Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO. 
77
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  2015)7th December,
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2014
SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2014
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 153

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (v)-(vii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (vi ii)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-23
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS – A T A G LANCE ............................................................ 24-31
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 33-58
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 59-112
(I) Lokpal And Lokayuktas And Other Related Law
(Amendment) Bill, 2014............................................................................................... 61-73
(II) Lokpal And Lokayuktas Act, 2013 .............................................................................. 74-112

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2014 )
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
*10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Subrata Bakshi
13. Adv. Sharad Bansode
14. Shri P.P . Chaudhary
15. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
16. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
17. Shri Shanta Kumar
18. Shri Santosh Kumar
19. Shri Bhagwant Mann
20. Shri Anoop Mishra
21. Shri B.V. Naik
22. Shri Vincent H. Palla
23. Shri V . Panneerselvam
24. Shri Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Dr. A. Sampath
26. Shri Bharat Singh
27. Shri Udhayakumar M.
(i)
* Nominated vice Shri Aayanur Manjunatha w.e.f. 30th September, 2014.

28. Dr. V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
29. Dr. Anshul Verma
#30. Shri Tariq Anwar
$31. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok  K.  Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
# Vacancy existing since the constitution of the Committee and filled-up on 11th September, 2011.
$ Change in the nomination of Shri Innocent w.e.f. 22nd December, 2014.
(ii)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted on 1st September, 2015 )
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Adv. Sharad Bansode
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
16. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary
17. Adv. Joice George
18. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
19. Shri Santosh Kumar
20. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
21. Shri Anoop Mishra
22. Shri B.V . Nayak
23. Shri Vincent H. Pala
24. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri  M. Udhayakumar
29. Dr. V araprasad Rao Velagapalli

30. Dr. Anshul Verma
*31. Shri Shanta Kumar
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok  K.  Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
(iv)
* Resigned from Committee w.e.f. 9th October, 2015.

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the
Seventy-Seventh Report on the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014.
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees,
the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment)
Bill, 2014 (Annexure-I), as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 18th December, 2014 to the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 25th
December, 2014, for examination and report to Parliament within three months i.e. by the 24th March,
2015. In order to solicit the views of stakeholders, the Committee issued a Press Communiqué on 7th
January, 2015. In response thereto the Committee received several memoranda containing suggestions from
various organizations/individuals/experts. Comments of the Department of Personnel and Training on the
views/suggestions so received, were placed for the consideration of the Committee.
3. The Committee heard the views of Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and Director, Central Bureau of Investigation during its meeting
held on 8th January, 2015. The Committee then heard the views of Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission
and Director of Prosecution of Central Bureau of Investigation during the meeting held on 3rd March, 2015.
4. The Committee heard the views of Shri Ashok Kapur, Director, Institute of Directors; Professor, K
Elumalai, Director, School of Law, Indira Gandhi National Open University;  Smt. Anjali Bhardwaj and Shri
Nikhil Dey of National Campaign for Peoples' Right to Information and Ms. Guninder Gill during its meeting
held on the 15th April, 2015. The Committee also heard Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, General Secretary, Lok
Satta on 26th May, 2015.
5. The Committee again heard the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training and Director,
Central Bureau of Investigation; Chairperson, Central Board of Direct Taxes; Secretary, Central Vigilance
Commission and Director, Enforcement Directorate on 16th July, 2015.
6. The Committee wrote to all the recognised National and State Political Parties to hear their views on
the Bill and particularly on Clause 6. The Committee received written views from Bharatiya Janata Party,
Communist Party of India, Shiromani Akali Dal, YSR Congress Party, All India Trinamool Congress, All
India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Indian National Lok Dal and Aam Aadmi Party. All India Anna
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, All India Trinamool Congress and Indian National Lok Dal presented their
views on the Bill during its sittings held on 14th October and 16th November, 2015.
7. The Committee also heard the views of Indian Revenue Service Association, Indian Civil Accounts
Service Association, Confederation of Central Government Gazetted Officers' Organisations and Confederation
of Civil Service Association during the meeting held on 14th October, 2015. It has received written views of
Central Secretariat Non-gazetted Employees Union, Central Secretariat Service Group A Officers Association
and Central Secretariat (Promotee) Assistants' Association.
(v)

(vi)
8. The Committee during its local study-visit on 8th April, 2015, visited the Central Vigilance Commission
Headquarters in New Delhi, interacted with the Chief Vigilance Commissioner. The Committee, during its
study visit from 14th to 23rd June, 2015 to Kolkata, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Tirupati and Chennai, interacted
with management together with Chief Vigilance Officers (CVOs) of Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL),
Allahabad Bank, UCO Bank, Balmer Lawrie & Company, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), Union
Bank of India, Shipping Corporation of India (SCI), Life Insurance Corporation, New India Assurance
Company Ltd., Central Bank of India, State Bank of Hyderabad (SBH), National Mineral Development
Corporation (NMDC), Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL), Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL),
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI), Andhra Bank, National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL),
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited (CPCL), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL), Bank
of Baroda and Madras Fertilisers Limited. It also heard views of Defence Research and Development
Organization (DRDO), Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited (BHEL) and THDC India Limited during its study-
visit to Dehradun, Mussoorie and Haridwar on 4th to 7th  November, 2015.
9. The Committee had final consultation with Department of Personnel and Training, Legislative
Department and Department of Legal Affairs on certain issues connected with the provisions of the Bill and
the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 on the 26th November, 2015.
10. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information placed
before it:-
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Personnel and Training;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts and recognized National and State Political Parties on the
provisions of the Bill and the comments of the Department of Personnel and Training
thereon;
(iii) Comments of Department of Personnel and Training to the questionnaire made by the
Secretariat;
(iv) Replies of Public Sector Undertakings, Financial Institutions and Department of Personnel
and Training to questions raised by Members of the Committee during its meetings and
study-visits;
(v) Views expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by various official
and non-official witnesses;
(vi) V iews of Justice M.L. Tahaliyani, Lokayukta, Maharashtra;
(vii) Representation of Peoples Act, 1951;
(viii) The Salary and Allowances of Leader of Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977;
(ix) Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003;
(x) The Members of Rajya Sabha (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities) Rules, 2004;
(xi) All India Service (Conduct) Rules,1968; and
(xii) Central Civil Service (Conduct) Rules, 1964.

11. The Committee considered and adopted its Report in its meeting held on the 3rd December, 2015
and decided to present verbatim proceedings of the meetings held to examine the Bill.
12. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
3rd December, 2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha
(vii)

(viii)
ACRONYMS
UNCAC — United Nations Convention Against Corruption
DoPT — Department of Personnel and Training
 DSPE — Delhi Special Police Establishment
CVC — Chief Vigilance Commissioner
LoP — Leader of Opposition
NJAC — National Judicial Appointments Commission
CVOs — Chief Vigilance Officers
IAS — Indian Administrative Service
IPS — Indian Police Service
IFoS — Indian Forest Service
CBDT — Chairperson of Central Board of Direct Taxes
ED — Director of Enforcement Directorate
DoI — Director of Inquiry
NGOs — Non Government Organisations
P AN — Permanent Account Number
AP AR — Annual Performance Appraisal Report
PSUs — Public Sector Undertakings
DRDO — Defence Research and Development Organisation
BJP — Bharatiya Janata Party
CPI — Communist Party of India
AIADMK — All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
AAP — Aam Aadmi Party
AITC — All India Trinamool Congress
INLD — Indian National Lok Dal
SAD — Shiromani Akali Dal
ACR — Annual Confidential Report

1
REPORT
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 was enacted to setup an independent and empowered anti-
corruption institution, namely, Lokpal at union level and for making enabling provision for
establishment of Lokayukta for States for prompt inquiry and investigation into allegation of
corruption by public functionaries and to fulfil the obligations of our country under the United
Nations Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC). The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 came into
force w.e.f. 16th January, 2014. Pursuant thereto the Union Government framed and notified the
following Rules thereunder to implement the provisions of the said Act:-
(i) The search Committee (Constitution, Terms and Conditions of Appointment of
Members and the Manner of Selection of Panels of Names for Appointment of
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal) Rules, 2014; and
(ii) The Public Servants (Furnishing of Information and Annual Returns of Assets and
Liabilities and Limit for Exemption of Assets in Filing Returns) Rules, 2014
In order to remove certain difficulties in making Lokpal functional and to make certain other
changes, amendments to the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 have been proposed under the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014 (Annexure-I) .
2. The Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014, seeks to
amend the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (Annexure-II)  and the Delhi Special Police
Establishment (DSPE) Act, 1946. The relevant Sections of the abovesaid Acts along with
corresponding Clauses of the Bill making amendments in those Sections, are presented below in a
tabular form:-
Amendments Proposed to the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 — At a Glance
Sl. Area of Provisions in Relevant Provisions in the Relevant Extent of Amendment
No. Concern the Lokpal and Section Bill Clause proposed
Lokayuktas Act,
2013 and Delhi
Special Police
Establishment
Act, 1946
1     2      3   4      5   6        7
1. Composition Prime Minister, 4(1) of Prime Minister, 2(a) (i) Inclusion of Leader
of Selection Chief Justice of Lokpal Chief Justice of of largest Opposition
Committee India or Judge and Lok- India or Judge of Party in Lok Sabha in
of Supreme ayuktas Supreme Court, lieu  of Leader of
Court, Speaker, Act, Speaker, Lok Sabha, Opposition in Lok
Lok Sabha, 2013 Leader of largest Sabha in Selection
1

2
Leader of Op- Opposition Party, Committee
position, Lok Lok Sabha and
Sabha and eminent jurist
eminent jurist
2. Tenure of No mention of 4(1)(e) Fixed tenure of 2 (b) Limiting tenure of
eminent jurist tenure of Lok- three years with eminent jurist to
in Selection pal and no renomination single term in the
Committee Lokayu- Selection Committee
ktas Act,
2013
3. Proceedings Proceedings not 4(2) of No invalidation of 2(b) To validate the pro-
of Search to be invalidated Lokpal proceedings of & ceedings of Search
and Selection due to vacancy and Lok- Search and Selec- 2 (c) and Selection Com-
Committees in the Selection ayuktas tion Committees mittees in the event
Search Act, 2013 due to vacancy or of absence or
Committees absence therein vacancy of any
member arising
therein in future
4. Rank of Secretary to 10 (1) Additional Secretary 3(a) Rank reduced.
Secretary Government of of Lokpal to Government of
to Lokpal India and Lok- India
ayuktas
Act, 2013
5. Rank of Additional 10(1) of Joint Secretary to 3(b) Ranks reduced by
Director of Secretary to Lokpal Government of one level.
Inquiry and Government and Lok- India
Director of of India ayuktas
Prosecution Act, 2013
of Lokpal
6. Disclosure All Public ser- 44(1) & Public servants to 6(a) Immovable assets
of assets vants to declare 44(2) of declare the (i) im- acquired by the
and liabilities assets and liabi- Lokpal movable assets public servant whe-
by public lities of self, and Lok- owned/acquired/ ther in his/her name
servants spouse and dep- ayuktas inherited by the or  in  the  name  of
endant children Act, 2013 p ublic servant in any family member
in the manner his/her name, in or any other person
provided under the name of any to be declared.
the Act within member of his/her Movable assets of
30 days of the family or in the only public servant to
Act coming into name of any other be declared.
force to their person; (ii) mov-
1     2      3   4      5   6        7

3
Competent Auth- able property
ority and to file owned/acquired/inherited
Annual Return by him/her and;
of movable and (iii) Debts and other
immoveable as- liabilities incurred by
sets and liabilities him/her directly or
of self, spouse indirectly. Such
and dependant declaration to be
children as on made to Competent
31st March by Authority under
31st July of that Act/Rules/Regula-
year to the Com- tions governing
petent Authority their appointment/
which is to be election. The Com-
put in public petent Authority to
domain by 31st publish the declara-
August of that tion filed by public
year. servant in prescri-
bed manner by
31st August of that
year.
7. Seat of New Delhi 16(f) of NCR of Delhi. 4 To facilitate setting
Lokpal Lokpal up of Headquarters in
and Lok- the NCR of Delhi.
ayuktas
Act,
2013
8. Eligibility Rank of Direc- 4BA of Indian Legal Ser- 9(a) Makes the eligibility
Criteria of tor of Prosecu- DSPE vice Officer eligible criteria more strin-
Director of tion is Joint Act, to be appointed as gent. Allows only
Prosecution Secretary to 1946 Special Public Pro- officers with legal
(DoP) of Government of secutor. In absence background to head
CBI India of such officer, the prosecution wing
an advocate having of the Central Bureau
at least 15 years of of Investigation
practice, and exper-
ience in handling
Government cases
relating to offences
related to economic
offences and corr-
uption.
1     2      3   4      5   6        7

4
9. Difference No provision 4BA of To be settled by 9(b) New provision.
of opinion DSPE Attorney General
between Act, for India whose
Director, 1946 decision would
and Director be binding.
of Prosecu-
tion of CBI
Leader of Single Largest Opposition Party to be Part of Selection Committee in the Absence
of Leader of Opposition (LoP) in Lok Sabha
3.0. Clause 2 inter alia  seeks to amend Section 4 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013
allowing the leader of the single largest opposition party in the House of People (Lok Sabha) to
be part of the Selection Committee for Lokpal when there is no recognized Leader of Opposition
(LoP) in that House.
3.1. The Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) has stated that the amendment is
necessitated keeping in view the political exigencies which emerged after the Sixteenth General
Election to Lok Sabha as there is no Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha in the current Lok Sabha.
Similar amendment was made to Section 4A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment (DSPE) Act,
1946 in November, 2014 enabling leader of largest opposition party to be part of the selection
process for appointment of a new Director of CBI. Similar provisions also exist for the
appointment of Chief Vigilance Commissioner (CVC) under Section 4 of CVC Act, 2003.
3.2. Several Members of the Committee raised questions regarding a situation wherein two or
more parties have the same strength in the House of People and wondered, in that situation, who
would become a part of the Selection Committee for Lokpal. In response thereto, the DoPT has
submitted that such a situation is a rare one. In such a situation, the selection of Lokpal can either
be made by treating the position of Leader of Opposition (LoP) as vacant and proceeding with
making the selection or to wait for the decision of the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to recognise
the leader of one party as per the provisions of the Salary and Allowances of Leader of Opposition
in Parliament Act, 1977. The Explanation to Section 2 of the Salary and Allowances of Leaders of
Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977 permits the Presiding Officer of the House (Lok Sabha/Rajya
Sabha) to recognize the leader of one political party in opposition to the Government as Leader of
Opposition when there are two or more parties having similar numerical strength in that House.
3.3. Most of the non-official witnesses who appeared before the Committee also agreed with the
amendment.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
3.4. The Committee notes that in the present Lok Sabha, there is no recognized Leader
of Opposition and such a situation can arise in future as well. In the absence of Leader of
Opposition it is not possible to constitute the Selection Committee of Lok Pal as per
provisions of the Lok Pal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. In order to overcome such a situation,
amendment is proposed to provide that the Leader of Opposition recognised as such in the
Lok Sabha or where there is no such Leader of Opposition, the leader of the single largest
1     2      3   4      5   6        7

5
opposition party in that House shall be a Member of the Selection Committee. Similar
provision exists for the appointment of Chief Vigilance Commissioner (CVC) under Section
4 of CVC Act, 2003. The Committee is of the view that the amendment is both necessary
and appropriate and accordingly recommends it.
Fixed Tenure for the Eminent Jurist in Selection Committee of Lokpal
4.0. Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 4 (1) (e) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013 to insert a proviso which fixes a three year tenure for the eminent jurist with bar on re-
nomination.
4.1. The DoPT has stated that it is essential to fix the tenure of the eminent jurist which was
not provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. The DoPT has further submitted that three
years tenure has been prescribed in the case of the eminent jurist in the National Judicial
Appointments Commission (NJAC) by the Ninety-ninth Constitution Amendment Act, 2014.
4.2. Some non-official witnesses suggested that the post should not be of a permanent nature
and that the eminent jurist should be invited only when the Selection Committee meets for the
purpose of making the appointments of Members of Lokpal. Suggestions have also been received
for fixing qualification for the eminent jurists.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
4.3. The Committee is in agreement with the proposed amendment.
VALIDITY OF PROCEEDINGS OF SELECTION AND SEARCH COMMITTEES
5.0. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend Sections 4(2) and 4(3) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2013 to provide that nomination of an eminent jurist or the appointment of Chairperson or a
Member either in the Lokpal or in the Search Committee or the proceedings of Search Committee
shall not become invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of a member in the Selection/
Search Committee.
5.1. The DoPT has stated that the clause has been introduced to address a situation when a
member is not able to participate in the proceedings of the Selection or Search Committee due to
any reason or unforeseen circumstances, and the appointment process cannot be delayed any more.
5.2. Some stakeholders suggested prescribing a quorum in Selection/Search Committee for the
meeting. It was also suggested that the absentee members of the Selection Committee may also be
given adequate opportunity to present their views in writing to the Chairman. Some other
stakeholders have submitted that this provision may be misused to bypass particular member of the
Selection Committee especially when that member is of an opinion which is not to the liking of
some others.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
5.3. The Committee is of the view that whenever a Member is unable to attend the
meeting either of the Selection Committee or of the Search Committee, he/she should be

6
accorded adequate opportunity to send his/her views in writing to the Selection/Search
Committee and such views of the absentee Member should be taken into account while
taking a decision by the Committee. Only in rare situations where despite affording
adequate opportunities to the absentee Member, he/she fails to send his views to the Search/
Selection Committee in writing, decision may be taken in absence of views of the absentee
Member after recording the reasons for non-availability of views of the absentee Member.
5.4. The Committee, however, is firmly of the opinion that Search/Selection Committee
should not take any decision unless vacancy, if any, in Search/Selection Committee is filled
up. The Committee sees no reason for not filling any vacancy quickly that may arise in the
Search/Selection Committee. The Committee accordingly recommends that the Bill may be
modified accordingly.
UNIFIED STRUCTURE FOR ANTI CORRUPTION SETUP
6.0. The Committee observes that with the setting up of Lokpal, multiple agencies such
as Lokpal, Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI),
Chief Vigilance Officers (CVOs) of concerned organisation would be dealing with complaints
of corruption. The Committee notes that the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act, 2013 and
amendments proposed thereto make an attempt to integrate CVC and CBI (anti corruption
functions) with Lokpal, but it falls short of a fully integrated setup for dealing with
corruption cases.
6.1. The Committee notes that there is an overlapping between the functions of CVC and
Lokpal. For example, Section 20 of Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 provides that Lokpal,
if it decides to proceed with the preliminary inquiry shall refer the complaint in respect of
public servants belonging to Groups 'A', 'B', 'C' or 'D' to the Central Vigilance Commission
who shall after making preliminary inquiry submit a report to Lokpal in case of public
servants belonging to Groups 'A' and 'B' and shall deal with complaints in respect of other
two groups as per the provisions of CVC Act, 2003. Under Section 25(1) of Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013, Lokpal has also been made competent to exercise powers and
superintendence and to give directions to CBI. Under Sections 8(1)(a) and 8(1)(b) of CVC
Act, 2003, CVC is empowered to exercise superintendence over the function of Delhi Special
Police Establishment (CBI) and to give it directions in relation to the investigation of
offences alleged to have been committed under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
Similarly, under Sections 8(1)(c) and 8(1)(d) of CVC Act, 2003, CVC can inquire or cause
an inquiry or investigation to be made for alleged offences under Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 against an official. Further, under Section 14(1) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2013, Lokpal can also inquire or cause an inquiry to be conducted in such cases.
Complaints of corruption against any government servants may be lodged with Lokpal,
CVC, CBI or the vigilance department of the concerned organization. This may give rise to
same complaint being examined by different organizations and may cause unnecessary
harassment of public servant apart from causing functional problems. The Committee notes
that Section 15 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 provides that after commencement
of the said Act, if any matter or proceedings related to allegation of corruption under the

7
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 is pending before any authority prior to commencement
of any inquiry it shall continue with such authority. It is, however, not clear how other
authorities would have such knowledge until concerned public servant is informed of it and
he takes up with such authorities. The position, therefore, as it exists provides for
overlapping of functions and powers of CVC and Lokpal in certain areas.
6.2. The Committee notes that under the second proviso to Section 20(1), the Central
Vigilance Commission is required to submit a report to the Lokpal. Under Section 25(1), the
powers of Lokpal override Section 8 of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 and
under sub-Section 2 of Section 25, the Central Vigilance Commission is required to send a
statement to the Lokpal at such intervals as the Lokpal may direct in respect of action
taken on complaints referred to it and Lokpal is made competent to issue guidelines for
effective and expeditious disposal of such cases. Further, power to grant prosecution has
been vested in Lokpal under Section 20(7) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. This
sub-Section provides that a Bench consisting of not less than 3 members of Lokpal shall
consider the investigation report received by it from any investigating agency including CBI
and after obtaining the comments of the Competent Authority and the public servant, shall
decide the further course of action i.e. either to grant sanction for prosecution or direct the
closure of report before the Special Court or direct the Competent Authority to initiate the
departmental proceedings or any other appropriate action. These provisions show that the
scheme of Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 places Lokpal on a higher pedestal than CVC
notwithstanding overlapping of jurisdictions and functions as stated above.
6.3. The Committee is of the view that institutions of CVC and the CBI (in so far as its
anti corruption functions are concerned), be fully integrated with Lokpal and the institution
of anti corruption watchdog may be architecturally created vertically with the Lokpal at the
apex level and CVC and CBI (anti-corruption wing) working directly under its command and
control. The functions of Lokpal and CVC be clearly specified and overlap between functions
and powers of CVC and Lokpal be addressed. Lokpal in turn should utilize these
organizations for conduct of inquiry, investigation and prosecution.
6.4. The Committee notes that a post of Director of Inquiry was created in CVC by
inserting Section 11A in the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 through the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. On such integration, the post of Director of Inquiry which is
available in CVC can be utilized by the Lokpal and there would be no need for creation of
another post of Director of Inquiry for Lokpal as provided under Sections 10(2) and 11 of
the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. The Committee is also aware that apart from anti-
corruption, the Central Bureau of Investigation is also handling cases relating to economic
offences, special crimes, bank security and fraud and cyber-crime, etc. The Committee is
only recommending integration of Anti-corruption Branch of CBI with Lokpal which on such
integration may be placed under the Director of Inquiry of Lokpal. For investigation of
crimes, other than corruption crimes, the existing structure and procedures may continue
to operate. The Government if it so considers necessary for the purpose, may come up with
a comprehensive legislation on CBI for effective performance of other functions of the
agency as recommended in the Twenty Fourth Report of this Committee on 'Working of
CBI' (2008). The Committee feels that such an integrated structure would be more
practicable setup and cause least financial burden on the exchequer.

8
RANK AND STATUS OF SECRETARY TO LOKPAL, DIRECTOR OF INQUIRY AND
DIRECTOR OF PROSECUTION OF LOKPAL
7.0. The Clause 3 of the Bill proposes amendment to Sections 10 (1) and 10 (2) of the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 to reduce the rank and status of Secretary to Lokpal from the rank of
Secretary to Government of India to Additional Secretary. Similarly, the rank and status for
Director of Inquiry (DoI) and Director of Prosecution (DoP) of Lokpal, is proposed to be reduced
from Additional Secretary to Joint Secretary.
7.1. The DoPT has stated that a Secretary rank officer generally serves for a year or two before
his/her retirement. In order to provide continuity, a minimum tenure of three to four years for
Secretary to Lokpal is required which is possible if he is of the rank of Additional Secretary.
Correspondingly, the ranks of DoI and DoP of Lokpal have been reduced to the level of Joint
Secretary.
7.2. Members, however, felt that the rank and status of Secretary to Lokpal should be of the
rank of Secretary to the Government of India and Director of Inquiry and Director of Prosecution
of Lokpal should not be less than the rank and status of Additional Secretary to the Government
of India. Further these officers may be provided fixed tenure.
7.3. The Committee took note of the fact that a Director of Inquiry was created in CVC by
inserting Section 11A in the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 by the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2013.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
7.4. The Committee is of the view that since the Secretary to Lokpal would be dealing
with high ranking officials of the Government of India, and as such it is absolutely
necessary that he/she should not be lower than the rank and status of Secretary to
Government of India so that he is not unduly influenced by his/her seniors or colleagues
from the Civil Service and is able to function independently. The Committee is further of
the view that for effective functioning the Director of Inquiry and the Director of
Prosecution of Lokpal, they should not be lower than the rank and status of Additional
Secretary to the Government of India. The Committee does not favour the changes
proposed by Clause 3 of the Bill. The Committee further recommends that Director of
Inquiry created in CVC by insertion of Section 11A in the Central Vigilance Commission
Act, 2003 should be used for purposes of inquiry by Lokpal and there is no need for
creation of another Director of Inquiry in Lokpal.
OMISSION OF MENTION OF SECTION 6A OF DSPE ACT, 1946
8.0. The Clause 5 seeks to amend Section 23 (1) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 to
delete the Section 6A of the DSPE Act, 1946 from therein.
8.1. The DoPT has stated that in view of the decision of Supreme Court of India invalidating
Section 6A of DSPE Act, 1946, this provision in the Lokpal Act has become infructuous. The
amendment is thus only a sequel to the judgement of the Apex Court.

9
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
8.2. The Committee agrees with the proposed amendment.
DECLARATION OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES BY PUBLIC SERV ANTS
9.0. The Clause 6 seeks to amend Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 relating
to declaration of assets and liabilities by public servants. The Section provides for declaration of
assets and liabilities to the Competent Authority for all categories of public servants including Union
Ministers and Members of Parliament within thirty days of affirmation of oath or assuming office.
In accordance with the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 all public servants are required to provide
an Annual Return of their assets and liabilities as on 31st March of every year by 31st July of that
year. The same needs to be published in the websites of the organizations by 31st August of that
year by the Competent Authority concerned. The declaration would comprise the details of the both
movable and immovable assets and liabilities of the public servant and his/her spouse and dependent
children.
9.1. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide that the asset-liability declaration should be filed by
the public servants in the manner prescribed under the provisions of the existing Statutes/Rules/
Regulations governing their service conditions or election. This means that the manner and form
of such declaration will be governed by respective Statute/Rules/Regulations. For instance, the
Union Ministers and Members of Parliament currently declare their assets and liabilities within
ninety days from the date of taking oath of affirmation by them in the manner prescribed under
the Section 75A of Representation of People Act, 1951 and Rules made thereunder, to Presiding
Officer of the respective House. Rules have accordingly been framed under Section 75A of
Representation of People Act, 1951 viz. The Members of Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha (Declaration of
Assets and Liabilities) Rules, 2004, which prescribes the manner and form of such declaration.
Such declaration is akin to the provisions of Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
9.2. Rule 3 of The Members of Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities)
Rules, 2004 stipulates that:-
"(1) Every member of the Council shall, within ninety days from the date on which he
makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation for taking his seat, furnish as in
Form-1 the following information as required to be furnished by him to the
Chairman in pursuance of sub-Section (1) of Section 75A, namely:-
(i) The movable and immovable property of which he, his spouse and his
dependent children are jointly or severally owners or beneficiaries;
(ii) His liabilities to any public financial institution; and
(iii) His liabilities to the Central Government or to the State Governments.
(2) Every Member shall notify changes, if any, in the information furnished by him
under sub-rule (1) as on 31st day of March every year, by the 30th June of that
year."

10
9.3. The declaration of assets and liabilities by government servants are currently regulated by
All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 (framed under the All India Services Act, 1951) and
Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964 (framed under Articles 148 and 309 of the
Constitution of India). Rule 16 of All India Service (Conduct) Rules, 1968 which applies to the
officers of Indian Administrative Service (IAS), Indian Police Service (IPS) and Indian Forest
Service (IFoS) and Rule 18 of Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964 which applies to all
other officials of the Union Government, provide for manner and form of particulars that are
required to be submitted.
9.4. Existing provisions for government servants under the All India Service (Conduct) Rules,
1968 and Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964 require the public servant to submit a
return, giving the full particulars regarding:-
(a) "The immovable property owned by him, or inherited or acquired by him or held by
him on lease or mortgage, either in his name or in the name of any member of his
family or in the name of any other person;
(b) Shares, debentures, postal Cumulative Time Deposits and cash including bank
deposits inherited by him or similarly owned, acquired or held by him;
(c) Other movable property inherited by him or similarly owned, acquired or held by
him; and
(d) Debts and other liabilities incurred by him directly or indirectly."
9.5. It may be pointed out that the information required to be submitted by Members of
Parliament under Representation of People Act, 1951 is broadly similar to the provisions of Section
44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 whereas the information required to be furnished under
the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 is substantially different from that of the information required
to be furnished by government servants under the aforesaid Conduct Rules, applicable to them.
Under Representation of People Act, 1951, every elected Member of Parliament is required to
furnish the information relating to moveable and immoveable property of which he, his spouse and
his dependent children are jointly or severely owners or beneficiaries whereas under Conduct Rules
applicable to government servants, they are not required to furnish information of moveable and
immoveable assets owned by their family members if those have not been acquired from the
income of government servant.
9.6. The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 though has an over-riding effect over Section
75A of the Representation of People Act, 1951, it does not repeal Section 75A of the
Representation of People Act, 1951. An elected Member of Parliament, therefore, may be
required to furnish information of assets and liabilities both under Section 75A of the
Representation of People Act, 1951 as well as under Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
Further, under Representation of People Act, 1951 they would be required to furnish
information in ninety days from the date on which they take oath while under the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, they may be required to do so within thirty days. Similarly, there
may be difference in manner and content of declaration of assets and liabilities under
Conduct Rules or other Rules applicable to other public servants. This is not a desirable
situation and a uniform system of declaration of assets and liabilities should be made

11
applicable to all public servants. The Committee further observes that Section 75A of the
Representation of People Act, 1951 is applicable only to elected Members of the Parliament.
It has no application to nominated Members. Nominated Members may also be required to
file a declaration of their assets and liabilities similar to the one to be filed by elected
Members of Parliament. Necessary provision in this regard may be incorporated in the Bill
and the Committee recommends accordingly.
9.7. In DoPT's view, Rule 16 of All India Services (Conduct) Rules and Rule 18 of the Central
Civil Services (Conduct) Rules which are in operation for the last fifty years have been operating
successfully. These Rules provide for declaring movable and immovable assets acquired by the
public servant in the name of any other person. The same is also reflected in the Bill. However,
the Rules do not cover any property which is held/acquired independently by any family member.
9.8. The Department further is of the view that putting the details of assets and liabilities of
public servants in public domain may jeopardize the security of government servants. The Secretary
of DoPT in his deposition before the Committee stated that they had received representations from
several Civil Services Officers' Associations stating that putting the details of officers in the public
domain has the potential of hampering their effective working. They have stated that this can also
compromise the personal security of the government servants as well as that of their family
members. This is especially true for the civil servants posted in sensitive institutions like Indian
High Commissions in various countries and sensitive national security related agencies and
installations.
9.9. The Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission has supported the amending Clause.
9.10. The Chairperson of Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), in her deposition, stated that
as per the Income Tax Act, 1961 and the rules framed thereunder, every person having a
Permanent Account Number (PAN) is considered as a separate individual. The returns filed by
individuals are confidential and are held by the department as a safe keeper of this information. The
Income Tax Returns thus filed cannot be disclosed to any third party (including the spouse of the
filer). Such details can be shared only when a larger public interest is involved. The Chairperson
applied the same analogy to the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and said that the Government
cannot bind the spouse of a public servant to disclose information related to his/her assets and
liabilities as the contract of employment and related service conditions binds only the public servant
and not his/her spouse. Therefore, the amendment is necessitated. Only the assets acquired by the
public servant using his/her funds in his name or in the name of anyone of his family members
or in the name of any one else must be disclosed. The Chairperson further stated that the
information regarding the assets and liabilities of public servants must not be put in the public
domain as this could jeopardize the security of the public servant as well as the members of the
family.
9.11. The Director of Enforcement Directorate (ED) during his deposition stated that the
Directorate is in agreement with the views of CBDT on Clause 6 and stated that the amendment
would bring it in consonance with the existing provisions which have stood the test of time. He,
however, stated that the manner of publication of information filed by the public servant must not
be left to the discretion of the Competent Authority and must be clearly defined in the Act itself.

12
9.12. Some Non Government Organisations (NGOs) have suggested that the declaration of assets
and liabilities of the public servant, his/her spouse and children made by the public servant should
be published in the website and therefore opposed the amendment. They have also suggested that
the existing manner of disclosure as prescribed under Section 44 of Principal Act appears to be
better than those prescribed under their respective Statutes/Rules/Regulations governing their
service conditions.
9.13. Some employees associations during their depositions have stated that the Immovable
Property Return (IPR) is furnished by the government servant every year along with submission
of Annual Performance Appraisal Report (APAR) to the Competent Authority. In case of complaint
to Lokpal, such information may be forwarded to the Lokpal by the Competent Authority.
Alternatively, the Central Vigilance Commission may audit property returns of government servant
every year in the manner Comptroller and Auditor General carry out audit of government accounts.
The CVC may refer disproportionate assets cases to Lokpal to take appropriate action against
corrupt government servants. They have also cited several barriers in submitting the declaration of
movable assets of their spouse and dependent children. Firstly, it would be difficult for a public
servant to correctly assess the value of movable property owned by him or his spouse and
dependent children every year. Assessing the correct value of goods like gold and valuable metals
would require the services of a professional valuator. This would entail a recurrent expenditure on
the part of the government servant. Secondly, in the case of streedhan, the Supreme Court in the
case of Pratibha Rani Vs. Suraj Kumar (1985 AIR 628), has held that the position of the streedhan
in Hindu marriage is clear and unambiguous and she is the absolute owner of such a property and
deal with it in any manner she likes without any reference to her husband. Thus, keeping this in
mind, a public servant may not be in a position to reveal the correct information regarding the
streedhan. Thirdly, the spouse of a government servant is an independent entity and cannot be
forced by the government to reveal personal information relating to his/her property. The Section
44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 has already been challenged by Mrs. Vinita Singla
(spouse of a government servant), who has approached the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. That
Court in an interim observation on 9th September, 2014 has held that:-
".......prima facie, there is merit in the petitioner's contention that as a private citizen, the
indirect method adopted by Section 44 in compelling disclosure, which is essentially falling
within her exclusive control, results in violation of Article 21..."
Lastly, even if the spouse of the government servant reveals some information to him/her,
there is no method available with him/her to verify the authenticity of the information provided.
Holding a public servant accountable for such information is harsh and impractical. On the issue
of publishing the declaration of assets and liabilities filed by the public servant to the competent
authority, the Convener of Confederation of Civil Services Associations, made the following
submission before the Committee:-
"...If we start giving each and every information in the public domain and on the website,
what will happen is that this information will not only be there for each and every member
of the public, it will also fall into the hands of all sorts of criminal elements. As of now,
it is very difficult to perceive as to what assets each person may be having. Once it is out
in the public domain, it will be very easy to target the person and the victims would be

13
his family members, his children who can be kidnapped. There could be extortions and there
could be dowry demands. Right now any father can just say that he does not have anything
and somehow can escape any dowry demand. There can be very specific dowry demands.
This new provision about revealing of such information may cause problems. There are some
officers who are tackling Naxalism, Maoism and terrorism. Their details and their
whereabouts may lead to revealing of other information about them, about their family
members and that will pose a threat. Then, particularly, the officers who are tackling such
sorts of crimes, the forest officers who are deep in the forests, plus revenue officers who
are collecting revenue from other people, may be targeted. Also, once the information is
there, there will be a plethora of false and malicious complaints. Anybody can take the
information from the net, add something to it and file a complaint. Once a complaint is
lodged, it takes years and years, and, in fact, the entire career of an officer can be marred.
It is very different for a bureaucrat because for government servants, with the system of
constant appraisals and promotions, once some allegation about corruption is made, some
false allegation is made, it takes years before it is finally settled. Right now, any person,
having a genuine complaint can come forward. But if we start giving all the information,
people having mala fide intentions take information from the net, add something to it and
start filing false complaints. And that complaint cannot be brushed aside because there will
be so much of data in the complaint that it will not be entirely baseless…"
Thus, they have opposed the publication of asset-liabilities of the public servant and his/her
spouse. Baseless allegations of corruption levied on the public servant will reduce his efficiency and
make his work suffer due to the proverbial Damocles' sword of vigilance inquiry.
9.14. The Committee during its study visit, interacted with several public sector banks and Public
Sector Undertakings (PSUs) on the provisions of the Bill. All the stakeholders have agreed to the
clause in principle. They are of the view that asset and liability statement of public servants should
be with the competent authority, rather than putting them in public domain, sensing threat to the
members of the family by anti-social elements. The Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO) has stated the following in respect of Clause 6 of the Bill:-
"….(a) DRDO is a sensitive organization. It is engaged in research and development of
critical/frontier defence technologies. Publication of assets/liabilities of self and dependent
family members on websites may make them vulnerable to anti-social elements with social
repercussions.
(b) It may lead to invasion of privacy or intrusion into details of family's assets and
liabilities acquired through inheritance/gift with which the general public may have no
concern. While these details may be kept with the Government for vigilance purposes, but
sharing these confidential information especially relating to movable assets viz gold/
jewellery with general public may amount to violation of confidentiality.
(c) Quantifying gold/silver jewellery (especially streedhan) of spouse which are inherited
through generations, may be difficult, due to prevailing customs/traditions. Possibility of
family disputes cannot be ruled out and may lead to harassment of Government servant by
disgruntled elements. There may also be reluctance on the part of the spouse to share details

14
of her assets/liabilities including jewellery with the Government servant, with which the
general public may have no concern..."
9.15. The Lokayukta, Maharashtra, in his written submission made to the Committee, has
appreciated the concerns raised by public servants and stated that:-
"...I have come to the conclusion that there is nothing wrong in the amendments,
particularly considering the provisions of the Old Conduct Rules of 1935. However , the
apprehension of certain sections of public servants with regard to the Sub Section 6 appears
to be reasonable. In my opinion, publication of the information is not necessary to achieve
the ends which the Act is seeking to achieve. The provisions of Sub Section 6 may be used
by some unscrupulous persons for dubious purposes. In brief, publication in respect of
assets of public servants and his family members may be avoided to be published..."
9.16. As per the current rules, Immovable Property Returns of the government servant are to be
filed by 31st Jaunary every year to the Competent Authority without which, vigilance clearance is
denied and promotion and empanelment to higher grades is withheld. The Immovable Property
Returns of All India Services Officers have been uploaded by the Competent Authority even though
their Conduct Rules have no specific provisions for such disclosure. However, as per data available,
23.98% of Indian Police Service (IPS) Officers, 8% of Indian Administrative Service (IAS)
Officers and 54% of Indian Forest Service (IFoS) Officers have not disclosed details of their
immovable property returns for the year 2014 to the Competent Authority under their Conduct
Rules.
9.17. The Committee also reviewed certain other barriers which discourage suo motu  disclosure
of assets by public servants. Chief among them are the myriad of complex rules and regulations
which govern such disclosures. For example, the acquisition of movable property by the
Government servant is governed by Rule 18(3) of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964
which states:-
"(3) Where a government servant enters into a transaction in respect of movable property
either in his own name or in the name of the member of his family, he shall, within one
month from the date of such transaction, report the same to the prescribed authority, if the
value of such property exceeds two months' basic pay of the government servant:
Provided that the previous sanction of the prescribed authority shall be obtained by the
government servant if any such transaction is with a person having official dealings with
him".
This rule is antiquated and not in line with the current reality of price rise and market
dynamics. This rule would cover almost all consumer durable items that a government servant
would purchase. Keeping a track of all such purchases would be a tedious task for the government
servant. Further, the time limit prescribed of one month is illogical and too short. Failure to comply
with the instructions within the prescribed time frame results in disciplinary proceedings against the
official. Thus, public servants do not disclose purchase of movable items. The rule also does not
take into cognizance, the existence of finance schemes, which make several consumer durables
accessible to people with limited incomes. The procedures and practice in governing the conduct

15
of public servants reflect the colonial mentality of doubt and mistrust which the colonial masters
had upon its employees wherein, the government servants were viewed with suspicion. The rules
thus drafted were meant to harass the public servant. The complicated procedures set by the
various conduct rules act as barriers to self disclosure. Even if a public servant makes a suo motu
disclosure, more often than not, he is harassed on some procedural issue. If a government servant
has acquired an asset with just means, he should not be harassed unnecessarily. Thus, rules need
to be made user-friendly, simplified and easy to comply with.
9.18. The Committee approached all the recognised National and State Political Parties to hear
their views on the provision of the Bill particularly on Clasue 6. Amongst the National Parties,
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Communist Party of India (CPI) responded to the request and
submitted written memoranda. While BJP has extended support to the Bill, the CPI has objected
to the provisions of the Bill and has stated that:-
"…This amendment will defeat the purpose of declaration of assets."
All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) has agreed in principle but has
proposed some amendments to Clause 6. The Party in its written submission has stated the
following:-
"…party proposes a modification to sub-clause (6) of Clause 6 of the amendment Bill which
relates to publication of the returns filed under this provision of the Lokpal Act. It is
essential to place restrictions on the disclosure of the property returns filed, in keeping with
the privacy and security issues of the individuals concerned which would be in the overall
public interest. Hence, the property returns may be disclosed by the competent authority only
in specified cases where enquiry into disproportionate assets cases or similar issues are
involved and not as a matter of routine under the Right to Information Act. The proposed
amendment may be modified to this effect."
Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) while supporting the amendment has suggested that the salary of
public servant may be stopped in case Immovable Property Return is not submitted by 31st January
of that year. In case any property is not disclosed by the public servant, if found to be his at a
later date, it may be confiscated by the Janlokpal. The All India Trinamool Congress (AITC) has
stated the following:-
"…This clause is irrational and unreasonable in view of the following reasons:-
(a)  Assets and liabilities of an independent child and/or any other person of family,
excluding dependent children, cannot be assets and liabilities of public servant.
Independent children enjoy all statutory or constitutional rights which cannot be
surrendered for controlling a public servant under any statute.
(b) A public servant does not have any control over his independent children. Public
servant cannot force his independent children and/or like others to disclose such
assets and liabilities to him.
(c) Independent children of public servants do not derive any benefits of government
concession or allowance or medical benefits, since he/she is children of public
servant.

16
We are therefore of the view that independent children and like others cannot be included
in declaration of public servant's assets and liabilities but declaration of such assets and
liabilities of the dependent children should remain as stands today."
The Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) has suggested that the movable and immovable
property returns of the public servant and his family members may be filed every year on affidavit.
Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) has supported the proposed amendment. YSR Congress Party has also
agreed with the amendments.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
9.19. Clause 6 of this Bill seeks to amend Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013 to provide for declaration of assets acquired by the public servant using his/her funds
in his/her name, in the name of any of his/her family member or in the name of any other
person. The Committee notes that under the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961, every
person who files an income tax return is regarded as a separate entity and details of his/
her return are not disclosed to anyone else including his/her spouse unless it serves some
public good. Further, a public servant cannot compel his/her spouse or child to disclose to
him the details of assets acquired by them independently of the public servant. In today's
world considering increasing avenues available in the fields of arts, entertainment and even
business ventures even minor children of a public servant may have income of their own.
Moreover, more and more spouses of public servants are working and having their
independent sources of income. In such a scenario, compelling declaration of assets acquired
by the spouse or children of a public servant from his/her own income may even be held
to be in breach of their right to privacy guaranteed under Article 21 or even violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. As such any provision that seeks declaration of
assets acquired by family members of public servant through their own income may not be
legally sustainable. Family members of public servant are under no obligation to disclose to
him/her, the assets acquired by them through their own income and it may, therefore, not
be appropriate to even expect that all public servants would have knowledge of assets
acquired by his/her family members through their own incomes. It may, therefore, not be
feasible to hold the public servant accountable in case the information furnished by him
regarding assets of his family members turns out to be factually incorrect and, therefore,
any exercise of compelling a public servant to declare assets of his/her family members
independently acquired by them, may turn out to be an exercise in futility. The Committee,
therefore, agrees with the proposed amendments in so far as the declaration of assets
acquired by the family members of the public servants through their own income or from
sources independent of the public servant is sought to be excluded from disclosure to be
made by the public servant.
9.20. The Committee further agrees that the public servant should declare the assets and
liabilities to their Competent Authority. The Committee, however, is of the opinion that the
Competent Authority of the public servant should forward a copy of the assets and liabilities
so declared by the public servant to the Lokpal who shall keep these declaration in a
fiduciary capacity. Both competent authority of public servant and Lokpal would be

17
competent to review the returns filed by the public servants particularly in suspicious cases
including through use of digital surveillance software to detect any disproportionate growth
in assets and liabilities of a public servant beyond his known sources of income. This,
however, should be done in a professional manner so as not to give rise to a feeling that
every government servant is suspect and under surveillance. Further, it should be ensured
that government servants are not subjected to unnecessary clarifications/queries as a result
of such scrutiny. Any feeling amongst public servants that they are not trusted and are
working under surveillance is bound to affect their morale and productivity and would not
be in public interest.
9.21. The Committee is further of the opinion that the provision of double scrutiny by the
Competent Authority of the public servant and by the Lokpal would serve the purpose
sought to be achieved by making such declarations public while at the same time it would
safeguard the public servant from the misuse of such information by miscreants and
criminals and avoid any danger to the security and safety of the public servants and their
family members.
9.22. The Committee, therefore, feels that public disclosure of assets and liabilities of
public servants may not be necessary and recommends accordingly.
9.23. The Committee is further of the view that public servants need to spend less time
on routine and non-productive activities and more time on productive activities. It is in this
light that the Committee feels the need to revisit the rules which currently govern the
manner and form of declaration of assets and liabilities by a government servant as these
rules reflect the colonial mindset of doubt and mistrust which the colonial masters had
regarding their employees. The extant Rules and procedures are at present being used more
to harass government servants than as a safeguard against corruption and often act as
barriers against true and fair disclosure by government servants.
9.24. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013 and interalia  provides that the public servants referred to in Clauses (a) to (f) of sub-
Section 1 of Section 14 shall discloses their assets and liabilities in the manner provided
under the relevant provisions, rules or regulations of the Act applicable to them and for
other public servants in the manner specified by Lokpal. As stated in para 9.6 above, this
would not lead to uniformity either in the contents or form or manner of declaration of
assets and liabilities by the public servants.
9.25. The Committee is accordingly of the view that a uniform provision may be made and
incorporated in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 for declaration of assets and liabilities
by the public servants and contents, format, manner of declaration and other details thereof
may be specified in the rules made under the Act. Existing provisions for declaration of
assets and liabilities made under any Act, Rules, Regulations or Instructions may be
omitted so that there is no duplication in declaration of assets and liabilities by public
servants. The Committee further recommends that a public servant may be required to
furnish declaration of assets and liabilities owned by him/her, his dependent spouse,
dependent children and any other person dependent on him/her. In addition, he may also
be required to declare assets acquired by him/her from his/her income/resources in the

18
name of any other person. The first declaration may be made within ninety days of coming
into force of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment) Act, 2014
or joining public service or taking oath as a public servant. Thereafter, such declaration
may be made every year and the last date for filing such a declaration may be kept a
month after the last date for filing Income Tax Return.
AMENDMENTS TO DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT ACT, 1946
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR DIRECTOR OF PROSECUTION, CENTRAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION
10.0. The Clause 9 seeks to amend Section 4BA (1) and 4BA (2) of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946 to provide eligibility conditions for the appointment of Director of
Prosecution. The amendment prescribes that an officer from the Indian Legal Service, holding the
post of Joint Secretary and who is eligible for appointment as Special Public Prosecutor as per
Section 24 (8) and Section 24 (9) of the CrPC, 1973, shall be eligible for appointment as a Director
of Prosecution of CBI. In the absence of such an officer, an advocate with minimum fifteen years
of experience in handling cases relating to Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, Prevention of
Money Laundering Act, 2002 and other such laws relating to economic offences on behalf of the
government, may be appointed.
10.1. The DoPT has provided historical background leading to the creation of an independent
Directorate of Prosecution. The DoPT has stated that before the enactment of CrPC, 1973, even
police officers officiated as public prosecutor. Subsequently, the Law Commission in its Fourteenth
Report on 'Reforms of the Judicial Administration' (September, 1958) recommended that
prosecutors should be lawyers and the prosecuting agency must be independent of the police.
CrPC, 1973 made it mandatory that a public prosecutor must be a lawyer. The Supreme Court
reiterated this in the SB Shahane case (AIR SC 1628). Similar recommendation was also made by
the Second Administrative Reforms Commission. Several State Governments have established a
separate Directorate of Prosecution manned by either an officer belonging to Higher Judicial Service
or by IPS Officers.
10.2. Some Members of the Committee suggested raising the rank of the Director of Prosecution
to the level of Director of CBI to ensure independence of Director of Prosecution in the Bill. Some
Members raised concerns about limiting the zone of consideration to advocates handling only
economic offences. Keeping in mind the myriad nature of cases being referred to the CBI by the
Judiciary, they felt that it is not appropriate to limit the zone of consideration to specified areas.
10.3. The CVC has stated that it would be prudent to set up an independent Director of
Prosecution. It feels that in view of the responsibilities of the post, the post should be atleast of
the rank of Additional Secretary or above. In amendment clause (b), the CVC feels that a minimum
experience should be 20-25 years as this is usually the time taken by Government officers to reach
the rank of Additional Secretary. Further, maximum age limit should be fixed at 55-58.
10.4. The CBI has not made any comments on Clause 9(a) about the eligibility norms. CBI feels
that in view of the sensitive nature of the cases handled by the organization where several sensitive
documents pertaining to national security are handled, the appointee should not be on contractual

19
basis as this may compromise national security. It further suggested that law officers holding
analogous rank and working in State Vigilance and Anti Corruption Bureaus should also be
considered.
10.5. The Committee in its Twenty-fourth Report on 'Working of CBI' (March 2008) had
observed the following:-
"....The Committee observers that autonomy of the Directorate of Prosecution will guarantee
independence of the prosecution, thereby clearing out many bottlenecks existing in the
present system which result in acquittal in many cases.
16.4.1. The Committee strongly feels that the decision as to whether prosecution should be
initiated against the accused on the basis of evidence gathered during the investigation and
whether the case under consideration is sustainable in Court of law should be left solely
to the Directorate of Prosecution. The Committee is of the view that the Prosecutors are the
best judge in this regard and any interference in this process should be avoided to the extent
possible.
16.5. The Committee recommends that the observation of the Supreme Court in Vineet
Narain's case that a panel of competent lawyers of experience and impeccable reputation
shall be prepared with the advice of the Attorney General and that their services shall be
utilised as Prosecuting Counsels in cases of significance and that even during the course
of investigation of an offence, the advice of a lawyer chosen from the panel should be
taken by the CBI/Enforcement Directorate, should be examined by the Government and
appropriate action should be taken in this regard...."
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
10.6 The Committee is of the opinion that in order to secure effective functioning and
independence of the Director of Prosecution, his rank should be at par with that of Director,
CBI and it recommends accordingly. The Committee further is of the opinion that field of
selection for appointment to the post of Director of Prosecution of the CBI or of the Lokpal
should also extend to the Advocates having at least fifteen years experience of conducting
criminal cases on behalf of the Government in the capacity of Public Prosecutor, Assistant
Solicitor General, Defence Lawyer, etc. The Committee is of the view that practical
knowledge of conduct of criminal cases in the court should be preferable to desk knowledge.
The Committee further feels that officers of Indian Legal Service in order to be eligible
should also have experience of at least fifteen years of handling cases on behalf of the
Government under the Prevention of Corruption Act,1988, Prevention of Money Laundering
Act, 2002 and other laws relating to economic offences or criminal cases. Considering that
the Committee has recommended that the rank of Director of Prosecution should be at par
with the rank of Director, CBI, it is of the opinion that eligibility conditions as proposed
in the Bill should be revised to bring them in consonance with the level of the post of
Director of Prosecution and experience of at least fifteen years.
10.7. The Committee further recommends that appointment to this post should be made
through detailed and proper enquiry into integrity, credibility and competence of the persons
in the zone of consideration for the post.

20
RESOLUTION OF DIFFERENCE OF OPINION BETWEEN DIRECTOR, CBI AND DIRECTOR
OF PROSECUTION, CBI
11.0. Clause 10 seeks to insert sub-Section (5) after sub-Section (4) in Section 4BA of the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 to provide that in case of difference of opinion between the
Director and the Director of Prosecution of CBI, the matter shall be referred to Attorney General
for India for his advice and such advice shall be binding.
11.1. The DoPT has expressed its view that this amendment would help in establishing
independence of the Directorate of Prosecution of the CBI and at the same time would eliminate
departmental dysfunctionality by providing for faster and efficient resolution of differences between
the two functionaries. The Department believes that the Attorney General being a constitutional
authority with sufficient legal background, will be in a better position to arbitrate differences
between the two functionaries. The Department has cited landmark judgements of the Supreme
Court, namely, (i) Sushil Kumar Modi Case (AIR 1999 SC 500) and (ii) ML Sharma Case (Writ
Petition (CRL.) No. 120 of 2012), wherein, similar views have been expressed by the Supreme
Court.
11.2. Several Members of the Committee have however expressed their opinion against this
provision of the Bill. The Members feel that referring a matter to the Attorney General, may result
in undue interference from the Government as the Attorney General is an appointee of the Union
Government and is its chief law officer.
11.3. The CBI has stated that as per the provisions of the CrPC, there is no mandate for the role
of a prosecutor at the stage of investigation, i.e., till filing of the final report before the competent
court. The role of the prosecutor commences thereafter. This position has been stated by the
Supreme Court in the MC Mehta Case, R Sarala Case, Nirmal Yadav Case etc. The CBI has also
quoted the OM of DoPT dated 9th July, 2001 which provides that in important cases where the
Director, CBI disagrees with the advice of the Director of prosecution, the decision taken by the
Director, CBI after consulting the Attorney General for India shall be deemed to be final.
11.4. The CVC does not agree with the amendment. It believes that the amendment would affect
the independence of both Director CBI and Director of Prosecution, CBI. The Commission has
stated that this would invite undue interference from the Government. The Commission feels that
in case of difference of opinion, the opinion of the Director, CBI should prevail and no reference
should be made to the Attorney General.
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee
11.5. The Committee has already recommended that anti corruption wing of the CBI
should be integrated with Lokpal and in that situation, Director of Prosecution of Lokpal
should handle cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act and if there is a difference of
opinion between the Director of Enquiry of Lokpal and Director of Prosecution of Lokpal,
the difference would naturally be resolved by Lokpal under whom both of them would work.
For cases other than those under the Prevention of Corruption Act, the resolution of
differences between Director of Prosecution, CBI and Director, CBI may be done as per
advice of Attorney General for India. The Committee recommends accordingly.

21
ANNUAL PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL REPORT (APAR) OF THE DIRECTOR OF
PROSECUTION OF CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
12.0. Clause 9 further seeks to insert sub-Section (6) in Section 4BA of Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946 to provide that the Annual Performance Appraisal Report of the Director
of Prosecution of CBI shall be recorded and maintained in the Ministry of Law and Justice in such
a manner as may be prescribed.
12.1. The DoPT has expressed the view that this measure shall help in ensuring independence of
Director of Prosecution of CBI. Director, Central Bureau of Investigation would be the reporting
authority and Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs would be the reviewing authority for recording
the APAR of Director of Prosecution. The Department also cited the affidavit filed by the
Government of India in Supreme Court in the course of the M.L. Sharma Case (Coal Mines Case).
In that affidavit, it has been stated that the Annual Confidential Report (ACR) of the Director of
Prosecution shall be written by the Director of CBI and the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
shall be the reviewing authority. Necessary administrative orders in this regard have already been
issued by the CBI on 10.10.2013 on DoPT's advice.
12.2. The CVC has said that it is opposed to the changes being made by the Bill. It has suggested
that the APAR of the Director of Prosecution of CBI should be recorded and maintained by the
Director, CBI. The Commission has also objected to the dropping of the words "the Director of
Prosecution shall function under the overall supervision and control of the Director" from the
Section 4BA (2) of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 via the amendment. The
Commission believes that the Director of Prosecution should function under the supervision of the
Director of CBI.
12.3. The CBI is also opposed to this Clause and state that the Supreme Court of India in the
matter of Manohar Lal Sharma v/s Union of India vide its order dated 10th September, 2013 has
directed the Government of India to issue orders to provide for writing of APAR of Director of
Prosecution by Director, CBI and submission to Law Minister directly. The CBI has further stated
that the provision is in contravention of the existing law and Government Instructions. The Section
4BA (2) of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 states that the DoP shall function under
the overall supervision and control of Director, CBI.
12.4. The Director of Prosecution has stated that he is in agreement with the amending clause
and that such a move would be one of the steps required for ensuring independence of the Director
of Prosecution.
12.5. Some other Stakeholders have opposed to the clause and stated that the APAR of the DoP
should be maintained by the Lokpal.
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee
12.6. The Committee is of the view that Director of Prosecution of Lokpal should be
responsible for handling all cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 being
handled by it and his Annual Performance Appraisal Report is to be recorded by the Lokpal.
The Committee is further of the view that cases other than those falling under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 should be handled by Director of Prosecution of CBI for

22
purposes of deciding the prosecution and the Annual Performance Appraisal Report of the
Director of Prosecution of CBI may be recorded and maintained in the Ministry of Law &
Justice in such a manner as may be prescribed.
HEADQUARTERS OF LOKPAL
13.0. The Bill seeks to amend Section 16 (1)(f) to provide that the location of the Headquarters
should be in NCR of Delhi.
13.1. The DoPT has stated that the provision will allow for setting up the Headquarters of Lokpal
at any location in National Capital Region of Delhi. In case land is not available in Delhi or is
prohibitively expensive, the Headquarters may be set up anywhere in NCR area.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
13.2. In view of the recommendations of the Committee to have an integrated setup for
anti corruption watchdog, the Committee is of the view that the Headquarters of the Lokpal
should be established within the CVC Headquarters.
13.3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Headquarters of the Lokpal should
be established within the CVC headquarters as the apex body of anti corruption setup with
CVC, CBI, Director of Prosecution (CBI) providing support to it.
Other Observations of the Committee
13.4. The Committee during its interactions with the political parties received suggestions from
the All India Trinamool Congress to review the role and functioning of the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI). The AITC stated that the CBI is an extra constitutional body and that there
is a need to review the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. The party questioned the
practice of referring law and order related cases to the Bureau as a matter of routine. The party
also said that the agency has already been provided enough independence to investigate cases which
is unwarranted and unconstitutional. Thus, there is a need to create another independent pool of
investigators which would work under the overall supervision of the Lokpal.
13.5. The Committee notes that various High Courts and Supreme Court of India are
frequently issuing directions to CBI to handle cases relating to Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 as also of "Public Order". As a result, the jurisdiction and powers of CBI have
widened and deepened and have far exceeded than what was contemplated under the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. The superior courts who are courts of appeal under
Section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 are even directing CBI in a number
of cases to report day-to-day progress in a sealed cover bypassing Sections 172 and 173 of
the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and performing functions envisaged under the criminal
justice system of the country for the lowest rung of criminal court and also appreciating the
evidence which under Section 173 of Criminal Procedure Code is required to be done by the
Magistrate. Judicial activism of higher judiciary by taking pains of overseeing an
investigation and passing interim directions to CBI and even pre-empting the rights and
remedies available to affected persons under criminal justice system. It may, therefore,

23
appear to affected persons as a pre-emptive and colourable exercise of power by the superior
courts. The Committee also notes that CBI Courts are being established in various districts
of the States giving rise to a new culture of "Federal Criminal Investigation Agency and
Federal Criminal District Courts" akin to the system prevailing in USA. This in effect is
leading to introduction of dual judicial system which is not contemplated under our
Constitution. This is not only encroaching upon the constitutional powers and jurisdiction
conferred by the Constitution upon the States but also obliterates their obligations and
accountability in the subjects allocated to them under the Constitution. It impinges upon
the division of power and the Federal character of our Constitution and destabilises the
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. This trend is making CBI as the most sought after
investigating agency for investigation of all sorts of crimes and is relegating the State Police
to the mere level of Home Guards. The Committee is afraid that this trend if allowed to
persist may lead to inversion of pyramidical structure of governance provided under the
Constitution of India and it may get crumbled under the weight of over-burdened Judiciary,
Executive and Parliament. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is a need to revisit
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 which was enacted for the limited purpose of
dealing with corruption cases. The Committee feels that with the setting up of institution
of Lokpal and in the light of its suggestion that anti-corruption set up of the country may
be unified by creating an architecture in which Lokpal is at apex level and CBI and CVC
as its arms to carry out inquiry, investigation and prosecution etc. in offence relating to
corruption under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The Committee is of the opinion that
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 may be repealed and suitable provisions
incorporated in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 to set up a unified architecture for
the purpose. The Committee further notes that under Section 3 of the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013, the Chairperson of the Lokpal would be a serving or former Chief
Justice of India or a judge of the Supreme Court and at least 50% of its members would
be judicial members who are serving or former judges of Supreme Court or Chief Justices
of High Courts. The Committee feels that with setting up of such an institution of Lokpal
there should be no occasion in cases under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 for the
judiciary to issue directions to CBI of the nature referred to above and to monitor the
progress of investigation which is essentially the job of a Magistrate or a lowest rung of
criminal court. In the proposed set up, the Lokpal would have sufficient powers to monitor
the investigation being carried out by its agencies as the agencies would only be its organs.
For other type of cases now being conducted by the CBI, a separate legislation may be
brought and a new agency created for those purposes. This new agency may use the existing
infrastructure, personnel, etc of CBI.

24
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV A TIONS — A T A GLANCE
1. The Committee notes that in the present Lok Sabha, there is no recognized Leader
of Opposition and such a situation can arise in future as well. In the absence of Leader of
Opposition it is not possible to constitute the Selection Committee of Lok Pal as per
provisions of the Lok Pal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. In order to overcome such a situation,
amendment is proposed to provide that the Leader of Opposition recognised as such in the
Lok Sabha or where there is no such Leader of Opposition, the leader of the single largest
opposition party in that House shall be a Member of the Selection Committee. Similar
provision exists for the appointment of Chief Vigilance Commissioner (CVC) under Section
4 of CVC Act, 2003. The Committee is of the view that the amendment is both necessary
and appropriate and accordingly recommends it. [Para 3.4]
2. The Committee is in agreement with the proposed amendment. [Para 4.3]
3. The Committee is of the view that whenever a Member is unable to attend the
meeting either of the Selection Committee or of the Search Committee, he/she should be
accorded adequate opportunity to send his/her views in writing to the Selection/Search
Committee and such views of the absentee Member should be taken into account while
taking a decision by the Committee. Only in rare situations where despite affording
adequate opportunities to the absentee Member, he/she fails to send his views to the Search/
Selection Committee in writing, decision may be taken in absence of views of the absentee
Member after recording the reasons for non-availability of views of the absentee
Member. [Para 5.3]
4. The Committee, however, is firmly of the opinion that Search/Selection Committee
should not take any decision unless vacancy, if any, in Search/Selection Committee is filled
up. The Committee sees no reason for not filling any vacancy quickly that may arise in the
Search/Selection Committee. The Committee accordingly recommends that the Bill may be
modified accordingly. [Para 5.4]
5. The Committee observes that with the setting up of Lokpal, multiple agencies such
as Lokpal, Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI),
Chief Vigilance Officers (CVOs) of concerned organisation would be dealing with complaints
of corruption. The Committee notes that the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act, 2013 and
amendments proposed thereto make an attempt to integrate CVC and CBI (anti corruption
functions) with Lokpal, but it falls short of a fully integrated setup for dealing with
corruption cases. [Para 6.0]
6. The Committee notes that there is an overlapping between the functions of CVC and
Lokpal. For example, Section 20 of Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 provides that Lokpal,
if it decides to proceed with the preliminary inquiry shall refer the complaint in respect of
public servants belonging to Groups 'A', 'B', 'C' or 'D' to the Central Vigilance Commission
24

25
who shall after making preliminary inquiry submit a report to Lokpal in case of public
servants belonging to Groups 'A' and 'B' and shall deal with complaints in respect of other
two groups as per the provisions of CVC Act, 2003. Under Section 25(1) of Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013, Lokpal has also been made competent to exercise powers and
superintendence and to give directions to CBI. Under Sections 8(1)(a) and 8(1)(b) of CVC
Act, 2003, CVC is empowered to exercise superintendence over the function of Delhi Special
Police Establishment (CBI) and to give it directions in relation to the investigation of
offences alleged to have been committed under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
Similarly, under Sections 8(1)(c) and 8(1)(d) of CVC Act, 2003, CVC can inquire or cause
an inquiry or investigation to be made for alleged offences under Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 against an official. Further, under Section 14(1) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2013, Lokpal can also inquire or cause an inquiry to be conducted in such cases.
Complaints of corruption against any government servants may be lodged with Lokpal,
CVC, CBI or the vigilance department of the concerned organization. This may give rise to
same complaint being examined by different organizations and may cause unnecessary
harassment of public servant apart from causing functional problems. The Committee notes
that Section 15 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 provides that after commencement
of the said Act, if any matter or proceedings related to allegation of corruption under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 is pending before any authority prior to commencement
of any inquiry it shall continue with such authority. It is ,however, not clear how other
authorities would have such knowledge until concerned public servant is informed of it and
he takes up with such authorities. The position, therefore, as it exists provides for
overlapping of functions and powers of CVC and Lokpal in certain areas. [Para 6.1]
7. The Committee notes that under the second proviso to Section 20(1), the Central
Vigilance Commission is required to submit a report to the Lokpal. Under Section 25(1), the
powers of Lokpal override Section 8 of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 and
under sub-Section 2 of Section 25, the Central Vigilance Commission is required to send a
statement to the Lokpal at such intervals as the Lokpal may direct in respect of action
taken on complaints referred to it and Lokpal is made competent to issue guidelines for
effective and expeditious disposal of such cases. Further, power to grant prosecution has
been vested in Lokpal under Section 20(7) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. This
sub-Section provides that a Bench consisting of not less than 3 members of Lokpal shall
consider the investigation report received by it from any investigating agency including CBI
and after obtaining the comments of the Competent Authority and the public servant, shall
decide the further course of action i.e. either to grant sanction for prosecution or direct the
closure of report before the Special Court or direct the Competent Authority to initiate the
departmental proceedings or any other appropriate action. These provisions show that the
scheme of Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 places Lokpal on a higher pedestal than CVC
notwithstanding overlapping of jurisdictions and functions as stated above. [Para 6.2]
8. The Committee is of the view that institutions of CVC and the CBI (in so far as its
anti corruption functions are concerned), be fully integrated with Lokpal and the institution
of anti corruption watchdog may be architecturally created vertically with the Lokpal at the
apex level and CVC and CBI (anti-corruption wing) working directly under its command and

26
control. The functions of Lokpal and CVC be clearly specified and overlap between functions
and powers of CVC and Lokpal be addressed. Lokpal in turn should utilize these
organizations for conduct of inquiry, investigation and prosecution. [Para 6.3]
9. The Committee notes that a post of Director of Inquiry was created in CVC by
inserting Section 11A in the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 through the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. On such integration, the post of Director of Inquiry which is
available in CVC can be utilized by the Lokpal and there would be no need for creation of
another post of Director of Inquiry for Lokpal as provided under Sections 10(2) and 11 of
the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. The Committee is also aware that apart from anti-
corruption, the Central Bureau of Investigation is also handling cases relating to economic
offences, special crimes, bank security and fraud and cyber-crime, etc. The Committee is
only recommending integration of Anti-corruption Branch of CBI with Lokpal which on such
integration may be placed under the Director of Inquiry of Lokpal. For investigation of
crimes, other than corruption crimes, the existing structure and procedures may continue
to operate. The Government if it so considers necessary for the purpose, may come up with
a comprehensive legislation on CBI for effective performance of other functions of the
agency as recommended in the Twenty Fourth Report of this Committee on 'Working of
CBI' (2008). The Committee feels that such an integrated structure would be more
practicable setup and cause least financial burden on the exchequer. [Para 6.4]
10. The Committee is of the view that since the Secretary to Lokpal would be dealing
with high ranking officials of the Government of India, and as such it is absolutely
necessary that he/she should not be lower than the rank and status of Secretary to
Government of India so that he is not unduly influenced by his/her seniors or colleagues
from the Civil Service and is able to function independently. The Committee is further of
the view that for effective functioning the Director of Inquiry and the Director of
Prosecution of Lokpal, they should not be lower than the rank and status of Additional
Secretary to the Government of India. The Committee does not favour the changes
proposed by Clause 3 of the Bill. The Committee further recommends that Director of
Inquiry created in CVC by insertion of Section 11A in the Central Vigilance Commission
Act, 2003 should be used for purposes of inquiry by Lokpal and there is no need for
creation of another Director of Inquiry in Lokpal. [Para 7.4]
11. The Committee agrees with the proposed amendment. [Para 8.2]
12. The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 though has an over-riding effect over Section
75A of the Representation of People Act, 1951, it does not repeal Section 75A of the
Representation of People Act, 1951. An elected Member of Parliament, therefore, may be
required to furnish information of assets and liabilities both under Section 75A of the
Representation of People Act, 1951 as well as under Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
Further, under Representation of People Act, 1951 they would be required to furnish
information in ninety days from the date on which they take oath while under the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, they may be required to do so within thirty days. Similarly, there
may be difference in manner and content of declaration of assets and liabilities under
Conduct Rules or other Rules applicable to other public servants. This is not a desirable

27
situation and a uniform system of declaration of assets and liabilities should be made
applicable to all public servants. The Committee further observes that Section 75A of the
Representation of People Act, 1951 is applicable only to elected Members of the Parliament.
It has no application to nominated Members. Nominated Members may also be required to
file a declaration of their assets and liabilities similar to the one to be filed by elected
Members of Parliament. Necessary provision in this regard may be incorporated in the Bill
and the Committee recommends accordingly. [Para 9.6]
13. Clause 6 of this Bill seeks to amend Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013 to provide for declaration of assets acquired by the public servant using his/her funds
in his/her name, in the name of any of his/her family member or in the name of any other
person. The Committee notes that under the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961, every
person who files an income tax return is regarded as a separate entity and details of his/
her return are not disclosed to anyone else including his/her spouse unless it serves some
public good. Further, a public servant cannot compel his/her spouse or child to disclose to
him the details of assets acquired by them independently of the public servant. In today's
world considering increasing avenues available in the fields of arts, entertainment and even
business ventures even minor children of a public servant may have income of their own.
Moreover, more and more spouses of public servants are working and having their
independent sources of income. In such a scenario, compelling declaration of assets acquired
by the spouse or children of a public servant from his/her own income may even be held
to be in breach of their right to privacy guaranteed under Article 21 or even violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. As such any provision that seeks declaration of
assets acquired by family members of public servant through their own income may not be
legally sustainable. Family members of public servant are under no obligation to disclose to
him/her, the assets acquired by them through their own income and it may, therefore, not
be appropriate to even expect that all public servants would have knowledge of assets
acquired by his/her family members through their own incomes. It may, therefore, not be
feasible to hold the public servant accountable in case the information furnished by him
regarding assets of his family members turns out to be factually incorrect and, therefore,
any exercise of compelling a public servant to declare assets of his/her family members
independently acquired by them, may turn out to be an exercise in futility. The Committee,
therefore, agrees with the proposed amendments in so far as the declaration of assets
acquired by the family members of the public servants through their own income or from
sources independent of the public servant is sought to be excluded from disclosure to be
made by the public servant. [Para 9.19]
14. The Committee further agrees that the public servant should declare the assets and
liabilities to their Competent Authority. The Committee, however, is of the opinion that the
Competent Authority of the public servant should forward a copy of the assets and liabilities
so declared by the public servant to the Lokpal who shall keep these declaration in a
fiduciary capacity. Both competent authority of public servant and Lokpal would be
competent to review the returns filed by the public servants particularly in suspicious cases
including through use of digital surveillance software to detect any disproportionate growth
in assets and liabilities of a public servant beyond his known sources of income. This,

28
however, should be done in a professional manner so as not to give rise to a feeling that
every government servant is suspect and under surveillance. Further, it should be ensured
that government servants are not subjected to unnecessary clarifications/queries as a result
of such scrutiny. Any feeling amongst public servants that they are not trusted and are
working under surveillance is bound to affect their morale and productivity and would not
be in public interest. [Para 9.20]
15. The Committee is further of the opinion that the provision of double scrutiny by the
Competent Authority of the public servant and by the Lokpal would serve the purpose
sought to be achieved by making such declarations public while at the same time it would
safeguard the public servant from the misuse of such information by miscreants and
criminals and avoid any danger to the security and safety of the public servants and their
family members. [Para 9.21]
16. The Committee, therefore, feels that public disclosure of assets and liabilities of
public servants may not be necessary and recommends accordingly. [Para 9.22]
17. The Committee is further of the view that public servants need to spend less time
on routine and non-productive activities and more time on productive activities. It is in this
light that the Committee feels the need to revisit the rules which currently govern the
manner and form of declaration of assets and liabilities by a government servant as these
rules reflect the colonial mindset of doubt and mistrust which the colonial masters had
regarding their employees. The extant Rules and procedures are at present being used more
to harass government servants than as a safeguard against corruption and often act as
barriers against true and fair disclosure by government servants. [Para 9.23]
18 Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013 and interalia  provides that the public servants referred to in Clauses (a) to (f) of sub-
Section 1 of Section 14 shall discloses their assets and liabilities in the manner provided
under the relevant provisions, rules or regulations of the Act applicable to them and for
other public servants in the manner specified by Lokpal. As stated in para 9.6 above, this
would not lead to uniformity either in the contents or form or manner of declaration of
assets and liabilities by the public servants. [Para 9.24]
19. The Committee is accordingly of the view that a uniform provision may be made and
incorporated in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 for declaration of assets and liabilities
by the public servants and contents, format, manner of declaration and other details thereof
may be specified in the rules made under the Act. Existing provisions for declaration of
assets and liabilities made under any Act, Rules, Regulations or Instructions may be
omitted so that there is no duplication in declaration of assets and liabilities by public
servants. The Committee further recommends that a public servant may be required to
furnish declaration of assets and liabilities owned by him/her, his dependent spouse,
dependent children and any other person dependent on him/her. In addition, he may also
be required to declare assets acquired by him/her from his/her income/resources in the
name of any other person. The first declaration may be made within ninety days of coming
into force of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment) Act, 2014
or joining public service or taking oath as a public servant. Thereafter, such declaration

29
may be made every year and the last date for filing such a declaration may be kept a
month after the last date for filing Income Tax Return. [Para 9.25]
20. The Committee is of the opinion that in order to secure effective functioning and
independence of the Director of Prosecution, his rank should be at par with that of Director,
CBI and it recommends accordingly. The Committee further is of the opinion that field of
selection for appointment to the post of Director of Prosecution of the CBI or of the Lokpal
should also extend to the Advocates having at least fifteen years experience of conducting
criminal cases on behalf of the Government in the capacity of Public Prosecutor, Assistant
Solicitor General, Defence Lawyer, etc. The Committee is of the view that practical
knowledge of conduct of criminal cases in the court should be preferable to desk knowledge.
The Committee further feels that officers of Indian Legal Service in order to be eligible
should also have experience of at least fifteen years of handling cases on behalf of the
Government under the Prevention of Corruption Act,1988, Prevention of Money Laundering
Act, 2002 and other laws relating to economic offences or criminal cases. Considering that
the Committee has recommended that the rank of Director of Prosecution should be at par
with the rank of Director, CBI, it is of the opinion that eligibility conditions as proposed
in the Bill should be revised to bring them in consonance with the level of the post of
Director of Prosecution and experience of at least fifteen years. [Para 10.6]
21. The Committee further recommends that appointment to this post should be made
through detailed and proper enquiry into integrity, credibility and competence of the persons
in the zone of consideration for the post. [Para 10.7]
22. The Committee has already recommended that anti corruption wing of the CBI
should be integrated with Lokpal and in that situation, Director of Prosecution of Lokpal
should handle cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act and if there is a difference of
opinion between the Director of Enquiry of Lokpal and Director of Prosecution of Lokpal,
the difference would naturally be resolved by Lokpal under whom both of them would work.
For cases other than those under the Prevention of Corruption Act, the resolution of
differences between Director of Prosecution, CBI and Director, CBI may be done as per
advice of Attorney General for India. The Committee recommends accordingly. [Para 11.5]
23. The Committee is of the view that Director of Prosecution of Lokpal should be
responsible for handling all cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 being
handled by it and his Annual Performance Appraisal Report is to be recorded by the Lokpal.
The Committee is further of the view that cases other than those falling under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 should be handled by Director of Prosecution of CBI for
purposes of deciding the prosecution and the Annual Performance Appraisal Report of the
Director of Prosecution of CBI may be recorded and maintained in the Ministry of Law &
Justice in such a manner as may be prescribed. [Para 11.5]
24. The Committee is of the view that Director of Prosecution of Lokpal should be
responsible for handling all cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 being
handled by it and his Annual Performance Appraisal Report is to be recorded by the Lokpal.
The Committee is further of the view that cases other than those falling under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 should be handled by Director of Prosecution of CBI for

30
purposes of deciding the prosecution and the Annual Performance Appraisal Report of the
Director of Prosecution of CBI may be recorded and maintained in the Ministry of Law &
Justice in such a manner as may be prescribed. [Para 12.6]
25. In view of the recommendations of the Committee to have an integrated setup for
anti corruption watchdog, the Committee is of the view that the Headquarters of the Lokpal
should be established within the CVC Headquarters.                          [Para 13.2]
26. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Headquarters of the Lokpal should
be established within the CVC headquarters as the apex body of anti corruption setup with
CVC, CBI, Director of Prosecution (CBI) providing support to it. [Para 13.3]
27. The Committee notes that various High Courts and Supreme Court of India are
frequently issuing directions to CBI to handle cases relating to Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 as also of "Public Order". As a result, the jurisdiction and powers of CBI have
widened and deepened and have far exceeded than what was contemplated under the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. The superior courts who are courts of appeal under
Section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 are even directing CBI in a number
of cases to report day-to-day progress in a sealed cover bypassing Sections 172 and 173 of
the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and performing functions envisaged under the criminal
justice system of the country for the lowest rung of criminal court and also appreciating the
evidence which under Section 173 of Criminal Procedure Code is required to be done by the
Magistrate. Judicial activism of higher judiciary by taking pains of overseeing an
investigation and passing interim directions to CBI and even pre-empting the rights and
remedies available to affected persons under criminal justice system. It may, therefore,
appear to affected persons as a pre-emptive and colourable exercise of power by the superior
courts. The Committee also notes that CBI Courts are being established in various districts
of the States giving rise to a new culture of "Federal Criminal Investigation Agency and
Federal Criminal District Courts" akin to the system prevailing in USA. This in effect is
leading to introduction of dual judicial system which is not contemplated under our
Constitution. This is not only encroaching upon the constitutional powers and jurisdiction
conferred by the Constitution upon the States but also obliterates their obligations and
accountability in the subjects allocated to them under the Constitution. It impinges upon
the division of power and the Federal character of our Constitution and destabilises the
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. This trend is making CBI as the most sought after
investigating agency for investigation of all sorts of crimes and is relegating the State Police
to the mere level of Home Guards. The Committee is afraid that this trend if allowed to
persist may lead to inversion of pyramidical structure of governance provided under the
Constitution of India and it may get crumbled under the weight of over-burdened Judiciary,
Executive and Parliament. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is a need to revisit
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 which was enacted for the limited purpose of
dealing with corruption cases. The Committee feels that with the setting up of institution
of Lokpal and in the light of its suggestion that anti-corruption set up of the country may
be unified by creating an architecture in which Lokpal is at apex level and CBI and CVC
as its arms to carry out inquiry, investigation and prosecution etc. in offence relating to
corruption under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The Committee is of the opinion that

31
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 may be repealed and suitable provisions
incorporated in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 to set up a unified architecture for
the purpose. The Committee further notes that under Section 3 of the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013, the Chairperson of the Lokpal would be a serving or former Chief
Justice of India or a judge of the Supreme Court and at least 50% of its members would
be judicial members who are serving or former judges of Supreme Court or Chief Justices
of High Courts. The Committee feels that with setting up of such an institution of Lokpal
there should be no occasion in cases under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 for the
judiciary to issue directions to CBI of the nature referred to above and to monitor the
progress of investigation which is essentially the job of a Magistrate or a lowest rung of
criminal court. In the proposed set up, the Lokpal would have sufficient powers to monitor
the investigation being carried out by its agencies as the agencies would only be its organs.
For other type of cases now being conducted by the CBI, a separate legislation may be
brought and a new agency created for those purposes. This new agency may use the existing
infrastructure, personnel, etc of CBI. [Para 13.5]

MINUTES

35
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 8 th January, 2015 in Committee Room G-074,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
4. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
7. Dr. A. Sampath
8. Shri Bharat Singh
9. Dr. Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
10. Shri Santosh Kumar
11. Shri B. V . Naik
12. Shri Vincent H. Pala
13. Dr. Anshul V erma
14. Shri Tariq Anwar
15. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr.  D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
I. Representatives of the Ministry Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri Sanjay Kothari, Secretary
2. Shri Bhanu Pratap Sharma, Establishment Officer & Special Secretary

36
3. Shri T. Jacob, Additional Secretary
4. Shri Jishnu Barua, Joint Secretary
5. Shri P. K. Das, Joint Secretary
6. Ms. Mamta Kundra, Joint Secretary
7. Shri V . M. Rathnam, Director
II. CBI
1. Shri Anil Kumar Sinha, Director
2. Shri  O. P. V erma, Director of Prosecution
3. Shri  R. K. Dutta, Additional Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members and laid out the agenda of the meeting. He briefly
introduced the Members to the amendments proposed in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other
Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014  and sought their permission to call the witnesses to make
their presentations.
3. The Secretary, DoPT made power-point presentation inter alia  touching upon the need for
amendments to Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,
1946, to address practical difficulties associated with selection process for appointment of
Chairperson and  Members of Lokpal and also to ensure functional independence of Director of
Prosecution in Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). He offered rationale for limiting the tenure
of eminent jurists in Selection Committee and barring re-nomination of that person to that
Committee, validating the decision of Search and  Selection Committee in the absence of any
Member thereof, lowering rank and status of Secretary to Lokpal and Director of Prosecution,
maintenance and publication of property details of public servant in public interest by the
Government, Annual Confidential Report of Director of Prosecution by Ministry of Law and
Justice, Attorney General to be arbitrator in the case of difference of opinion between Director of
CBI and Director of Prosecution, etc. He also covered comparative analysis of Director of
Prosecution mechanisms in United Kingdom, United States of America, Germany and France viz-
a-viz India in his deposition.
4.0 Members sought clarifications as to whether decision taken in the absence of any Member
in Search and Selection Committee could be validated by giving an opportunity to the absentee to
present his/her views in writing. Another clarification sought as to whether money released to Non-
Governmental Organisations under MPLAD Scheme by Members of Parliament would be treated as
‘financed by Government’ for the purpose of the Bill.
4.1 It was suggested that Annual Confidential Report (ACR) of Director of Prosecution should
be written by Chairperson of Lokpal instead of Law Secretary to Government of India.  Another
view in the Committee was that maintenance ACR by Ministry of Law and Justice might breed
institutional indiscipline having direct bearing upon the investigation procedure of CBI.  In that
context, recommendations of Standing as  well as Select Committee of Parliament on the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas Bill was sought for.
4.2 Reduction of status and rank of Director of Prosecution and Secretary to Lokpal was a
matter of concern amongst the Members. It was suggested that rank of Secretary to Lokpal and

37
Director of Prosecution should be the rank of Secretary and Additional Secretary to Government
of India, respectively with a fixed tenure.
4.3 The Committee felt that difference of opinion between Director of CBI and Director of
Prosecution should be referred to Chairperson of Lokpal rather than to Attorney General for India.
4.4 Some of the members apprehended that broadening of definitions of Assets and Liabilities
owned and inherited by any member of the family of public servant may defame them.  At the
same time it was also felt that the properties held in other name (benami property) ought to be
accounted for, to contain corruption.
4.5 A view emerged that the eligibility criteria for Director of Prosecution should include
experience of Advocates in Criminal Law in addition to experience in handling corruption and
money laundering cases and criteria laid down under Section 24 of CrPC, 1973.  It was felt that
it needs to be examined whether independence available to Queen’s Public Prosecution in the United
Kingdom and Federal Public Prosecution in the United States of America should be made available
to the Director of Prosecution.
5.0 The Director, CBI, while making power point presentation on the Bill mentioned that the Bill
might erode the tenuous balance between investigation and prosecution wings of CBI leading to
dysfunctionality.  It was pointed out that the prosecution has no role during investigation which
has been upheld by the Apex Court in many cases.  In his view, the difference of opinion between
Director of CBI and Director of Prosecution should be resolved by Director of CBI and opinion
of Attorney General should not be binding upon Director of CBI.  While writing ACR of DoP by
Law Secretary, the note of Director of CBI about performance of DoP should be taken into
account as DoP works under overall supervision of Director of CBI.
5.1 On the issue of appointing Advocates having experience in certain field, as DoP would allow
them to have access to sensitive documents and materials in the area of space, atomic energy,
external affairs, etc., it was suggested that the pool of candidates for DoP might be widened to
include Law Offices, Officers of Vigilance and Anti-corruption Branch of State Governments.
6. The Chairman further directed the witnesses to submit written replies to questions raised
by the Hon’ble Members within two weeks.  The Committee decided to hear Director of
Prosecution separately on a future date.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 05.13 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 22 th January, 2015.

38
38
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 3 rd March, 2015 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
5. Adv. Sharad Bansode
6. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
7. Shri B. V . Naik
8. Shri Santosh Kumar
9. Shri V Panneerselvam
10. Shri Udhayakumar M.
11. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Dr.  D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
A. Central Vigilance Commission (CVC)
1. Shri Alok Kumar, Secretary
2. Shri Salim Haque, Additional Secretary
B. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
1. Shri O. P. Verma, Director of Prosecution
2. Shri Vidyasagar Shukla, Additional Legal Advisor

39
C. Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT)
1. Shri T. Jacob, Additional Secretary (S&V)
2. Shri V . M. Rathnam, Director
D. Legislative Department (M/o Law and Justice)
1. Dr. N. R. Battu, Joint Secretary
2. Shri K. V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the official witnesses to the
meeting. He requested the Central Vigilance Commission and the Director of Prosecution to present
their views on certain specific issues related to the Bill. The Chairman requested the CVC to submit
clarification on the current role of CVC and its views on the possibility of a duplicity in the role
of the CVC and Lokpal. The Chairman requested the Director of Prosecution to present his views
on the suitability of having an independent prosecution wing.
3. The Secretary, CVC  in his deposition to informed that while there would not be much
overlap initially but  such overlap could be possible once Lokpal starts functioning.  However, he
was of the view that the two institutions would rather complement each other in a way that normal
misdemeanor would continue to be overseen by the CVC while matter relating to corruption
charges will be handled by the Lokpal. He also stated the public servants engaged under the two
institutions are different in that CVC covers only Group ‘A ’ officers in the Government while the
Lokpal Act covers all categories of Government employees.
4. The Chairman asked the Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Director of Prosecution to
send written replies to the issues raised by the Members of the Committee within two weeks. He
also told them that they would be asked to appear before the Committee again at a later date for
a more in depth deliberation, which would be conveyed to them in due course.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 3.47 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 10 th March, 2015.

40
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 15 th April, 2015 in Committee Room No. 139,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Rajani Patil
3. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
LOK SABHA
4. Adv. Sharad Bansode
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
7. Shri Santosh Kumar
8. Shri B. V . Naik
9. Shri Vincent H. Pala
10. Dr. A. Sampath
11. Dr. Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr.  D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
A. NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Prof. K Elumalai, Director, School of Law, Indira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU);
2. Shrimati Anjali Bhardwaj, Co-convener National Campaign for Peoples’ Right to
Information (NCPRI);
3. Shri Nikhil Dey, Co-convener National Campaign for Peoples’ Right to Information
(NCPRI);
40

41
4. Shri Venkatesh Nayak, Co-convener National Campaign for Peoples’ Right to
Information (NCPRI);
5. Ms. Amrita Johri, Co-convener National Campaign for Peoples’ Right to Information
(NCPRI);
6. Shri Ashok Kapur, Director General, Institute of Directors, New Delhi;
7. Ms Guninder Gill; and
8. Dr. L.S. Choudhury
B. DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING, MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES AND PENSIONS
Shri Jishnu Barua, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, official and non-official witnesses to
the sitting and requested them to confine themselves to the proposed amendments to the Lokpal
and Lokayukta Act, 2013 under the Bill.
3. Prof. K. Elumalai, IGNOU made a power point presentation wherein he submitted that 25
years of active practice in the Bar or 25 years of experience in teaching or research in legal
institution may be considered as essential qualification of the eminent jurist in the Lokpal.  He also
proposed reduction in tenure of eminent jurist from three to two years.  He also pointed out that
family members of the public servants needed to be defined in the Bill for the purpose of
declaration of their assets and liabilities.
4. The representatives of National Campaign for People’s Right to Information (NCPRI),
thereafter made presentation on the Bill.  While pointing out the lack of will on the part of the
Government to operationalise provisions of the Principal Act, they suggested that the Committee
might like to indicate specified time period for making it mandatory for the Government to put in
place Lokpal.
4.1. They opposed the amendment proposed to Section 44 of the Act on the grounds that
existing Laws/Rules governing different categories of public servants have different manners of
disclosure of assets while the Principal Act had attempted uniformity in disclosure of assets and
liabilities of all public servants.  The assets of elected representatives and their family members
have been in public domain as they are required to submit the same in their affidavits under the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 to Election Commission at the time of filing nomination for
election.  They were of the view that assets of Government Servants and their family members
should be in public domain to enable citizen to make informed complaints about commissioning of
corruption.  Accordingly, they proposed deletion of Clauses 6 and 7of the Bill.
4.2. The representatives of NCPRI were of the view that the appraisal of APAR of Director of
Prosecution of CBI  may be made by the Lokpal in lieu of  Law Secretary. A quorum of two-thirds
or three-fourths in Selection Committee may be provided in the Bill.  They further suggested that
the rank of Secretary to Lokpal might not be lower than any Officer of Government of India
except Cabinet Secretary.
4.3. The representatives of NCPRI also suggested amendment to the Principal Act to the extent
that complaints needed to be inquired in to and investigated by the Lokpal through its own officers

42
rather than depending upon CBI and CVC for that purpose. They appealed to the Committee that
jail term for filing false and vexatious complaints may be reduced to hefty fines where malicious
intent of the complainant is established. The existing police station or district level Lokayukta office
might be authorized to receive complaint of corruption against Group C and D employees at field
levels.
5. Shri Ashok Kapur, dubbed the Principal Act as well as the amending Bill as unconstitutional
as these upset the separation of power principle. He also panned proposed quota in Lokpal,
unaccountability of the Lokpal in the Act.
6. Ms. Guninder Gill was of the view that backdoor amendment to DSPE Act through Lokpal
Act is improper.  The Director of Prosecution under the Act could not be fully independent and
the Lokpal Act has failed to ensure complete separation of prosecution and investigation even
though our country is a signatory to International Convention upholding independence of
prosecutor.
7. Dr. L.S. Choudhury submitted that as regards the qualification of a judge deciding a case,
it provides  that  he should have a standing of seven years at the Bar but in the case of Director
of Prosecution, the minimum qualification prescribed is  fifteen years of practice which appeared
to be  contradictory and therefore, he suggested that the qualification for  appointment as Director
of Prosecution should be reduced to seven years of practice. He further stated that officers of the
Indian Legal Service must not be appointed as Director of Prosecution as they do not have the
experience of handling cases in a court.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 1.03 
P.M.

43
XXIII
TWENTY THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 26 th May, 2015 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
6. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
7. Shri Vincent H. Pala
8. Shri Udhayakumar M.
9. Dr. Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
10. Dr Anshul Verma
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr.  D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
A. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
1. Shri O. P. V erma, Director of Prosecution; and
2. Shri V . S. Shukla, Additional LA;
B. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (DoPT)
Shri T. Jacob, Additional Secretary.
C. Non-official Witnesses
Lok Satta
1. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, General Secretary;
43

44
2. Ms. Ankita K. Verma;
3. Shri Amol Ratna;
4. Shri Pallav Pradyumn Narang; and
5. Shri Dushyant Arora.
D. Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice)
1. Dr. M. Vijayawargiya, Additional Secretary; and
2. Shri Jose Thomas, Director (P).
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members of the Committee, Director of Prosecution
(DoP) of CBI and officers of DoPT to the sitting and requested Director of Prosecution to offer
his opinion on the issue as to whether the proposed amendment to Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013 would ensure functional independence of Director of Prosecution.  His views were also
sought on the issue of resolution of difference of the opinion between DoP and Director, CBI by
Attorney General for India and difficulties to be encountered by him while reporting to multiple
authorities i.e. Lokpal, Law Secretary and CBI,  Director.
3. The Director of Prosecution (DoP), CBI made a Power Point Presentation wherein he
alluded to relevant recommendations of Law Commission contained in their 14th and 41st Reports
and various judgements pronounced by Supreme Court including the one on Vineet Nairain case
(1998) supporting independent Director of Prosecution, for the sake of free and fair trial.  He
submitted that independent Director of Prosecution have been set up in States in accordance with
Section 25A of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. He expressed a firm view that DoP should not
report to Director CBI to ensure from ... fair legal opinion. He further stated that DoP served be
independent or investigation.  He was of the view that the proposed amendment for appraisal of
APAR of DoP, CBI by Union Law Secretary would not amount to separation of prosecution and
investigation of CBI as envisaged under Section 25A of CrPC, however, the proposed amendments
were small steps in that direction.
4. Members sought data regarding conviction rate of cases referred to CBI in pre and post
2000 phases.  Cogent reasons were sought for narrowing down the zone of consideration for
practicing lawyers to the field of economic and anti-corruption crimes for the post of DoP while
CBI have been assigned the cases in the areas of criminal law, cyber law, etc.
(The witnesses withdrew and meeting adjourned for tea and reassembled at 4:30 
P.M.)
5. The Committee, thereafter, heard views of non-official witnesses invited on the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas and other Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014 and on the Subject – “Feasibility of
Conducting Simultaneous Elections to House of People and State Legislative Assemblies”. The
Chairman in his initial remark recapitulated the views offered in the memoranda submitted by
invited witness and requested him to make submissions in respect of issues not covered it ...
memoranda.
6. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan suggested that an eminent jurist in Selection Committee for Lokpal
need not be a full time functionary. The initial and annual declaration of assets and liabilities of
Public Servant should be in public domain. He was of the view that amendment moved by
Government to the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 to make Lokpal sanctioning authority for

45
prosecution of any group of government employees would unnecessarily over burden the high
profile institution.  He felt that there was a need for seamless integration of the institutions of
Lokpal, Lokayuktas, and Vigilance Commisssions at national and state level to fulfil our international
obligation under UNCAC. He, in that context, proposed stringent provisions relating to confiscation
of property analogous to the provisions in the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators
Prevention Act, 1976 for corruption cases to create deterrant in the minds of corrupt public
servants.
7. On the issue of simultaneous elections, he supported the proposition in principle as frequent
elections had been disruptive of governance process and also encourages/competitive populism to
the extent of offering freebies by the political parties.  He referred to recent experiments undertaken
in Germany, United Kingdom and Canada to avoid mid-term polls and constructive no-confidence
motion was suggested as a measure to restrict the role of the Government to truncate the tenure
of the Legislature.  He suggested direct election of Chief Minister in the State for fixed tenure to
achieve the objectives.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 5.33 
P.M.

46
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 2:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16 th July, 2015 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
3. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
5. Dr. A. Sampath
6. Shri Udhayakumar M.
7. Dr. Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
8. Dr. Anshul V erma
9. Shri Tariq Anwar
10. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr.  D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
A. * * *
B. The Lokpal and Lokayuktas and other related laws (Amendment) Bill, 2014
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training)
1. Shri Sanjay Kothari, Secretary;
2. Shri Jacob T., Addditional Secretary;
3. Shri Jishnu Barua, Joint Secretary; and
4. Shri Sandeep Jain, Director.
46

47
II. Central Vigilance Commission (CVC)
1. Shrimati Nilam Sawhney Secretary; and
2. Shri Salim Haque, Additional Secretary
III. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
1. Shri Anil Kumar Sinha, Director; and
2. Shri R. S. Bhatti, Joint Director.
IV. Enforcement Directorate (ED)
Shri Rajan Katoch, Director.
V . Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)
Ms. Anita Kapur, Chairperson.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. He then apprised the
Committee that * * * and the Department of Personnel and Training, Central Vigilance Commission,
Central Bureau of Investigation, Enforcement Directorate and Central Board of Direct Taxes were
also invited to present their views on the Lokpal and Lokayuktas  and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2014.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
B. The Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2014
6. The Chairman welcomed the officers of the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT),
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), Enforcement
Directorate (ED) and Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) to the meeting. He requested them to
present their views on Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and Clause 6 of the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014.
7. The Chairperson, Central Board of Direct Taxes submitted that under the Income Tax Act,
every individual is considered an independent entity and the returns filed by him/her are held by
the Income Tax Department in a fiduciary capacity which could not be disclosed to any other third
party including the spouse of the individual except when it serves any public interest. She added
that the Bill mandates disclosure of assets and liabilities of public servant and not the income. She
also felt that publishing such information would jeopardise the safety of the public servant and his/
her family and therefore the Clauses in the Bill are more appropriate than Section 44 of the
Principal Act.
8. The Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training concurred with the views expressed
by Chairperson of CBDT and stated that the Government does not have any right to ask for details
of assets of spouse. The Secretary informed that the provisions of Section 44 has already been
*** Relate to other matters.

48
challenged in the High Court of Delhi. The Secretary also informed that the immovable property
returns of All India Services officers have been already put on the website. He also informed that
the Department of Personnel and Training has received representations from Civil Services
Employees’ Associations wherein they have opposed the publication of details of assets and
liabilities on the website apprehending threat to their family members from unsocial elements.
9. The Director, Enforcement Directorate supported the views of Chairperson of CBDT. He
felt that the amendments would bring the law in consonance with other existing laws which have
stood the test of time and would make it easier to implement the provisions of the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013. He opposed the publication of assets and liabilities of public servants as it
could lead to unnecessary harassment or the public servants. He stated that whenever the
Department investigates a case of disproportionate assets against an officer, they could use the
Income Tax Returns filed by the government servant as the base document.
10. The Director, Central Bureau of Investigation, while supporting amendments, highlighted on
the need to protect the honest public servants from frivolous and vexatious complaints. However,
he requested the Committee to grant the Bureau more time to submit their views on Clause 6 of
the Bill.
11. The Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission informed that after careful reconsideration of
the Bill, the Commission found the clauses in the Bill to be more appropriate. However, they did
not support publication of assets and liabilities of public servants on the websites.
12. The Chairman directed the Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance Commission
to submit their views on the proposition of placing both the agencies under the supervisory control
of the Lokpal instead of making them report to multiple institutions.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
13. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
14. The meeting adjourned at 4.52 
P.M.

49
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 14 th October, 2015 in Committee Room No.
G-074, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Rajani Patil
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
5. Adv. Joice George
6. Shri Bhagwant Mann
7. Shri B. V . Nayak
8. Dr. A. Sampath
9. Shri Bharat Singh
10. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Dr.  D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
A. Representatives of recognized Political Party
All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK)
Shri A. Navneethakrishnan, MP, Rajya Sabha.
B. Representatives of Central Government Employees Associations
I. Indian Revenue Service Association
1. Ms. Nirupama Kotru, IRS;
2. Shri B.R.R. Kumar, IRS;
3. Ms. Anchal Khandelwal, IRS; and
4. Shri Hemant Gupta, IRS.
49

50
II. Indian Civil Account Service Association
1.  Ms. Sofia Dahiya, Deputy Controller of Accounts; and
2.  Shri Alok Kumar Verma, Deputy Controller of Accounts.
III. Confederation of Central Government Gazetted Officers’
Organisations
1.  Shri S. Mohan, Secretary General;
2.  Shri Bhaskar Bhattacharjee, Additional Secretary; and
3.  Shri Surendra Singh Chauhan, Joint Secretary.
IV. Confederation of Civil Service Associations
1. Shri Jayant Misra, Convenor;
2. Shri P. V . Rama Sastry, Indian Police Service;
3. Shri R. N. Singh, Indian Railway Service of Engineers; and
4. Ms. Ranjana Dev Sarmah, Indian Information Service.
C. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (DoPT)
1. Shri T. Jacob, Additional Secretary; and
2. Shri Rakesh Kumar, Director.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the representative
of the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK), Shri A. Navneethakrishnan, MP,
Rajya Sabha. He outlined aspects of Clause 6 of the Bill and Section 44 of the Principal Act and
requested the Member to submit his party’s views on the provisions of the Bill especially on Clause
6 of the Bill and Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
3. Shri Navaneethakrishnan, MP, Rajya Sabha submitted that AIADMK agrees to the clause in
principle but suggested amendments to sub-Clause of Clause 6 which relates to publication of
returns filed by the public servants. He suggested that keeping in mind the security of the public
servant as well his right to privacy, the asset and liability declaration made under the Act might
not be put in the public domain. The declaration might be filed with the Competent Authority which
may be disclosed only if an investigation is being carried out against a particular public servant.
(The witness then withdrew)
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Central Government Employees
Associations and requested them to present their views on the Bill.
5. The Convenor, Confederation of Civil Service Associations submitted that it would not be
appropriate to put the details of assets and liabilities of public servants in the public domain as it
could jeopardize his safety as well as that of his/her family. Further, he added that publication of
such information in the public domain would also lead to a rise in filing of malicious and false
complaints against public servants to harass them. As per the Income Tax Act, 1961, details of an
individual’s income cannot be disclosed to anyone including his/her spouse. He averred that putting
the assets and liability details of the public servant in public domain might be discriminatory against
the public servant. On the issue of inclusion of details of assets and liabilities of the spouse, he
submitted that the exisiting provisions in Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 are

51
violative of the Right to Privacy of the spouse. He further stated a public servant does not have
any device to get accurate information from his spouse including Streedhan.  In that context, he
pointed out that the Supreme Court in the Pratibha Rani V/s Suraj Kumar  (1985 AIR 628)  has
stated that the position of the Streedhan in Hindu Marriage is clear and unambiguous and she is
the absolute owner of such property and deal with it in any manner she likes without any reference
to her husband. Therefore, a public servant could not force his spouse to divulge details regarding
Streedhan. He also referred to the interim observation of the Hon’ble Delhi High Court in a petition
challenging the validity of Section 44 filed by the wife of a civil servant wherein the Court has
stated that forcing the spouse of a civil servant to divulge information of his/her assets and
liabilities under Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 is violative of his/her
Fundamental Rights. He also pointed out that in order to furnish accurate details of his/her assets
every year, the public servant would have to get his property valuated professionally every year.
This might impose an unnecessary fiscal burden on the public servant. The association members
also suggested that the date of filing of returns under the Lokpal Act, Income Tax Returns and
the returns to be filed under the respective Conduct Rules of Public Servants need to be
harmonized.
6. While concurning with the views of the Convenor, Confederation of Civil Service
Associations, the Secretary General of Confederation of Central Government Gazetted Officers’
Organisations submitted that public servants might not be burdened by making him file multiple
declarations of his/her assets and liabilities. Instead, the details declared to the competent authority
might be forwarded to the Lokpal by the competent authority.
7. The representative of Indian Revenue Service Association concurred with the views of the
Convenor, Confederation of Civil Service Associations and stated that the declaration of assets and
liabilities as envisaged in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 is similar to filing an Income Tax
Return under the Income Tax Act, 1961 and therefore confidentiality of the declaration must be
maintained. She submitted that a public servant must get the same protection as any other tax payer
of the country is entitled to.
7. The Chairman directed the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) to state their
views on the apparent contradiction in the manner of declaration of assets and liabilities by public
servants as prescribed under Section 75A of Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 and Clause 6 of
the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014. The Department was
further directed to state their views on the possibility of deletion of Section 44(3) of the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 4.03 
P.M.

52
52
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 16 th November, 2015 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
3. Shri K. T. S.Tulsi
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
7. Adv. Joice George
8. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Dr. A. Sampath
10. Dr. Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Dr.  D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
A. Representatives of recognized Political Party
I. All India Trinamool Congress (AITC)
Shri Kalyan Banerjee, MP, Lok Sabha
II. Indian National Lok Dal (INLD)
Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap, MP, Rajya Sabha
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the representatives of political
parties to the meeting. The Chairman requested the representatives to present their views on the
Bill and specifically on Clause 6 of the Bill.
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee, MP, Lok Sabha stated the views of the All India Trinamool Congress
had already been forwarded in writing to the Committee wherein the position of the party was

53
clearly articulated. On Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokyuktas Act, 2013, he stated that
independent children of public servants enjoy their constitutional and statutory rights which cannot
be surrendered in the name of keeping a check on public servants under any statute. Thus, he
stated that the assets and liabilities of independent children of public servants must be excluded
from the purview of the Act. He further stated that Lokpal should not become an institution where
retired officials are accommodated. Instead, sitting judges and serving officers of the Government
may be appointed in Lokpal. He further advocated the need to establish an independent investigation
agency which would work under the supervision of Lokpal.
(One witness withdrew at this point)
4. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap, MP, Rajya Sabha while representing the view of his party, viz.
INLD stated that the public servant must declare the assets and liabilities in respect of immovable
and movable property, including that of his/family member under oath or affirmation. Further, he
stated that ‘Competent Authority’ should be clearly defined.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. The Committee held internal discussions on the provisions of the Bill.
6. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 4.22 
P.M.

54
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 26 th November, 2015 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
7. Adv. Joice George
8. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Shri Vincent H. Pala
10. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
11. Shri Bharat Singh
12. Shri M. Udhayakumar
SECRETARIAT
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
A. Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri P. K. Malhotra, Law Secretary;
2. Shri Dinesh Bhardwaj, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri M. Khandelwal, Additional Government Advocate; and
4. Shri Rajveer Singh Verma, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
B. Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri G. Naryana Raju, Secretary;
2. Ms. Reeta V asistha, Additional Secretary;
54

55
3. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
C. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training)
1. Shri Sanjay Kothari, Secretary;
2. Shri T. Jacob, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri Jishnu Barua, Joint Secretary;
4. Ms. Meera Mohanty, Deputy Secretary; and
5. Shri A. K. Roy, Deputy Secretary.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. He then apprised the
Committee that Secretaries of Department of Personnel and Training, Department of Legal Affairs
and Legislative Department have been invited to consult them on certain major issues on the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas and Other Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014. * * *
(After the arrival of the witnesses)
A.  The Lokpal and Lokayuktas and other Related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014
3. The Chairman welcomed Secretaries of Department of Personnel and Training, Department
of Legal Affairs, Legislative Department and other senior officers of those Departments. The
Chairman requested the Secretary, DoPT to focus on the apparent distinction between selected and
elected public servants with regard to declaration of their assets and liabilities, the need for
including independent spouse and children of public servants under Section 44 of the Act, the need
for a separate Directorate of Inquiry and Directorate of Prosecution in the Lokpal, the justification
for making  Attorney-General for India to sort out  difference of opinion between the Director of
Prosecution of CBI and Director, CBI and the possibility of prescribing same ranks for the
Secretary, Lokpal; Director of Inquiry and Director of Prosecution for ensuring their independence.
4. The Secretary, DoPT stated that the Department would examine the suggestion of the
Committee to include only the dependent spouse and other dependent individuals of a public servant
for making the declaration of assets and liabilities by the Public Servant. The Department requested
the Committee that a recommendation might be made by the Committee so that the declaration
sought under Section 44 of the Act may not be insisted for the last three financial years and only
prospective effect might be given to Section 44 of the Act in view of recent amendments thereto.
The Committee further suggested that the date of declaration of the asset and liabilities of public
servant could be synchronised with that of filing of Income Tax Returns.
4.1. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs clarified that Section 44 of the Act did not
create distinction between the elected and selected public servants. However, the amendments
proposed thereto had been required to remove duplication of filing separate declarations of assets
and liabilities under the respective Service Rules or Representation of People Act, 1951 and the
Lokpal Act, 2013.
*** Relate to other matters.

56
5. On the issue of prescribing lower rank to Secretary, Lokpal and Director of Prosecution,
Lokpal, the Secretary, DoPT stated that the reason for reducing the ranks in the Bill was to ensure
continuity of tenure to the Secretary of Lokpal.
6. On the resolution of difference of opinion between the Director, CBI and Director of
Prosecution, CBI by the Lokpal the Secretary, DoPT stated that anti-corruption cases are only  one
of the six types of cases that the Central Bureau of Investigation handles. He submitted that the
Lokpal may resolve the difference of opinion arising on corruption cases but in other cases, the
Attorney General for India happened to be better suited. The Members of the Committee expressed
their reservations on the active participation of the Attorney General for India in the prosecution
stage of cases as it had been expressly barred by the Supreme Court. The Members further stated
that atleast in corruption cases coming under the purview of the Lokpal, the difference of opinion
must be resolved by the Lokpal only. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs added that the
provision of consulting the Attorney General for India had been included keeping in view the
directions of the Supreme Court in the Sushil Kumar Modi V/s the Union of India case, 1999.
(Secretary DoPT withdrew)
B. ** *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
12. The meeting adjourned at 5.54 
P.M.
*** relating to other matters

57
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 3 rd December, 2015 in Room No. ‘67’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
10. Adv. Joice George
11. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
12. Shri Santosh Kumar
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala
14. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
15. Dr. A. Sampath
16. Shri Bharat Singh
17. Shri M. Udhayakumar
18. Dr. Anshul V erma
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the
consideration and adoption of the draft Report on the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related
Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014. Members deliberated on the issues Contained in the Report, and
thereafter, the Report was adopted with minor changes.
57

58
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to both Houses of Parliament on the 7 th
December, 2015. It authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Ms. Anu Aga to present the Report
to Rajya Sabha and Shri Vincent H. Pala and in his absence, Shri M. Udhayakumar to lay the same
in Lok Sabha.
4. The meeting adjourned at 4.30 P.M.

59
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 190 of 2014
THE LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS AND OTHER RELATED LAW
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to amend the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and further to amend the
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and
Other Related Law (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
CHAPTER I
AMENDMENT OF THE LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS ACT, 2013
2. In the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in section 4,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
Short title and
commencement.
61
Amendment of
section 4.1 of 2014.

62
(i) for clause ( c), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(c) the Leader of Opposition recognised as such
in the House of the People or where there is no such
Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of the single
largest Opposition Party in that House —Member;”;
(ii) after clause ( e), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the eminent jurist shall be nominated
for a period of three years and shall not be eligible for
re-nomination.”;
(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member or
the nomination of an eminent jurist shall be invalid merely
by reason of any vacancy or absence of a Member in the
Selection Committee.”;
(c) in sub-section (3), after the second proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that no appointment of a person in the
Search Committee or the proceedings of the Search
Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy
or absence of a Member in the Selection Committee or
absence of a person in the Search Committee, as the case
may be.”.
3. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “in the rank of
Secretary to the Government of India”, the words “in the rank
of Additional Secretary to the Government of India” shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “not below the rank of
Additional Secretary to the Government of India”, the words
“not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of
India” shall be substituted.
4. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for
clause (f), the following clause and Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(f) the headquarters of the Lokpal shall be in the National
Amendment of
section 10.
Amendment of
section 16.

63
Capital Region and the benches thereof shall sit at such other
places as the Lokpal may, by regulations, specify.
Explanation.—The expression “National Capital Region”
shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2 of
the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.”.
5. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), the
words, figures and letter “or section 6A of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946" shall be omitted.
6. In section 44 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(2) A public servant shall, within a period of thirty days
from the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or
affirmation to enter upon his office, furnish to the competent
authority the information relating to—
(a) all his assets, including—
(i) immovable property owned by him, or
inherited or acquired by him or held by him on lease
or mortgage, either in his own name or in the name
of any member of his family or in the name of any
other person;
(ii) movable property inherited by him or
similarly owned, acquired or held by him;
(b) all his debts and other liabilities, incurred by
him directly or indirectly;
under the relevant provisions of the Acts or the rules or
regulations, in case of—
(A) public servants referred to in clauses ( a), ( b) and
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 14, in the manner provided
in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the rules
made thereunder;
(B) public servants referred to in clauses ( d) and (e) of
sub-section (1) of section 14, in the manner provided in the
All India Services Act, 1951 and the rules and regulations
made thereunder or the rules made under the provisions of
article 148 or article 309 of the Constitution, as the case
may be;
(C) public servants referred to in clause ( f) of sub-
section (1) of section 14, in the manner provided under the
Amendment of
section 23.
Amendment of
section 44.
2 of 1985.
25 of 1946.
43 of 1951.
61 of 1951.

64
relevant Acts and the rules and regulations respectively
applicable to them; and
(D) public servants not specifically covered under ( A)
to (C), in such manner as may be specified, by regulations
by the Lokpal.”;
(b) sub-section ( 5) shall be omitted;
(c) for sub-section ( 6) and the Explanation, the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, the competent authority
shall, in public interest, ensure that the information referred
to in sub-section ( 2), is published in such manner as may
be prescribed, by 31st August of that year.”.
7. In section 59 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for
clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted , namely:—
“(k) the manner of publication of information, in public
interest, relating to assets and liabilities of public servants under
sub-section ( 6) of section 44;”.
8. In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after
clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(da) the manner of furnishing information to the competent
authority by public servants under clause ( D) of sub-section
(2) of section 44;”.
CHAPTER II
A
MENDMENT OF THE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT ACT, 1946
9. In the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946
(hereinafter referred to as the Special Police Act), in section 4BA,—
(a) for sub-sections ( 1) and (2), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) There shall be a Directorate of Prosecution, headed
by a Director, for conducting prosecution of cases under
this Act.
(2) The following persons shall be eligible for
consideration for appointment as Director of Prosecution,
namely:—
(a) an officer from the Indian Legal Service holding
the post of Joint Secretary and who is eligible for
Amendment of
section 59.
Amendment of
section 60.
25 of 1946.Amendment of
section 4BA.

65
appointment as Special Public Prosecutor within the
meaning of sub-sections ( 8) and ( 9) of section 24 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(b) in the absence of an eligible officer referred to
in clause ( a), a person who has been in practice as an
advocate for not less than fifteen years and has
experience in handling cases on behalf of the government
relating to offences under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, the Prevention of Money-laundering Act,
2002 and such other laws relating to economic
offences.”;
(b) after sub-section ( 4), the following sub-sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(5) In case of difference of opinion between the
Director and the Director of Prosecution, the matter shall
be referred to the Attorney - General for India for his advice
and such advice shall be binding.
(6) The annual performance appraisal report of the
Director of Prosecution shall be recorded and maintained in
the Ministry of Law and Justice, in such manner as may be
prescribed.”.
10. After section 6A of the Special Police Act, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of recording and maintenance of the
annual performance appraisal reports under sub-section (6)
of section 4BA;
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
2 of 1974.
49 of 1988.
15 of 2003.
Insertion of new
section 7.
Power to make
rules.

66
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule, or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.”.

67
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014), providing for the establishment of a
body of Lokpal for the Union and making enabling provision for establishment of Lokayukta for
States to inquire into allegations of corruption against certain public functionaries, was enacted and
brought into force with effect from 16th January, 2014.
2. Sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (the Lokpal Act)
provides for a Selection Committee for making recommendations to the President for appointment
of the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal. As per the existing provision in clause (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 4, the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People is one of the
Members of the said Selection Committee. Sub-section (1) of section 4 does not contain any
provision as to how the eminent jurist is to be recommended for nomination by the President under
clause (e) of sub-section (1) or how the Search Committee shall be constituted by the Selection
Committee under sub-section (3), when there is no Leader of Opposition recognised as such in the
House of the People. Therefore, it is considered appropriate to amend clause (c) of sub-section (1)
of section 4 of the Lokpal Act and make enabling provision for inclusion of the Leader of the single
largest Opposition Party in the House of the People as a Member of the said Committee. Further,
sub-section (1) of section 4 does not specify any tenure for the eminent jurist. It is, therefore,
proposed to insert a proviso to sub-section (1) so as to lay down that the eminent jurist shall be
nominated for a period of three years and shall not be eligible for re-nomination.
3. It is also proposed to amend sub-section (2) of section 4 so as to provide that no
appointment of a Chairperson or a Member or the nomination of an eminent jurist shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of a Member in the Selection Committee, on the lines
of the recent amendment made in the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. Similarly, it is
proposed to add a proviso to sub-section (3) of section 4 so as to provide that no appointment
of a person in the Search Committee or the proceedings of the Search Committee shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of a Member in the Selection Committee or absence
of a person in the Search Committee, as the case may be.
4. It is proposed to amend section 44, with consequential amendments in sections 59 and
60 on account of the following reasons, namely:—
(a) Section 14 of the Act defines “public servant”, which, inter alia, includes Prime
Minister, Ministers and the Members of either House of Parliament. Section 44 of the Act
makes provision for declaration of assets and liabilities by the public servants. In this
regard, the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) makes detailed provisions
which provide for conduct of elections of the Members of Parliament, their qualifications
and disqualifications for the membership of the Houses, corrupt practices and other
offences, etc. The said Act and the rules framed thereunder make elaborate provisions for
filing of affidavits giving full details of the movable and immovable property and the
consequences of filing false affidavits, etc. In view of this, it is proposed to provide that
the provisions of the Representation of the People Act should be applicable to them as
67

68
regards the manner of filing of information regarding their assets and liabilities, instead of
making a different provision under the Lokpal Act. This will bring coherency between the
Lokpal Act and the Representation of People Act.
(b) In case of Government servants, there is a requirement of filing of property
returns both at the time of joining service and annually, giving details of property
transactions, under the rules framed under article 148 and article 309 of the Constitution
and the Acts of Parliament such as the All India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951). The
existing rules which regulate the property transactions of the Government servants are
much elaborate and comprehensive in comparison to what is intended to be provided under
section 44 of the Lokpal Act. Hence there is need for harmonising the said Act and the
Rules with the provisions of the Lokpal Act.
(c) In addition to the categories of public servants covered in (a) and (b) above,
there are public servants in statutory and autonomous bodies whose conduct is regulated
in terms of relevant Acts applicable to them and the rules and regulations made thereunder,
and this also requires to be harmonised with the provisions of the Lokpal Act.
(d) For the remaining categories of public servants not specifically covered under
clauses ( a) to ( c) above ( e.g. NGOs, etc.), the power to frame appropriate regulations for
matters relating to furnishing of information about assets and liabilities by them should
appropriately vest in the Lokpal which may either extend any set of rules or regulations
applicable to government servants for such categories of public servants, or provide for a
separate set of regulations, under its powers to make regulations.
It is accordingly proposed to amend sub-section ( 2) of section 44 to provide for a scheme
wherein the filing of information by public servants under the provisions of the section are brought
in harmony with the provisions of the respective Acts, Rules or Regulations, as applicable to
different categories of public servants. It is also proposed to amend sub-section ( 6) in order to
enable the Central Government to prescribe the manner in which information furnished by public
servants of different categories is to be published, keeping public interest in view, by the respective
competent authorities. It is also proposed to amend sections 10, 16 and 23 of the Lokpal Act.
5. Section 4BA of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), as inserted
by the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, provides for the establishment of a Directorate of
Prosecution headed by a Director of Prosecution, who will function under the overall supervision
and control of the Director of the Delhi Special Police Establishment. The provisions of section
4BA do not lay down any eligibility conditions for appointment to the post of Director of
Prosecution. In view of this, it is proposed to substitute sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 4BA
with new sub-sections, so as to provide for appropriate eligibility conditions for appointment to the
post. It is also proposed to insert two new sub-sections after sub-section ( 4) of section 4BA so
as to ensure functional independence to the Director of Prosecution in the Delhi Special Police
Establishment.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; DR. JITENDRA SINGH
The 15th December , 2014.

69
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause ( k) of sub-section ( 2) of section 59 of the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (the Lokpal Act), so as to empower the Central Government to
make rules for the purpose of prescribing the manner in which the competent authority shall, in
public interest, ensure that the information referred to in sub-section (2) of section 44 is published.
2. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause ( da) in sub-section ( 2) of section 60
of the Lokpal Act, so as to empower the Lokpal to make regulations specifying the manner of
furnishing information to the competent authority by public servants under clause ( D) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 44.
3. Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purpose
of carrying out the provisions of Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. Sub-clause ( 2) of
the said clause specifies that such rules may provide for the manner of recording and maintenance
of the annual performance appraisal reports of the Director of Prosecution in the Delhi Special
Police Establishment, under sub-section ( 6) of section 4BA. Sub-clause ( 3) of clause 10 of the Bill
provides that the rules made by the Central Government under the proposed new section 7 are
required to be laid before each House of Parliament, as soon as they are made.
4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made under the proposed
amendments are matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
69

70
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE L OKPAL AND L OKAYUKTAS A CT, 2013
(1 OF 2014)
** * * *
4. (1) The Chairperson and Members shall be appointed
by the President after obtaining the recommendations of a
Selection Committee consisting of—
** * * *
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the
People—Member;
** * * *
(e) one eminent jurist, as recommended by the
Chairperson and Members referred to in clauses ( a) to ( d)
above, to be nominated by the President—Member.
(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall
be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection
Committee.
(3) The Selection Committee shall for the purposes of
selecting the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal and for
preparing a panel of persons to be considered for appointment
as such, constitute a Search Committee consisting of atleast
seven persons of standing and having special knowledge and
expertise in the matters relating to anti-corruption policy,
public administration, vigilance, policy making, finance
including insurance and banking, law and management or in
any other matter which, in the opinion of the Selection
Committee, may be useful in making the selection of the
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal:
Provided that not less than fifty per cent. of the members
of the Search Committee shall be from amongst the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
Other Backward Classes, Minorities and women:
Provided further that the Selection Committee may also
consider any person other than the persons recommended by
the Search Committee.
70
Appointment of
Chairperson and
Members on
recommendations
of Selection
Committee.

71
** * * *
10. (1) There shall be a Secretary to the Lokpal in the
rank of Secretary to Government of India, who shall be
appointed by the Chairperson from a panel of names sent by
the Central Government.
(2) There shall be a Director of Inquiry and a Director of
Prosecution not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the
Government of India or equivalent, who shall be appointed by
the Chairperson from a panel of names sent by the Central
Government.
** * * *
16. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,—
** * * *
(f) the benches of the Lokpal shall ordinarily sit at New
Delhi and at such other places as the Lokpal may, by
regulations, specify.
** * * *
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 197
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or section 6A of the
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 or section 19 of
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, the Lokpal shall have
the power to grant sanction for prosecution under clause ( a)
of sub-section ( 7) of section 20.
** * * *
CHAPTER XIII
D
ECLARATION  OF ASSETS
44. (1) * *** *
(2) A public servant shall, within a period of thirty days
from the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or
affirmation to enter upon his office, furnish to the competent
authority the information relating to—
(a) the assets of which he, his spouse and his
dependent children are, jointly or severally, owners or
beneficiaries;
(b) his liabilities and that of his spouse and his
dependent children.
Secretary, other
officers and staff
of Lokpal.
Constitution of
benches of
Lokpal.
Power of Lokpal
to grant sanction
for initiating
prosecution.
Declaration of
assets.
2 of 1974.
25 of 1946.
49 of 1988.

72
** * * *
(5) The information under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section
(3) and annual return under sub-section ( 4) shall be furnished
to the competent authority in such form and in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(6) The competent authority in respect of each Ministry
or Department shall ensure that all such statements are
published on the website of such Ministry or Department by
31st August of that year.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,
“dependent children” means sons and daughters who have no
separate means of earning and are wholly dependent on the
public servant for their livelihood.
** * * *
59. (1) * *** *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
** * * *
(j) the form and the time for preparing an annual return
giving a summary of its activities during the previous year
under sub-section ( 5) of section 44;
(k) the form of annual return to be filed by a public
servant under sub-section ( 5) of section 44;
** * * *
————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE D ELHI S PECIAL P OLICE E STABLISHMENT A CT, 1946
(25 OF 1946)
** * * *
4BA. (1) There shall be a Directorate of Prosecution
headed by a Director who shall be an officer not below the
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, for
conducting prosecution of cases under this Act.
(2) The Director of Prosecution shall function under the
overall supervision and control of the Director.
** * * *
Power to make
rules.
Director of
Prosecution.

73
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and further to amend the Delhi Special
Police Establishment Act, 1946.
————
(Dr. Jitendra Singh, Minister for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions )
73

74
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
ANNEXURE-II
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—14
†ÃÖÖ¬ÖÖ¸üÞÖ
EXTRAORDINARY
³ÖÖÝÖ II—ÜÖÞ›ü 1
PART II—Section 1
¯ÖÏÖ×¬ÖÛúÖ¸ü ÃÖê ¯ÖÏÛúÖ×¿ÖŸÖ
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
ÃÖÓ. 1] ®Ö‡Ô ×¤ü»»Öß, ²Öã¬Ö¾ÖÖ¸ü, •Ö®Ö¾Ö¸üß 1, 2014 ¯ÖÖîÂÖ 11, 1935 (¿ÖÛú)
No. 1] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 1, 2014/PAUSA 11, 1935 (SAKA)
‡ÃÖ ³ÖÖÝÖ ´Öë ×³Ö®®Ö ¯ÖéÂšü ÃÖÓÜµÖÖ ¤üß •ÖÖŸÖß Æîü ×•ÖÃÖÃÖê ×Ûú µÖÆü †»ÖÝÖ ÃÖÓÛú»Ö®Ö Ûêú ºþ¯Ö ´Öë ¸üÜÖÖ •ÖÖ ÃÖÛêú
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 1st January, 2014/Pausa 11, 1935 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the
President on the 1st January, 2014, and is hereby published for
general information:—
THE LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS ACT, 2013
(No. 1 
OF 2014)
[1st January, 2014.]
An Act to provide for the establishment of a body of Lokpal for the
Union and Lokayukta for States to inquire into allegations of
corruption against certain public functionaries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the Constitution of India established a Democratic
Republic to ensure justice for all;
74
¸ü×•ÖÃ™Òüß ÃÖÓ. ›üß.‹»Ö.—(‹®Ö)04/0007/2003—14

75
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
AND WHEREAS India has ratified the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption;
AND W HEREAS  the Government’s commitment to clean and
responsive governance has to be reflected in effective bodies to
contain and punish acts of corruption;
NOW, THEREAS, it is expedient to enact a law, for more effective
implementation of the said Convention and to provide for prompt
and fair investigation and prosecution in cases of corruption.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall apply to public servants in and outside India.
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
PART II
LOKPAL FOR THE UNION
CHAPTER I
DEFINITIONS
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “bench” means a bench of the Lokpal;
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Lokpal;
(c) “competent authority”, in relation to—
(i) the Prime Minister, means the House of the People;
(ii) a member of the Council of Ministers, means the
Prime Minister;
(iii) a member of Parliament other than a Minister,
means—
(A) in the case of a member of the Council of States,
the Chairman of the Council; and
(B) in the case of a member of the House of the
People, the Speaker of the House;
Short title, extent,
application and
commencement.
Definitions.

76
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(iv) an officer in the Ministry or Department of the
Central Government, means the Minister in charge of the
Ministry or Department under which the officer is serving;
(v) a chairperson or members of any body or Board or
corporation or authority or company or society or
autonomous body (by whatever name called) established or
constituted under any Act of Parliament or wholly or partly
financed by the Central Government or controlled by it,
means the Minister in charge of the administrative Ministry
of such body or Board or corporation or authority or
company or society or autonomous body;
(vi) an officer of any body or Board or corporation or
authority or company or society or autonomous body (by
whatever name called) established or constituted under any
Act of Parliament or wholly or partly financed by the Central
Government or controlled by it, means the head of such
body or Board or corporation or authority or company or
society or autonomous body;
(vii) in any other case not falling under sub-clauses ( i)
to (vi) above, means such Department or authority as the
Central Government may, by notification, specify:
Provided that if any person referred to in sub-clause
(v) or sub-clause (vi) is also a member of Parliament, then,
the competent authority shall be—
(A) in case such member is a member of the Council
of States, the Chairman of the Council; and
(B) in case such member is a member of the House
of the People, the Speaker of the House;
(d) “Central Vigilance Commission” means the Central
Vigilance Commission constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3 of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003;
(e) “complaint” means a complaint, made in such form as
may be prescribed, alleging that a public servant has committed
an offence punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988;
(f) “Delhi Special Police Establishment” means the Delhi
Special Police Establishment constituted under sub-section ( 1)
of section 2 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946;
(g) “investigation” means an investigation as defined under
clause (h) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
45 of 2003.
49 of 1988.
25 of 1946.
2 of 1974.

77
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(h) “Judicial Member” means a Judicial Member of the
Lokpal;
(i) “Lokpal” means the body established under section 3;
(j) “Member” means a Member of the Lokpal;
(k) “Minister” means a Union Minister but does not include
the Prime Minister;
(l) “notification” means notification published in the Official
Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(m) “preliminary inquiry” means an inquiry conducted under
this Act;
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;
(o) “public servant” means a person referred to in clauses
(a) to (h) of sub-section ( 1) of section 14 but does not include
a public servant in respect of whom the jurisdiction is exercisable
by any court or other authority under the Army Act, 1950, the
Air Force Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and the Coast Guard
Act, 1978 or the procedure is applicable to such public servant
under those Acts;
(p) “regulations” means regulations made under this Act;
(q) “rules” means rules made under this Act;
(r) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Act;
(s) “Special Court” means the court of a Special Judge
appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988.
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined in
this Act but defined in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
(3) Any reference in this Act to any other Act or provision thereof
which is not in force in any area to which this Act applies shall be
construed to have a reference to the corresponding Act or provision
thereof in force in such area.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF L OKPAL
3. (1) On and from the commencement of this Act, there shall
be established, for the purpose of this Act, a body to be called the
“Lokpal”.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
30 of 1978.
Establishment of
Lokpal.

78
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(2) The Lokpal shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, who is or has been a Chief Justice of
India or is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or an
eminent person who fulfils the eligibility specified in clause (b)
of sub-section ( 3); and
(b) such number of Members, not exceeding eight out of
whom fifty per cent. shall be Judicial Members:
Provided that not less than fifty per cent. of the Members
of the Lokpal shall be from amongst the persons belonging to
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward
Classes, Minorities and women.
(3) A person shall be eligible to be appointed,—
(a) as a Judicial Member if he is or has been a Judge of the
Supreme Court or is or has been a Chief Justice of a High Court;
(b) as a Member other than a Judicial Member, if he is a
person of impeccable integrity and outstanding ability having
special knowledge and expertise of not less than twenty-five
years in the matters relating to anti-corruption policy, public
administration, vigilance, finance including insurance and
banking, law and management.
(4) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be—
(i) a member of Parliament or a member of the Legislature
of any State or Union territory;
(ii) a person convicted of any offence involving moral
turptitude;
(iii) a person of less than forty-five years of age, on the
date of assuming office as the Chairperson or Member, as the
case may be;
(iv) a member of any Panchayat or Municipality;
(v) a person who has been removed or dismissed from the
service of the Union or a State,
and shall not hold any office of trust or profit (other than his office
as the Chairperson or a Member) or be affiliated with any political
party or carry on any business or practise any profession and,
accordingly, before he enters upon his office, a person appointed as
the Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, shall, if—
(a) he holds any office of trust or profit, resign from such
office; or

79
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(b) he is carrying on any business, sever his connection
with the conduct and management of such business; or
(c) he is practising any profession, cease to practise such
profession.
4. (1) The Chairperson and Members shall be appointed by the
President after obtaining the recommendations of a Selection
Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(b) the Speaker of the House of the People—Member;
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—
Member;
(d) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme
Court nominated by him—Member;
(e) one eminent jurist, as recommended by the Chairperson
and Members referred to in clauses ( a) to ( d) above, to be
nominated by the President—Member.
(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(3) The Selection Committee shall for the purposes of selecting
the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal and for preparing a
panel of persons to be considered for appointment as such, constitute
a Search Committee consisting of at least seven persons of standing
and having special knowledge and expertise in the matters relating
to anti-corruption policy, public administration, vigilance, policy
making, finance including insurance and banking, law and
management or in any other matter which, in the opinion of the
Selection Committee, may be useful in making the selection of the
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal:
Provided that not less than fifty per cent. of the members of the
Search Committee shall be from amongst the persons belonging to
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes,
Minorities and women:
Provided further that the Selection Committee may also consider
any person other than the persons recommended by the Search
Committee.
(4) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure
in a transparent manner for selecting the Chairperson and Members
of the Lokpal.
Appointment of
Chairperson and
Members on
recommendations
of Selection
Committee.

80
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(5) The term of the Search Committee referred to in sub-section
(3), the fees and allowances payable to its members and the manner
of selection of panel of names shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The President shall take or cause to be taken all necessary
steps for the appointment of a new Chairperson and Members at
least three months before the expiry of the term of the Chairperson
or Member, as the case may be, in accordance with the procedure
laid down in this Act.
6. The Chairperson and every Member shall, on the
recommendations of the Selection Committee, be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal and hold office as
such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon
his office or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is
earlier:
Provided that he may—
(a) by writing under his hand addressed to the President,
resign his office; or
(b) be removed from his office in the manner provided in
section 37.
7. The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of—
(i) the Chairperson shall be the same as those of the Chief
Justice of India;
(ii) other Members shall be the same as those of a Judge of
the Supreme Court:
Provided that if the Chairperson or a Member is, at the time
of his appointment, in receipt of pension (other than disability
pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government
of India or under the Government of a State, his salary in respect
of service as the Chairperson or, as the case may be, as a
Member, be reduced—
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he has, before such appointment, received, in lieu
of a portion of the pension due to him in respect of such
previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount
of that portion of the pension:
Provided further that the salary, allowances and pension
payable to, and other conditions of service of, the Chairperson
or a Member shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.
Filling of vacancies
of Chairperson or
Members.
Term of office of
Chairperson and
Members.
Salary, allowances
and other condi-
tions of service of
Chairperson and
Members.

81
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
8. (1) On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson and every
Member shall be ineligible for—
(i) reappointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the
Lokpal;
(ii) any diplomatic assignment, appointment as administrator
of a Union territory and such other assignment or appointment
which is required by law to be made by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal;
(iii) further employment to any other office of profit under
the Government of India or the Government of a State;
(iv) contesting any election of President or Vice-President
or Member of either House of Parliament or Member of either
House of a State Legislature or Municipality or Panchayat within
a period of five years from the date of relinquishing the post.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), a
Member shall be eligible to be appointed as a Chairperson, if his
total tenure as Member and Chairperson does not exceed five years.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby
clarified that where the Member is appointed as the Chairperson,
his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as
the Member and the Chairperson.
9. (1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office
of the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise,
the President may, by notification, authorise the senior-most Member
to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of a new Chairperson
to fill such vacancy.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence on leave or otherwise, the senior-most Member
available, as the President may, by notification, authorise in this
behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the
date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
10. (1) There shall be a Secretary to the Lokpal in the rank of
Secretary to Government of India, who shall be appointed by the
Chairperson from a panel of names sent by the Central Government.
(2) There shall be a Director of Inquiry and a Director of
Prosecution not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the
Government of India or equivalent, who shall be appointed by
the Chairperson from a panel of names sent by the Central
Govern ment.
Restriction on
employment by
Chairperson and
Members after
ceasing to hold
office.
Member to act as
Chairperson or to
discharge his
functions in certain
circumstances.
Secretary, other
officers and staff
of Lokpal.

82
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(3) The appointment of officers and other staff of the Lokpal
shall be made by the Chairperson or such Member or officer of
Lokpal as the Chairperson may direct:
Provided that the President may by rule require that the
appointment in respect of any post or posts as may be specified in
the rule, shall be made after consultation with the Union Public
Service Commission.
(4) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament,
the conditions of service of Secretary and other officers and staff
of the Lokpal shall be such as may be specified by regulations made
by the Lokpal for the purpose:
Provided that the regulations made under this sub-section shall,
so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require
the approval of the President.
CHAPTER III
I
NQUIRY WING
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, the Lokpal shall constitute an Inquiry Wing
headed by the Director of Inquiry for the purpose of conducting
preliminary inquiry into any offence alleged to have been committed
by a public servant punishable under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988:
Provided that till such time the Inquiry Wing is constituted by
the Lokpal, the Central Government shall make available such number
of officers and other staff from its Ministries or Departments, as
may be required by the Lokpal, for conducting preliminary inquiries
under this Act.
(2) For the purposes of assisting the Lokpal in conducting a
preliminary inquiry under this Act, the officers of the Inquiry Wing
not below the rank of the Under Secretary to the Government of
India, shall have the same powers as are conferred upon the Inquiry
Wing of the Lokpal under section 27.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROSECUTION W ING
12. (1) The Lokpal shall, by notification, constitute a Prosecution
Wing headed by the Director of Prosecution for the purpose of
prosecution of public servants in relation to any complaint by the
Lokpal under this Act:
Inquiry Wing.
49 of 1988.
Prosecution Wing.

83
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
Provided that till such time the Prosecution Wing is constituted
by the Lokpal, the Central Government shall make available such
number of officers and other staff from its Ministries or Departments,
as may be required by the Lokpal, for conducting prosecution under
this Act.
(2) The Director of Prosecution shall, after having been so
directed by the Lokpal, file a case in accordance with the findings
of investigation report, before the Special Court and take all necessary
steps in respect of the prosecution of public servants in relation to
any offence punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988.
(3) The case under sub-section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a
report, filed on completion of investigation, referred to in section
173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
CHAPTER V
E
XPENSES OF LOKPAL TO BE CHARGED ON CONSOLIDATED FUND OF INDIA
13. The administrative expenses of the Lokpal, including all
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the
Chairperson, Members or Secretary or other officers or staff of the
Lokpal, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India and
any fees or other moneys taken by the Lokpal shall form part of
that Fund.
CHAPTER VI
J
URISDICTION IN RESPECT OF INQUIRY
14. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Lokpal
shall inquire or cause an inquiry to be conducted into any matter
involved in, or arising from, or connected with, any allegation of
corruption made in a complaint in respect of the following, namely:—
(a) any person who is or has been a Prime Minister:
Provided that the Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter
involved in, or arising from, or connected with, any such
allegation of corruption against the Prime Minister,—
(i) in so far as it relates to international relations, external
and internal security, public order, atomic energy and space;
(ii) unless a full bench of the Lokpal consisting of its
Chairperson and all Members considers the initiation of
inquiry and at least two-thirds of its Members approves of
such inquiry:
49 of 1988.
2 of 1974.
Jurisdiction of
Lokpal to include
Prime Minister,
Ministers,
Members of
Parliament,
Groups A, B, C
and D Officers and
Officials of Central
Government.
Expenses of
Lokpal to be
charged on
Consolidated Fund
of India.

84
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
Provided further that any such inquiry shall be held in
camera and if the Lokpal comes to the conclusion that the
complaint deserves to be dismissed, the records of the
inquiry shall not be published or made available to anyone;
(b) any person who is or has been a Minister of the Union;
(c) any person who is or has been a member of either House
of Parliament;
(d) any Group ‘A’ or Group ‘B’ officer or equivalent or
above, from amongst the public servants defined in sub-clauses
(i) and ( ii) of clause ( c) of section 2 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 when serving or who has served, in
connection with the affairs of the Union;
(e) any Group ‘C’ or Group ‘D’ official or equivalent, from
amongst the public servants defined in sub-clauses ( i) and ( ii)
of clause ( c) of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 when serving or who has served in connection with the
affairs of the Union subject to the provision of sub-section ( 1)
of section 20;
(f) any person who is or has been a chairperson or member
or officer or employee in any body or Board or corporation or
authority or company or society or trust or autonomous body
(by whatever name called) established by an Act of Parliament
or wholly or partly financed by the Central Government or
controlled by it:
Provided that in respect of such officers referred to in clause
(d) who have served in connection with the affairs of the Union
or in any body or Board or corporation or authority or company
or society or trust or autonomous body referred to in clause ( e)
but are working in connection with the affairs of the State or in
any body or Board or corporation or authority or company or
society or trust or autonomous body (by whatever name called)
established by an Act of the State Legislature or wholly or partly
financed by the State Government or controlled by it, the Lokpal
and the officers of its Inquiry Wing or Prosecution Wing shall
have jurisdiction under this Act in respect of such officers only
after obtaining the consent of the concerned State Government;
(g) any person who is or has been a director, manager,
secretary or other officer of every other society or association
of persons or trust (whether registered under any law for the
time being in force or not), by whatever name called, wholly or
partly financed by the Government and the annual income of
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.

85
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
which exceeds such amount as the Central Government may,
by notification, specify;
(h) any person who is or has been a director, manager,
secretary or other officer of every other society or association
of persons or trust (whether registered under any law for the
time being in force or not) in receipt of any donation from any
foreign source under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act,
2010 in excess of ten lakh rupees in a year or such higher
amount as the Central Government may, by notification, specify.
Explanation.—For the purpose of clauses ( f) and ( g), it is
hereby clarified that any entity or institution, by whatever name
called, corporate, society, trust, association of persons,
partnership, sole proprietorship, limited liability partnership
(whether registered under any law for the time being in force
or not), shall be the entities covered in those clauses:
Provided that any person referred to in this clause shall be
deemed to be a public servant under clause ( c) of section 2 of
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and the provisions of
that Act shall apply accordingly.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter involved in, or arising from,
or connected with, any such allegation of corruption against any
member of either House of Parliament in respect of anything said or
a vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof covered
under the provisions contained in clause (2) of article 105 of the
Constitution.
(3) The Lokpal may inquire into any act or conduct of any
person other than those referred to in sub-section (1), if such person
is involved in the act of abetting, bribe giving or bribe taking or
conspiracy relating to any allegation of corruption under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against a person referred to in
sub-section ( 1):
Provided that no action under this section shall be taken in case
of a person serving in connection with the affairs of a State, without
the consent of the State Government.
(4) No matter in respect of which a complaint has been made to
the Lokpal under this Act, shall be referred for inquiry under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that a complaint under this Act shall only relate to a period during
which the public servant was holding or serving in that capacity.
42 of 2010.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
60 of 1952.

86
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
15. In case any matter or proceeding related to allegation of
corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 has been
pending before any court or committee of either House of Parliament
or before any other authority prior to commencement of this Act or
prior to commencement of any inquiry after the commencement of
this Act, such matter or proceeding shall be continued before such
court, committee or authority.
16. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,—
(a) the jurisdiction of the Lokpal may be exercised by
benches thereof;
(b) a bench may be constituted by the Chairperson with
two or more Members as the Chairperson may deem fit;
(c) every bench shall ordinarily consist of at least one Judicial
Member;
(d) where a bench consists of the Chairperson, such bench
shall be presided over by the Chairperson;
(e) where a bench consists of a Judicial Member, and a
non-Judicial Member, not being the Chairperson, such bench
shall be presided over by the Judicial Member;
(f) the benches of the Lokpal shall ordinarily sit at New
Delhi and at such other places as the Lokpal may, by regulations,
specify.
(2) The Lokpal shall notify the areas in relation to which each
bench of the Lokpal may exercise jurisdiction.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the
Chairperson shall have the power to constitute or reconstitute
benches from time to time.
(4) If at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter it appears
to the Chairperson or a Member that the case or matter is of such
nature that it ought to be heard by a bench consisting of three or
more Members, the case or matter may be transferred by the
Chairperson or, as the case may be, referred to him for transfer, to
such bench as the Chairperson may deem fit.
17. Where benches are constituted, the Chairperson may, from
time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution
of the business of the Lokpal amongst the benches and also provide
for the matters which may be dealt with by each bench.
18. On an application for transfer made by the complainant or
the public servant, the Chairperson, after giving an opportunity of
49 of 1988.
Matters pending
before any court or
committee or
authority for
inquiry not to be
affected.
Constitution
of benches of
Lokpal.
Distribution of
business amongst
benches.
Power of
Chairperson to
transfer cases.

87
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
being heard to the complainant or the public servant, as the case
may be, may transfer any case pending before one bench for disposal
to any other bench.
19. If the Members of a bench consisting of an even number of
Members differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or
points on which they differ, and make a reference to the Chairperson
who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case
for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other
Members of the Lokpal and such point or points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the
Lokpal who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
CHAPTER VII
P
ROCEDURE IN RESPECT OF PRELIMINARY INQUIRY AND INVESTIGA TION
20. (1) The Lokpal on receipt of a complaint, if it decides to
proceed further, may order—
(a) preliminary inquiry against any public servant by its
Inquiry Wing or any agency (including the Delhi Special Police
Establishment) to ascertain whether there exists a prima facie
case for proceeding in the matter; or
(b) investigation by any agency (including the Delhi Special
Police Establishment) when there exists a prima facie case:
Provided that the Lokpal shall if it has decided to proceed with
the preliminary inquiry, by a general or special order, refer the
complaints or a category of complaints or a complaint received by
it in respect of public servants belonging to Group A or Group B or
Group C or Group D to the Central Vigilance Commission constituted
under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Central Vigilance
Commission Act, 2003:
Provided further that the Central Vigilance Commission in respect
of complaints referred to it under the first proviso, after making
preliminary inquiry in respect of public servants belonging to Group
A and Group B, shall submit its report to the Lokpal in accordance
with the provisions contained in sub-sections ( 2) and ( 4) and in
case of public servants belonging to Group C and Group D, the
Commission shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of the
Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003:
Provided also that before ordering an investigation under clause
(b), the Lokpal shall call for the explanation of the public servant so
as to determine whether there exists a prima facie case for
investigation:
Decision to be by
majority.
Provisions relating
to complaints and
preliminary
inquiry and
investigation.
45 of 2003.
45 of 2003.

88
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
Provided also that the seeking of explanation from the public
servant before an investigation shall not interfere with the search
and seizure, if any, required to be undertaken by any agency
(including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) under this Act.
(2) During the preliminary inquiry referred to in sub-section
(1), the Inquiry Wing or any agency (including the Delhi Special
Police Establishment) shall conduct a preliminary inquiry and on
the basis of material, information and documents collected seek the
comments on the allegations made in the complaint from the public
servant and the competent authority and after obtaining the
comments of the concerned public servant and the competent
authority, submit, within sixty days from the date of receipt of the
reference, a report to the Lokpal.
(3) A bench consisting of not less than three Members of the
Lokpal shall consider every report received under sub-section ( 2)
from the Inquiry Wing or any agency (including the Delhi Special
Police Establishment), and after giving an opportunity of being heard
to the public servant, decide whether there exists a prima facie
case, and proceed with one or more of the following actions,
namely:—
(a) investigation by any agency or the Delhi Special Police
Establishment, as the case may be;
(b) initiation of the departmental proceedings or any other
appropriate action against the concerned public servants by the
competent authority;
(c) closure of the proceedings against the public servant
and to proceed against the complainant under section 46.
(4) Every preliminary inquiry referred to in sub-section (1) shall
ordinarily be completed within a period of ninety days and for reasons
to be recorded in writing, within a further period of ninety days
from the date of receipt of the complaint.
(5) In case the Lokpal decides to proceed to investigate into the
complaint, it shall direct any agency (including the Delhi Special
Police Establishment) to carry out the investigation as expeditiously
as possible and complete the investigation within a period of six
months from the date of its order:
Provided that the Lokpal may extend the said period by a further
period not exceeding of six months at a time for the reasons to be
recorded in writing.

89
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 173 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any agency (including the Delhi
Special Police Establishment) shall, in respect of cases referred to it
by the Lokpal, submit the investigation report under that section to
the court having jurisdiction and forward a copy thereof to the Lokpal.
(7) A bench consisting of not less than three Members of the
Lokpal shall consider every report received by it under sub-section
(6) from any agency (including the Delhi Special Police
Establishment) and after obtaining the comments of the competent
authority and the public servant may—
(a) grant sanction to its Prosecution Wing or investigating
agency to file chargesheet or direct the closure of report before
the Special Court against the public servant;
(b) direct the competent authority to initiate the departmental
proceedings or any other appropriate action against the concerned
public servant.
(8) The Lokpal may, after taking a decision under sub-section
(7) on the filing of the charge-sheet, direct its Prosecution Wing or
any investigating agency (including the Delhi Special Police
Establishment) to initiate prosecution in the Special Court in respect
of the cases investigated by the agency.
(9) The Lokpal may, during the preliminary inquiry or the
investigation, as the case may be, pass appropriate orders for the
safe custody of the documents relevant to the preliminary inquiry
or, as the case may be, investigation as it deems fit.
(10) The website of the Lokpal shall, from time to time and in
such manner as may be specified by regulations, display to the public,
the status of number of complaints pending before it or disposed of
by it.
(11) The Lokpal may retain the original records and evidences
which are likely to be required in the process of preliminary inquiry
or investigation or conduct of a case by it or by the Special Court.
(12) Save as otherwise provided, the manner and procedure of
conducting a preliminary inquiry or investigation (including such
material and documents to be made available to the public servant)
under this Act, shall be such as may be specified by regulations.
21. If, at any stage of the proceeding, the Lokpal—
(a) considers it necessary to inquire into the conduct of any
person other than the accused; or
Persons likely to
be prejudicially
affected to be
heard.
2 of 1974.

90
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(b) is of opinion that the reputation of any person other than
an accused is likely to be prejudicially affected by the preliminary
inquiry,
the Lokpal shall give to that person a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the preliminary inquiry and to produce evidence in
his defence, consistent with the principles of natural justice.
22. Subject to the provisions of this Act, for the purpose of any
preliminary inquiry or investigation, the Lokpal or the investigating
agency, as the case may be, may require any public servant or any
other person who, in its opinion, is able to furnish information or
produce documents relevant to such preliminary inquiry or
investigation, to furnish any such information or produce any such
document.
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 197 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or section 6A of the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 or section 19 of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988, the Lokpal shall have the power to grant
sanction for prosecution under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 7) of
section 20.
(2) No prosecution under sub-section (1) shall be initiated against
any public servant accused of any offence alleged to have been
committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge
of his official duty, and no court shall take cognizance of such
offence except with the previous sanction of the Lokpal.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in
respect of the persons holding office in pursuance of the provisions
of the Constitution and in respect of which a procedure for removal
of such person has been specified therein.
(4) The provisions contained in sub-sections ( 1), ( 2) and ( 3)
shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained
in article 311 and sub-clause ( c) of clause (3) of article 320 of the
Constitution.
24. Where, after the conclusion of the investigation, the findings
of the Lokpal disclose the commission of an offence under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 by a public servant referred to
in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section
14, the Lokpal may file a case in the Special Court and shall send a
copy of the report together with its findings to the competent
authority.
Power of Lokpal
to grant sanction
for initiating
prosecution.
Action on
investigation
against public
servant being
Prime Minister,
Ministers or
Members of
Parliament.
2 of 1974.
25 of 1946.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
Lokpal may
require any public
servant or any
other person to
furnish
information, etc.

91
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
CHAPTER VIII
POWERS OF L OKPAL
25. (1) The Lokpal shall, notwithstanding anything contained in
section 4 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 and
section 8 of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003, have the
powers of superintendence over, and to give direction to the Delhi
Special Police Establishment in respect of the matters referred by
the Lokpal for preliminary inquiry or investigation to the Delhi Special
Police Establishment under this Act:
Provided that while exercising powers of superintendence or
giving direction under this sub-section, the Lokpal shall not exercise
powers in such a manner so as to require any agency (including the
Delhi Special Police Establishment) to whom the investigation has
been given, to investigate and dispose of any case in a particular
manner.
(2) The Central Vigilance Commission shall send a statement, at
such interval as the Lokpal may direct, to the Lokpal in respect of
action taken on complaints referred to it under the second proviso
to sub-section ( 1) of section 20 and on receipt of such statement,
the Lokpal may issue guidelines for effective and expeditious disposal
of such cases.
(3) Any officer of the Delhi Special Police Establishment
investigating a case referred to it by the Lokpal, shall not be
transferred without the approval of the Lokpal.
(4) The Delhi Special Police Establishment may, with the consent
of the Lokpal, appoint a panel of Advocates, other than the
Government Advocates, for conducting the cases referred to it by
the Lokpal.
(5) The Central Government may from time to time make available
such funds as may be required by the Director of the Delhi Special
Police Establishment for conducting effective investigation into the
matters referred to it by the Lokpal and the Director shall be
responsible for the expenditure incurred in conducting such
investigation.
26. (1) If the Lokpal has reason to believe that any document
which, in its opinion, shall be useful for, or relevant to, any
investigation under this Act, are secreted in any place, it may authorise
any agency (including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) to
whom the investigation has been given to search for and to seize
such documents.
25 of 1946.
45 of 2003.
Supervisory
powers of Lokpal.
Search and
seizure.
91

92
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(2) If the Lokpal is satisfied that any document seized under
sub-section ( 1) may be used as evidence for the purpose of any
investigation under this Act and that it shall be necessary to retain
the document in its custody or in the custody of such officer as
may be authorised, it may so retain or direct such authorised officer
to retain such document till the completion of such investigation:
Provided that where any document is required to be returned,
the Lokpal or the authorised officer may return the same after
retaining copies of such document duly authenticated.
27. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, for the purpose
of any preliminary inquiry, the Inquiry Wing of the Lokpal shall
have all the powers of a civil court, under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(iii) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(iv) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from
any court or office;
(v) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses
or documents:
Provided that such commission, in case of a witness, shall
be issued only where the witness, in the opinion of the Lokpal,
is not in a position to attend the proceeding before the Lokpal;
and
(vi) such other matters as may be prescribed.
(2) Any proceeding before the Lokpal shall be deemed to be a
judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 of the Indian
Penal Code.
28. (1) The Lokpal may, for the purpose of conducting any
preliminary inquiry or investigation, utilise the services of any officer
or organisation or investigating agency of the Central Government
or any State Government, as the case may be.
(2) For the purpose of preliminary inquiry or investigating into
any matter pertaining to such inquiry or investigation, any officer
or organisation or agency whose services are utilised under sub-
section (1) may, subject to the superintendence and direction of the
Lokpal,—
Lokpal to have
powers of civil
court in certain
cases.
Power of Lokpal to
utilise services of
officers of Central
or State
Government.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.

93
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(a) summon and enforce the attendance of any person and
examine him;
(b) require the discovery and production of any document;
and
(c) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any
office.
(3) The officer or organisation or agency whose services are
utilised under sub-section ( 2) shall inquire or, as the case may be,
investigate into any matter pertaining to the preliminary inquiry or
investigation and submit a report thereon to the Lokpal within such
period as may be specified by it in this behalf.
29. (1) Where the Lokpal or any officer authorised by it in this
behalf, has reason to believe, the reason for such belief to be recorded
in writing, on the basis of material in his possession, that—
(a) any person is in possession of any proceeds of
corruption;
(b) such person is accused of having committed an offence
relating to corruption;
and
(c) such proceeds of offence are likely to be concealed,
transferred or dealt with in any manner which may result in
frustrating any proceedings relating to confiscation of such
proceeds of offence,
the Lokpal or the authorised officer may, by order in writing,
provisionally attach such property for a period not exceeding ninety
days from the date of the order, in the manner provided in the Second
Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Lokpal and the officer
shall be deemed to be an officer under sub-rule ( e) of rule 1 of that
Schedule.
(2) The Lokpal or the officer authorised in this behalf shall,
immediately after attachment under sub-section (1), forward a copy
of the order, along with the material in his possession, referred to in
that sub-section, to the Special Court, in a sealed envelope, in the
manner as may be prescribed and such Court may extend the order
of attachment and keep such material for such period as the Court
may deem fit.
(3) Every order of attachment made under sub-section ( 1) shall
cease to have effect after the expiry of the period specified in that
Provisional
attachment of
assets.
43 of 1961.

94
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
sub-section or after the expiry of the period as directed by the Special
Court under sub-section ( 2).
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the person interested in
the enjoyment of the immovable property attached under sub-section
(1) or sub-section ( 2), from such enjoyment.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “person
interested”, in relation to any immovable property, includes all
persons claiming or entitled to claim any interest in the property.
30. (1) The Lokpal, when it provisionally attaches any property
under sub-section ( 1) of section 29 shall, within a period of thirty
days of such attachment, direct its Prosecution Wing to file an
application stating the facts of such attachment before the Special
Court and make a prayer for confirmation of attachment of the
property till completion of the proceedings against the public servant
in the Special Court.
(2) The Special Court may, if it is of the opinion that the property
provisionally attached had been acquired through corrupt means,
make an order for confirmation of attachment of such property till
the completion of the proceedings against the public servant in the
Special Court.
(3) If the public servant is subsequently acquitted of the charges
framed against him, the property, subject to the orders of the Special
Court, shall be restored to the concerned public servant along with
benefits from such property as might have accrued during the period
of attachment.
(4) If the public servant is subsequently convicted of the charges
of corruption, the proceeds relatable to the offence under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall be confiscated and vest in
the Central Government free from any encumbrance or leasehold
interest excluding any debt due to any bank or financial institution.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, the
expressions “bank”, “debt” and “financial institution” shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( d), (g) and (h)
of section 2 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993.
31. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 29 and
30, where the Special Court, on the basis of prima facie evidence,
has reason to believe or is satisfied that the assets, proceeds, receipts
and benefits, by whatever name called, have arisen or procured by
means of corruption by the public servant, it may authorise the
Confirmation of
attachment of
assets.
Confiscation of
assets, proceeds,
receipts and
benefits arisen or
procured by means
of corruption in
special
circumstances.
49 of 1988.
51 of 1993.

95
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
confiscation of such assets, proceeds, receipts and benefits till his
acquittal.
(2) Where an order of confiscation made under sub-section ( 1)
is modified or annulled by the High Court or where the public servant
is acquitted by the Special Court, the assets, proceeds, receipts and
benefits, confiscated under sub-section (1) shall be returned to such
public servant, and in case it is not possible for any reason to return
the assets, proceeds, receipts and benefits, such public servant shall
be paid the price thereof including the money so confiscated with
interest at the rate of five per cent. per annum thereon calculated
from the date of confiscation.
32. (1) Where the Lokpal, while making a preliminary inquiry
into allegations of corruption, is prima facie satisfied, on the basis
of evidence available,—
(i) that the continuance of the public servant referred to in
clause (d) or clause (e) or clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section
14 in his post while conducting the preliminary inquiry is likely
to affect such preliminary inquiry adversely; or
(ii) such public servant is likely to destroy or in any way
tamper with the evidence or influence witnesses,
then, the Lokpal may recommend to the Central Government for
transfer or suspension of such public servant from the post held by
him till such period as may be specified in the order.
(2) The Central Government shall ordinarily accept the
recommendation of the Lokpal made under sub-section ( 1), except
for the reasons to be recorded in writing in a case where it is not
feasible to do so for administrative reasons.
33. The Lokpal may, in the discharge of its functions under this
Act, issue appropriate directions to a public servant entrusted with
the preparation or custody of any document or record—
(a) to protect such document or record from destruction
or damage; or
(b) to prevent the public servant from altering or secreting
such document or record; or
(c) to prevent the public servant from transferring or
alienating any assets allegedly acquired by him through corrupt
means.
34. The Lokpal may, by general or special order in writing, and
subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified
Power of Lokpal
to recommend
transfer or
suspension of
public servant
connected with
allegation of
corruption.
Power of Lokpal
to give directions
to prevent
destruction of
records during
preliminary
inquiry.
Power to
delegate.

96
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
therein, direct that any administrative or financial power conferred
on it may also be exercised or discharged by such of its Members
or officers or employees as may be specified in the order.
CHAPTER IX
SPECIAL C OURTS
35. (1) The Central Government shall constitute such number
of Special Courts, as recommended by the Lokpal, to hear and decide
the cases arising out of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or
under this Act.
(2) The Special Courts constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall
ensure completion of each trial within a period of one year from the
date of filing of the case in the Court:
Provided that in case the trial cannot be completed within a
period of one year, the Special Court shall record reasons therefor
and complete the trial within a further period of not more than three
months or such further periods not exceeding three months each,
for reasons to be recorded in writing before the end of each
such three months period, but not exceeding a total period of
two ye ars.
36. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 if, in the course of an preliminary
inquiry or investigation into an offence or other proceeding under
this Act, an application is made to a Special Court by an officer of
the Lokpal authorised in this behalf that any evidence is required in
connection with the preliminary inquiry or investigation into an
offence or proceeding under this Act and he is of the opinion that
such evidence may be available in any place in a contracting State,
and the Special Court, on being satisfied that such evidence is
required in connection with the preliminary inquiry or investigation
into an offence or proceeding under this Act, may issue a letter of
request to a court or an authority in the contracting State competent
to deal with such request to—
(i) examine the facts and circumstances of the case;
(ii) take such steps as the Special Court may specify in
such letter of request; and
(iii) forward all the evidence so taken or collected to the
Special Court issuing such letter of request.
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as
the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf.
Special Courts to
be constituted by
Central
Government.
Letter of request
to a contracting
State in certain
cases.
49 of 1988.
2 of 1974.

97
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received
under sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be evidence collected
during the course of the preliminary inquiry or investigation.
CHAPTER X
COMPLAINTS AGAINST CHAIRPERSON, MEMBERS AND OFFICIALS OF LOKPAL
37. (1) The Lokpal shall not inquire into any complaint made
against the Chairperson or any Member.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the Chairperson
or any Member shall be removed from his office by order of the
President on grounds of misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, on
a reference being made to it by the President on a petition signed by
at least one hundred Members of Parliament has, on an inquiry held
in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf, reported
that the Chairperson or such Member, as the case may be, ought to
be removed on such ground.
(3) The President may suspend from office the Chairperson or
any Member in respect of whom a reference has been made to the
Supreme Court under sub-section ( 2), on receipt of the
recommendation or interim order made by the Supreme Court in
this regard until the President has passed orders on receipt of the
final report of the Supreme Court on such reference.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the
President may, by order, remove from the office, the Chairperson
or any Member if the Chairperson or such Member, as the case
may be,—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages, during his term of office, in any paid
employment outside the duties of his office; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in
office by reason of infirmity of mind or body.
(5) If the Chairperson or any Member is, or becomes, in any
way concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by
or on behalf of the Government of India or the Government of a
State or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit
or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in
common with the other members of an incorporated company, he
shall, for the purposes of sub-section (2), be deemed to be guilty of
misbehaviour.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson and
Members of
Lokpal.

98
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
38. (1) Every complaint of allegation or wrongdoing made against
any officer or employee or agency (including the Delhi Special Police
Establishment), under or associated with the Lokpal for an offence
punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall be
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) The Lokpal shall complete the inquiry into the complaint or
allegation made within a period of thirty days from the date of its
receipt.
(3) While making an inquiry into the complaint against any
officer or employee of the Lokpal or agency engaged or associated
with the Lokpal, if it is prima facie satisfied on the basis of evidence
available, that—
(a) continuance of such officer or employee of the Lokpal
or agency engaged or associated in his post while conducting
the inquiry is likely to affect such inquiry adversely; or
(b) an officer or employee of the Lokpal or agency engaged
or associated is likely to destroy or in any way tamper with the
evidence or influence witnesses,
then, the Lokpal may, by order, suspend such officer or employee
of the Lokpal or divest such agency engaged or associated with the
Lokpal of all powers and responsibilities hereto before exercised by
it .
(4) On the completion of the inquiry, if the Lokpal is satisfied
that there is prima facie evidence of the commission of an offence
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or of any wrongdoing,
it shall, within a period of fifteen days of the completion of such
inquiry, order to prosecute such officer or employee of the Lokpal
or such officer, employee, agency engaged or associated with the
Lokpal and initiate disciplinary proceedings against the official
concerned:
Provided that no such order shall be passed without giving such
officer or employee of the Lokpal, such officer, employee, agency
engaged or associated, a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
CHAPTER XI
A
SSESSMENT OF LOSS AND RECOVERY THEREOF BY SPECIAL COURT
39. If any public servant is convicted of an offence under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 by the Special Court,
notwithstanding and without prejudice to any law for the time being
in force, it may make an assessment of loss, if any, caused to the
Complaints against
officials of Lokpal.
Assessment
of loss and
recovery
thereof by
Special Court.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.

99
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
public exchequer on account of the actions or decisions of such
public servant not taken in good faith and for which he stands
convicted, and may order recovery of such loss, if possible or
quantifiable, from such public servant so convicted:
Provided that if the Special Court, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, comes to the conclusion that the loss caused was pursuant
to a conspiracy with the beneficiary or beneficiaries of actions or
decisions of the public servant so convicted, then such loss may, if
assessed and quantifiable under this section, also be recovered from
such beneficiary or beneficiaries proportionately.
CHAPTER XII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
40. The Lokpal shall prepare, in such form and at such time in
each financial year as may be prescribed, its budget for the next
financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of
the Lokpal and forward the same to the Central Government for
information.
41. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Lokpal grants of
such sums of money as are required to be paid for the salaries and
allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the
administrative expenses, including the salaries and allowances and
pension payable to or in respect of officers and other employees of
the Lokpal.
42. (1) The Lokpal shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Lokpal shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may
be specified by him.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of
the Lokpal under this Act shall have the same rights, privileges and
authority in connection with such audit, as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India generally has, in connection with the audit
of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right
to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers
and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices
of the Lokpal.
Budget.
Grants by Central
Government.
Annual statement
of accounts.

100
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(4) The accounts of the Lokpal, as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him
in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
43. The Lokpal shall furnish to the Central Government, at such
time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the
Central Government may request, such returns and statements and
such particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the
Lokpal, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.
CHAPTER XIII
D
ECLARA TION OF ASSETS
44. (1) Every public servant shall make a declaration of his
assets and liabilities in the manner as provided by or under this Act.
(2) A public servant shall, within a period of thirty days from
the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation
to enter upon his office, furnish to the competent authority the
information relating to—
(a) the assets of which he, his spouse and his dependent
children are, jointly or severally, owners or beneficiaries;
(b) his liabilities and that of his spouse and his dependent
children.
(3) A public servant holding his office as such, at the time of
the commencement of this Act, shall furnish information relating to
such assets and liabilities, as referred to in sub-section ( 2), to the
competent authority within thirty days of the coming into force of
this Act.
(4) Every public servant shall file with the competent authority,
on or before the 31st July of every year, an annual return of such
assets and liabilities, as referred to in sub-section (2), as on the 31st
March of that year.
(5) The information under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3)
and annual return under sub-section ( 4) shall be furnished to the
competent authority in such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(6) The competent authority in respect of each Ministry or
Department shall ensure that all such statements are published on
Furnishing of
returns, etc., to
Central
Government.
Declaration of
assets.

101
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
the website of such Ministry or Department by 31st August of that
year.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “dependent
children” means sons and daughters who have no separate means
of earning and are wholly dependent on the public servant for their
livelihood.
45. If any public servant wilfully or for reasons which are not
justifiable, fails to—
(a) to declare his assets; or
(b) gives misleading information in respect of such assets
and is found to be in possession of assets not disclosed or in
respect of which misleading information was furnished,
then, such assets shall, unless otherwise proved, be presumed to
belong to the public servant and shall be presumed to be assets
acquired by corrupt means:
Provided that the competent authority may condone or exempt
the public servant from furnishing information in respect of assets
not exceeding such minimum value as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER XIV
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
46. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whoever
makes any false and frivolous or vexatious complaint under this Act
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees.
(2) No Court, except a Special Court, shall take cognizance of
an offence under subsection ( 1).
(3) No Special Court shall take cognizance of an offence under
sub-section ( 1) except on a complaint made by a person against
whom the false, frivolous or vexatious complaint was made or by
an officer authorised by the Lokpal.
(4) The prosecution in relation to an offence under sub-section
(1) shall be conducted by the public prosecutor and all expenses
connected with such prosecution shall be borne by the Central
Government.
(5) In case of conviction of a person [being an individual or
society or association of persons or trust (whether registered or
not)], for having made a false complaint under this Act, such person
Presumption as to
acquisition of
assets by corrupt
means in certain
cases.
Prosecution for
false complaint
and payment of
compensation,
etc., to public
servant.

102
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
shall be liable to pay compensation to the public servant against
whom he made the false complaint in addition to the legal expenses
for contesting the case by such public servant, as the Special Court
may determine.
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall apply in case of
complaints made in good faith.
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub-section, the
expression “good faith” means any act believed or done by a person
in good faith with due care, caution and sense of responsibility or
by mistake of fact believing himself justified by law under section
79 of the Indian Penal Code.
47. (1) Where any offence under sub-section ( 1) of section 46
has been committed by any society or association of persons or
trust (whether registered or not), every person who, at the time the
offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was
responsible to, the society or association of persons or trust, for
the conduct of the business or affairs or activities of the society or
association of persons or trust as well as such society or association
of persons or trust shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society
or association of persons or trust (whether registered or not) and it
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of such society or
association of persons or trust, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
CHAPTER XV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
48. It shall be the duty of the Lokpal to present annually to the
President a report on the work done by the Lokpal and on receipt of
such report the President shall cause a copy thereof together with a
memorandum explaining, in respect of the cases, if any, where the
False complaint
made by society
or association of
persons or trust.
45 of 1860.
Reports of
Lokpal.

103
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
advice of the Lokpal was not accepted, the reason for such non-
acceptance to be laid before each House of Parliament.
49. The Lokpal shall function as the final appellate authority in
respect of appeals arising out of any other law for the time being in
force providing for delivery of public services and redressal of public
grievances by any public authority in cases where the decision
contains findings of corruption under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
50. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings under this
Act shall lie against any public servant, in respect of anything which
is done in good faith or intended to be done in the discharge of his
official functions or in exercise of his powers.
51. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against
the Lokpal or against any officer, employee, agency or any person,
in respect of anything which is done in good faith or intended to
be done under this Act or the rules or the regulations made
thereunder.
52. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees
of the Lokpal shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
53. The Lokpal shall not inquire or investigate into any complaint,
if the complaint is made after the expiry of a period of seven years
from the date on which the offence mentioned in such complaint is
alleged to have been committed.
54. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter
which the Lokpal is empowered by or under this Act to determine.
55. The Lokpal shall provide to every person against whom a
complaint has been made, before it, under this Act, legal assistance
to defend his case before the Lokpal, if such assistance is requested
for.
56. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other
than this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any
enactment other than this Act.
57. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in
derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
58. The enactments specified in the Schedule shall be amended
in the manner specified therein.
Lokpal to function
as appellate
authority for
appeals arising out
of any other law
for the time being
in force.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith by any
public servant.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith by
others.
Members, officers
and employees of
Lokpal to be
public servants.
Limitation to
apply in certain
cases.
Bar of
Jurisdiction.
Legal
assistance.
Act to have
overriding effect.
Provisions of this
Act to be in
addition of other
laws.
49 of 1988.
45 of 1860.
Amendment of
certain enactments.

104
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
59. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the form of complaint referred to in clause ( e) of sub-
section (1) of section 2;
(b) the term of the Search Committee, the fee and allowances
payable to its members and the manner of selection of panel of
names under sub-section ( 5) of section 4;
(c) the post or posts in respect of which the appointment
shall be made after consultation with the Union Public Service
Commission under the proviso to subsection ( 3) of section 10;
(d) other matters for which the Lokpal shall have the powers
of a civil court under clause ( vi) of sub-section ( 1) of section
27;
(e) the manner of sending the order of attachment along
with the material to the Special Court under sub-section ( 2) of
section 29;
(f) the manner of transmitting the letter of request under
sub-section ( 2) of section 36;
(g) the form and the time for preparing in each financial
year the budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated
receipts and expenditure of the Lokpal under section 40;
(h) the form for maintaining the accounts and other relevant
records and the form of annual statement of accounts under
sub-section ( 1) of section 42;
(i) the form and manner and the time for preparing the returns
and statements along with particulars under section 43;
(j) the form and the time for preparing an annual return
giving a summary of its activities during the previous year under
sub-section ( 5) of section 44;
(k) the form of annual return to be filed by a public servant
under sub-section ( 5) of section 44;
(l) the minimum value for which the competent authority
may condone or exempt a public servant from furnishing
information in respect of assets under the proviso to section
45;
Power to make
rules.

105
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(m) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.
60. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, the Lokpal may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the conditions of service of the secretary and other
officers and staff of the Lokpal and the matters which in so far
as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require
the approval of the President under sub-section ( 4) of section
10;
(b) the place of sittings of benches of the Lokpal under
clause (f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 16;
(c) the manner for displaying on the website of the Lokpal,
the status of all complaints pending or disposed of along with
records and evidence with reference thereto under sub-section
(10) of section 20;
(d) the manner and procedure of conducting preliminary
inquiry or investigation under sub-section ( 11) of section 20;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified under this Act.
61. Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or regulation, or both Houses
agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
62. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Power of Lokpal
to make
regulations.
Laying of rules and
regulations.
Power to remove
difficulties.

106
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement
of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
PART III
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE L OKAYUKTA
63. Every State shall establish a body to be known as the
Lokayukta for the State, if not so established, constituted or
appointed, by a law made by the State Legislature, to deal with
complaints relating to corruption against certain public functionaries,
within a period of one year from the date of commencement of this
Act.
Establishment of
Lokayukta.

107
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 58]
AMENDMENT TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART I
AMENDMENT TO THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952
(60 OF 1952)
In section 3, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “The appropriate
Government may”, the words and figures “Save as otherwise
provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, the appropriate
Government may” shall be substituted.
PART II
A
MENDMENTS TO THE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT ACT, 1946
(25 OF 1946)
1. In section 4A,—
(i) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Government shall appoint the Director
on the recommendation of the Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister — Chairperson;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the
People — Member;
(c) the Chief Justice of India or Judge of the
Supreme Court nominated by him — Member.”;
(ii) sub-section ( 2) shall be omitted.
2. After section 4B, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“4BA. (1) There shall be a Directorate of Prosecution headed
by a Director who shall be an officer not below the rank of
Joint Secretary to the Government of India, for conducting
prosecution of cases under this Act.
(2) The Director of Prosecution shall function under the
overall supervision and control of the Director.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint the Director of
Prosecution on the recommendation of the Central Vigilance
Commission.
Amendment of
section 3.
Amendment of
section 4A.
Insertion of new
section 4BA.
Director of
Prosecution.

108
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(4) The Director of Prosecution shall notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in the rules relating to his
conditions of service, continue to hold office for a period of
not less than two years from the date on which he assumes
office.”.
3. In section 4C, for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Government shall appoint officers to the
posts of the level of Superintendent of Police and above except
Director, and also recommend the extension or curtailment of
the tenure of such officers in the Delhi Special Police
Establishment, on the recommendation of a committee consisting
of:—
(a) the Central Vigilance Commissioner — Chairperson;
(b) Vigilance Commissioners — Members;
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in charge of
the Ministry of Home — Member;
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in charge of
the Department of Personnel — Member:
Provided that the Committee shall consult the Director
before submitting its recommendation to the Central
Government.”.
PART III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988
(49 OF 1988)
1. In sections 7, 8, 9 and section 12,—
(a) for the words “six months”, the words “three years”
shall respectively be substituted;
(b) for the words “five years”, the words “seven years”
shall respectively be substituted.
2. In section 13, in sub-section ( 2),—
(a) for the words “one year”, the words “four years” shall
be substituted;
(b) for the words “seven years”, the words “ten years”
shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 4C.
Amendment
of sections 7,
8, 9 and 12.
Amendment of
section 13.

109
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
3. In section 14,—
(a) for the words “two years”, the words “five years” shall
be substituted;
(b) for the words “seven years”, the words “ten years”
shall be substituted.
4. In section 15, for the words “which may extend to three
years”, the words “which shall not be less than two years but which
may extend to five years” shall be substituted.
5. In section 19, after the words “except with the previous
sanction”, the words “save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013” shall be inserted.
PART IV
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
In section 197, after the words “except with the previous
sanction”, the words “save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013” shall be inserted.
PART V
AMENDMENTS TO THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION ACT, 2003
(45 OF 2003)
1. In section 2, after clause ( d), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(da) “Lokpal” means the Lokpal established under sub-
section ( 1) of section 3 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013;’.
2. In section 8, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) on a reference made by the Lokpal under proviso to
sub-section ( 1) of section 20 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2013, the persons referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section
(1) shall also include—
(i) members of Group B, Group C and Group D services
of the Central Government;
(ii) such level of officials or staff of the corporations
established by or under any Central Act, Government
companies, societies and other local authorities, owned or
Amendment of
section 14.
Amendment of
section 15.
Amendment
of section 19.
Amendment
of section
197.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 8.

110
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
controlled by the Central Government, as that Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf:
Provided that till such time a notification is issued under this
clause, all officials or staff of the said corporations, companies,
societies and local authorities shall be deemed to be the persons
referred in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1).”.
3. After section 8, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“8A. ( 1) Where, after the conclusion of the preliminary
inquiry relating to corruption of public servants belonging to
Group C and Group D officials of the Central Government, the
findings of the Commission disclose, after giving an opportunity
of being heard to the public servant, a prima facie violation of
conduct rules relating to corruption under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 by such public servant, the Commission
shall proceed with one or more of the following actions,
namely:—
(a) cause an investigation by any agency or the Delhi
Special Police Establishment, as the case may be;
(b) initiation of the disciplinary proceedings or any other
appropriate action against the concerned public servant by
the competent authority;
(c) closure of the proceedings against the public servant
and to proceed against the complainant under section 46 of
the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
(2) Every preliminary inquiry referred to in sub-section (1) shall
ordinarily be completed within a period of ninety days and for reasons
to be recorded in writing, within a further period of ninety days
from the date of receipt of the complaint.
8B. (1) In case the Commission decides to proceed to investigate
into the complaint under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section
8A, it shall direct any agency (including the Delhi Special Police
Establishment) to carry out the investigation as expeditiously as
possible and complete the investigation within a period of six months
from the date of its order and submit the investigation report
containing its findings to the Commission:
Provided that the Commission may extend the said period by a
further period of six months for the reasons to be recorded in
writing.
Insertion of new
sections 8A and
8B.
Action on
preliminary
inquiry in relation
to public servants.
Action on
investigation in
relation to public
servants.
49 of 1988.

111
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 173 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any agency (including the Delhi
Special Police Establishment) shall, in respect of cases referred to it
by the Commission, submit the investigation report to the
Commission.
(3) The Commission shall consider every report received by it
under sub-section (2) from any agency (including the Delhi Special
Police Establishment) and may decide as to—
(a) file charge-sheet or closure report before the Special
Court against the public servant;
(b) initiate the departmental proceedings or any other
appropriate action against the concerned public servant by the
competent authority.”.
4. After section 11, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“11A. (1) There shall be a Director of Inquiry, not below
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, who
shall be appointed by the Central Government for conducting
preliminary inquiries referred to the Commission by the Lokpal.
(2) The Central Government shall provide the Director of
Inquiry such officers and employees as may be required for the
discharge of his functions under this Act.”.
————
P.K. MALHOTRA,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.
————
CORRIGENDA
In the Securities Laws (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2013
(9 of 2013), as published in a Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part
II, Section 1, Issue No. 32, dated the 16th September, 2013,—
1. At page 3, line 19, for “the disgorge”, read “to disgorge”.
2. At page 4,—
(i) in line 4, for “cluase” read “clause”;
(ii) in line 12, for “sub-clause”, read “sub-clauses”.
3. At page 6, line 15, for “purpose”, read “purposes”.
2 of 1974.
Insertion of new
section 11A.
Director of Inquiry
for making
preliminary
inquiry.

112
Sec I The Gazette of India extraordinary Part II
4. At page 8, line 43, for “sub-section”, read “sub-sections”.
5. At page 10, line 24, for “secton”, read “section”.
————
CORRIGENDA
In the Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies
(Third) Ordinance, 2013 (10 of 2013), as published in the Gazette
of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 1, Issue No. 41, dated the
27th September, 2013,—
(i) at page 1, in the Preamble, in paragraph 3, in the line 2,
for “Parliament”, read “Parliamentary”; and
(ii) at page 4, in line 15, for “to any”, read “of any”.
————
CORRIGENDA
In the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Second Ordinance,
2013 (11 of 2013), as published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, Section 1, Issue No. 42, dated the 28th September, 2013,—
(i) at page 2, in line 32, for “reprsentatives”, read
“representatives”.
(ii) at page 3, in line 3, for “provide”, read “may provide”.
(iii) at page 3, in line 40, for “sub-section”, read “sub-
sections”.