 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
133 
 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON THE SUBJECT 
"JUDICIAL PROCESSES AND THEIR REFORM" 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th August, 2023) 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-MAIL: rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
WEBSITE: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 

3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
      
SR. 
NO. 
 
TOPIC PAGE 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 4 
2 INTRODUCTION 5 
3 ACRONYMS 7 
4 REPORT 8 
I.    SOCIAL DIVERSITY IN APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES IN THE      
SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
9 
II. FEASIBILITY OF REGIONAL BENCHES OF SUPREME COURT  14 
III. EXPLORING THE POSSIBILITIES OF INCREASING THE 
RETIREMENT AGE OF HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT 
JUDGES 
19 
IV. VACATIONS IN THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 25 
V. MANDATORY DECLARATION OF ASSETS BY THE JUDGES 
OF THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
31 
VI.  PREPARATION AND PUBLICATION OF ANNUAL REPORTS 
BY THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
35 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 41 
6 RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 47 
 
                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
 
 
_____________________________________________ 
* Vacant due to change in nomination of Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anan d w.e.f. 08.12.2022 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the One Hundred 
Thirty-third Report on the Subject ‘Judicial Processes and their Reform'. The 
subject was, inter -alia, identified and notified by the Committee in 
Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 62570 dated 6th December, 2022. 
 
2. The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Justice on the subject 
in its meetings held on 22.12.2022 and 02.03.2023.   
 
3.  While considering the Subject, the Committee mainly relied upon the 
following documents/information:-  
(i) Background note on the subject furnished by the Department of 
Justice; 
(ii)  Presentations made by the Secretary, Department of Justice in 
the meetings of the Committee;  
(iii) Replies to the Questionnaires on the subject furnished by the 
Department of Justice; 
(iv) Written replies furnished by the Department of Justice to the 
queries of the M embers of the Committee raised during the 
meetings of the Committee;  
(v) Written submission made by Shri P. Wilson, member of the 
Committee; 
(vi) 229th and 230th Reports of Law Commission of India; and  
(vii) The Supreme Court Rules, 2013.  
 
4.     The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the Department 
of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice), Government of India for furnishing 
necessary information/documents and rendering valuable assistance to the 
Committee in its deliberations.  
 

6 
 
5.  For the facility of  reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 
the 31st July, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
7th August, 2023                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
  

7 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AOR Advocates on Record 
CCR Case Clearance Rate  
CJI Chief Justice of India 
COPLOT Committee on Papers laid on the Table 
DOJ Department of Justice 
HC High Court 
MOP Memorandum of Procedure  
 NCRWC The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution 
 NJDG The National Judicial Data Grid 
OBCs Other Backward Castes 
RTI Right to Information 
SC/SCI Supreme Court of India 
SCC Supreme Court Collegium  
SCs Scheduled Castes 
STs Scheduled Tribes 
  

8 
 
R E P O R T 
1. Reforms in the Judicial Processes are an ongoing process. The Committee 
through its ma ny reports in the past had been suggesting and recommending 
various reforms in our justice delivery system. The present report concerns the 
Higher Judiciary i.e. Supreme Court and High Courts, wherein the Committee 
has examined the following issues and has suggested some reforms: 
(i) Social Diversity in the appointment of Judges in the High Court and 
Supreme Court; 
(ii) Feasibility of Regional Benches of Supreme Court; 
(iii) Exploring the possibilities of increasing the retirement age of High 
Court and Supreme Court Judges; 
(iv) Vacations in the Supreme Court and High Courts; 
(v) Mandatory declaration of assets by the Judges of the Supreme Court 
and High Courts; and  
(vi) Preparation and publication of Annual Reports by the Supreme Court 
and High Courts.  
 
2. Here it is pertinent to not e that the Constitution has empowered the 
Supreme Court under Article 145 and High Courts under Article 225, to make 
rules to regulate its own procedure including its sittings. Though the Committee 
acknowledges its limitations on these issues, but it is al so a fact that our courts 
are public institutions and they are not beyond the scrutiny of the Parliament. 
The scrutiny is not in terms of encroachment upon their powers but in terms of 
their functioning. However, a ny functioning of any public institution, be it 
Parliament or Judiciary or Executive, has to be within the four corners of law, 
and it should be in the public interest. Thus, the recommendations of the 
Committee on this subject are purely in the public interest; the Judiciary may 
look into them as Vox populi, the voice of the people.  
--- 
  

9 
 
I. SOCIAL DIVERSITY IN APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES IN THE 
SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS  
Constitutional Provisions 
3. The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed under Article 124(2), and 
Judges of the High Courts a re appointed under Article 217(1) of the 
Constitution by the President.  The ad -hoc Judges and the retired Judges for the 
Supreme Court are appointed under Articles 127(1) and 128 of the Constitution, 
respectively. The appointments of Additional Judges and  Acting Judges for 
High Courts are made under Article 224 and appointments of retired Judges of 
the High Courts at sittings of High Courts are made under Article 224 (A) of the 
Constitution. 
Present System of Appointment of Judges 
4. At present the appoint ment of Judges of both the Supreme Court and 
High Courts is done by a ‘Collegium’ consisting of the Chief Justice of India 
and other senior most Judges of the Supreme Court. The entire process of 
appointment is governed by a Memorandum of Procedure (MOP) w hich lays 
down the detailed process and procedure of appointment of Judges to the 
Supreme Court and High Courts. Under the Collegium system of appointments, 
the recommendation for appointment to the Supreme Court and High Courts is 
made by the respective C ollegium. The composition of the Collegium is as 
follows: 
(i) Appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court - The Supreme Court 
Collegium consists of the Chief Justice of India and the four senior -
most puisne Judges of the Supreme Court. 
(ii) Appointment of Chief Justi ce of High Court - The Supreme Court 
Collegium consists of the Chief Justice of India and the two senior -
most puisne Judges of the Supreme Court. 
(iii) Appointment of Judge/ Additional Judge of High Court - Initiation 
by the High Court Collegium consisting of the Chief Justice of the 
concerned High Court and the two senior -most puisne Judges of the 
High Court; and by the Supreme Court Collegium consisting of the 
Chief Justice of India and the two senior -most puisne Judges of the 
Supreme Court. 

10 
 
The present system of  appointment of Judges and aspect of reservation in 
the Higher Judiciary 
5. The appointment of Judges of the High Courts is made under Articles 217 
and 224 of the Constitution of India, which do not provide for reservation for 
any caste or class of persons . However, the Government in their submission 
made before the Committee has informed that they have been requesting the 
Chief Justices of High Courts that while sending proposals for the appointment 
of Judges, due consideration be given to suitable candida tes belonging to 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities, and 
Women to ensure social diversity in appointment of Judges in High Courts. 
6. As per MOP, initiation of a proposal for appointment of Judges in the 
Supreme Court ve sts with the Chief Justice of India, while initiation of a 
proposal for appointment of Judges in the High Courts vests with the Chief 
Justice of the concerned High Court. All the names recommended by High 
Court Collegium are sent with the views of the Gove rnment to the Supreme 
Court Collegium (SCC) for advice. Therefore, it is the primary responsibility of 
the Supreme Court Collegium and High Court Collegiums to address the issue 
of social diversity and social justice in the process of appointment to the 
constitutional courts by making recommendations of suitable candidates from 
the communities. Government, however, appoints only those persons as Judges 
of the Supreme Court and High Courts who are recommended by SCC. 
7. The Government has informed that since there is no reservation in Higher 
Judiciary, no class/category -wise data is maintained by the Department of 
Justice. However, they have informed that based on the revised Performa for 
seeking information on recommendee Judges for elevation to the High Cou rts, 
as prescribed by the Supreme Court for all the High Courts in July 2017 as a 
part of the revised MoP, data has been compiled since 2018, which is given 
below. But as a disclaimer, the government has informed that the veracity of the 
data has not been cross-checked as no caste certificate is being sought at the 
time of appointment. 
Social status of High Court Judges appointed since 2018 
Sl. 
No. Year No. of 
Appointments General SC ST OBC Women Minority N.A* 
1. 2023 61 37 3 2 15 9 4 0 
2. 2022 165 137 6 0 17 34 5 0 

11 
 
3. 2021 120 85 2 4 16 17 13 0 
4. 2020 66 52 2 0 11 13 1 0 
5. 2019 81 64 3 1 8 7 3 2 
6. 2018 108 82 2 2 5 11 6 11 
Total 601 457 18 9 72 91 32 13 
* Not Available  
ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
8. The Committee during its del iberations on this issue was of the 
unanimous view that the representation of marginalized sections of the society, 
women and minorities in higher Judiciary is abysmally low. As the Collegium is 
responsible for making recommendations for appointment to the  Higher 
Judiciary, the onus is on them to ensure adequate representation for those 
sections of society.  
9. Underling the need to have diversity in the higher judiciary, one of the 
Members of the Committee, Shri P. Wilson has made the following 
observations: 
"Judicial diversity is fundamental to the quality of judging. This poor 
representation of many social groups may mean their rights are not 
being properly safeguarded, and may eventually lead to the 
infringement and violation of their rights. People of t his country are 
afraid that a very narrow, homogeneous group of Judges belonging 
to certain classes will not reflect the views and values of society as a 
whole, particularly on issues involving diverse, cultural and 
generational matters because they would require more perspectives, 
as the Judges would interpret and enforce law based on their own 
background. A more diverse judiciary is desirable because without 
one, the chances are greatly increased for violation of the rights on 
these under represented sect ions and could indirectly imply 
discrimination." 
10. He has forcefully advocated that the diversity improves the quality of 
judgments and on the issue of 'merit' as the sole criteria for the selection of 
judges he has made the following observations: 
"It has been observed that, sometimes, in order to deny diversity at 
the Bench, 'merit' is used as a proxy to justify the retention of a 

12 
 
particular class or community of persons as Judges. A judiciary that 
markedly fails to reflect the social composition of the  nation 
possesses a serious constitutional challenge. A bench that reflects 
society is pivotal to fostering public confidence in the ability of the 
Courts to make sound, responsive decisions. For the public to 
perceive our Court system as impartial and acc essible, the judiciary 
must reflect the diverse population affected by its decisions. On some 
level, we have been aware all along that there are hidden biases 
surrounding the society. It explains why people would appreciate a 
Bench that includes people mor e like them, who can appreciate their 
lived realities and listen with connection." 
11. Some members of the Committee have, accordingly, demanded 
constitutional amendment for ensuring representation of SCs/STs/OBCs in the 
higher judiciary.  
12. As per the d ata provided by the Government on the social status of 
the Judges of the High Courts and otherwise also, it can be seen that our 
higher judiciary suffers from a 'diversity deficit'. The representation of 
SCs, STs, OBCs, Women, and Minorities in the higher judiciary is far 
below the desired levels and does not reflect the social diversity of the 
country. In recent years there has been a declining trend in representation 
from all the marginalized sections of Indian society.  
13. Though there is no provision f or reservation in the judicial 
appointments at High Courts and Supreme Court level, the Committee 
feels that adequate representation of various sections of Indian society will 
further strengthen the trust, credibility, and acceptability of the Judiciary 
among the citizens.  
14. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India itself, in its judgment dated 
06.10.1993 in the Supreme Court Advocates -on-Record Assn. v. Union of 
India (Second Judges Case) has inter-alia recorded the following: 
 “…Along with other factors, such as, proper representation of all 
sections of the people from all parts of the country, legitimate 
expectation of the suitable and equally meritorious Judges to be 
considered in their turn is a relevant factor for due consideration while 
making the choice  of the most suitable and meritorious amongst them, 

13 
 
the outweighing consideration being merit, to select the best available 
for the apex court.”  
15. Further, the Government has informed that the need for ensuring 
adequate representation has also been ackn owledged by the Supreme 
Court Collegium, which while sending their comments on the draft MoP 
vide CJI’s letter dated March 2017 agreed to the following provision: 
“Merit and integrity shall be the prime criteria for appointment of a 
judge in the High Court .  As far as possible, representation shall be 
given to women and marginalized sections of society.  However, in case 
of judicial officers, due weightage shall also be given to their inter -se 
seniority.” 
16. Thus the Committee is of the view that while mak ing 
recommendations for appointments to the Higher Judiciary, both the 
Supreme Court and the High Court's Collegiums should recommend an 
adequate number of women and candidates from the marginalized sections 
of the society including minorities. This provis ion should be clearly 
mentioned in the Memoranda of Procedure (MoP), which is presently 
under finalization.  
17. Further, as of now, data related to the social status of High Court 
judges are available from 2018 onwards, the Committee recommends the 
Department of Justice find ways and means to collect such data in respect 
of all judges presently serving in the Supreme Court and High Courts. For 
doing this, if required, necessary amendments may be brought in the 
respective Acts/service rules of the judges.  
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
II. FEASIBILITY OF REGIONAL BENCHES OF SUPREME COURT  
18. As per Article 130 of the Constitution of India, the Supreme Court shall 
sit in Delhi or such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with 
the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint. 
19. In its 95 th report dated 1 st March, 1984, the Law Commission proposed 
the setting up of a Constitutional Division within the Supreme Court. Two years 
later in 1986, Supreme Court declared that it was never intended to be a r egular 
Court of Appeal against orders made by the High Courts and the Sessions 
Courts or the Magistrates. It was created as an Apex Court for the purpose of 
laying down the law for the entire country and for that purpose it was given the 
extraordinary jurisdiction to grant special leave to appeal under Article 136 of 
the Constitution so that it could interfere whenever it found that the law was not 
correctly appreciated or applied by the lower courts or tribunals. The 
jurisdiction was also held to be availa ble to correct a grave miscarriage of 
justice. More importantly, the Supreme Court held that every case, where the 
Apex Court finds some error, need not be entertained for otherwise, the Court 
would become a regular court of appeal and be reduced to a posi tion where it 
will not be able to remedy any injustice at all, on account of the tremendous 
backlog of cases which will get accumulated. 
 
20. Further, in 1988, the Law Commission of India reiterated its earlier 
recommendations where it had proposed the spl itting of the Court into two 
divisions. While doing so the Law Commission gave an additional reason 
namely the handicap which the litigant from more distant parts of the Country 
like Tamil Nadu in the South, Gujarat in the West, and Assam and other States 
in the East face in the matter of accessing justice before the Supreme Court. 
 
21. The Government has informed that the then Minister for Law & Justice 
on 30 th July, 2007 requested the Chief Justice of India for comments/views of 
the Court on the recommend ation of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public grievance, Law & Justice on the 
Demands for Grants (2007 -08), in its 20 th Report, for establishing a Bench of 
the Supreme Court at least in Chennai on a trial basis and t hen in other parts of 
the country. Hon’ble (Retd.) Chief Justice of India, Shri K.G. Balakrishnan 
informed the then Minister for Law & Justice that the Full Court meeting held 
on 7 th August, 2007 found no justification for deviating from its earlier 

15 
 
resolutions on the subject and unanimously resolved that the recommendation 
made by the Committee cannot be accepted. 
 
22. Then the Law Commission in its 229 th Report submitted on 5 th August, 
2009, once again recommended restructuring of the Supreme Court by set ting 
up of a Constitution Bench at Delhi and Cessation benches in four regions 
namely; Delhi, Chennai/Hyderabad, Kolkata, and Mumbai. Drawing support 
from the system prevalent in other countries like Italy, Egypt, Portugal, Ireland, 
the United States, and Denmark.  
 
23. Again the then Minister for Law & Justice on 16 th December, 2009 
requested the then Chief Justice of India for comments/views of the Court on 
the recommendation of the 229 th Report of the Law Commission. Yet again the 
Hon’ble (Retd.) Chief Justice of India, Shri K.G. Balakrishnan informed that the 
full Court meeting held on 18 th February, 2010 found no justification for 
deviating from its earlier resolutions on the subject and unanimously resolved 
that the recommendation made by the Committee cannot be accepted.  
 
ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
24. During the deliberations of the Committee on this issue, there was near 
unanimity among the members to have regional benches at different locations in 
the country. However, some membe rs were also of the view that with the 
ongoing push for e -courts/virtual courts in the country and rolling out of 5G 
infrastructure in the near future, this issue needs more careful examination.  
 
25. On analyzing the practical benefits of establishing Per manent Regional 
Benches of Supreme Court, Shri P Wilson, one of the Members of the 
Committee observes as follows: 
 
“Another benefit of establishing Permanent Regional Benches of 
Supreme Court is that the number of Judges on the Bench would 
increase. This w ould lead to speedy disposal of cases and clearing 
the backlog of pending cases. That apart, the Judge to Population 
ratio of the Apex Court would increase. Therefore, the establishment 
of Permanent Regional Benches of Supreme Court is the need of the 
hour”….  

16 
 
“…Further, the establishment of Permanent Regional Benches is 
also in the interest of the Judges themselves. At present there is 
intense competition among the Judges of the High Court to be 
elevated to the 34 seats on the Supreme Court, apart from the  
lawyers aiming for elevation directly from the Bar. Setting up of 
Permanent Regional Benches will increase the capacity and seats on 
the Supreme Court thereby paving the way for more meritorious and 
diverse Judges to be appointed to the Supreme Court” 
26. On invoking the constitutional mandate under the Article 130 of the 
constitution on this issue, Shri Wilson has opined the following: 
 
"The framers of the Constitution themselves understood that a time 
may come when the Supreme Court must sit at other pla ces apart 
from Delhi. That is why Art. 130 reads that “The Supreme Court 
shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice 
of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time 
appoint.” The use of the term “place or p laces” shows that the 
framers of the Constitution contemplated that the Court can sit in 
more than one place – obviously to ensure ease of access to citizens. 
There cannot be a higher purpose. Undoubtedly, therefore, it is 
expedient that in the interest of  the administration of justice, and 
access to justice, which is a fundamental right, the Law Ministry 
must take forward this proposal with the Hon’ble Chief Justice of 
India." 
27. As regard virtual courts as a substitute for the regional benches, Shri 
Wilson observes as following: 
 
"Virtual courts are a boon for the lawyers and litigants alike and 
help the speedy disposal of cases. It has been observed that in many 
sections of the legal community, virtual courts are being portrayed as 
a substitute to the Pe rmanent Regional Benches. However, Virtual 
Courts will not and cannot be a substitute for a full -fledged regional 
bench of the Supreme Court as the Registry is still located at Delhi.  
A litigant needs to have a physical presence/ AOR in Delhi for 
rectifying defects, listing of matters, filing process fees etc. and 
meeting of Advocate on record which will add to the litigation costs.  

17 
 
Virtual Courts have made the court-room accessible remotely but not 
the establishment." 
28. On turning down of this demand o f having regional benches by the full 
court of the Supreme Court inter alia citing adversely affecting the "country's 
unitary character" Shri Wilson has stated the following: 
 
"As elected representatives, it is our duty to ensure that the 
convenience of the people we serve is put at the forefront. The will of 
the people cannot be found in the decision of the Full Court of the 
Supreme Court but only in the decision of Parliament, which is the 
voice of the people. The final say in this issue cannot be left to  the 
decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court because the 
administration of justice is still a subject over which the Parliament 
has legislative competence. In any case, the independence of the 
Judiciary will not be affected if Permanent Regional Be nches are 
established. The Judges will still be selected as per the Memorandum 
of Procedure, which involves the collegium of the Supreme Court. 
The Chief Justice of India will continue to be the master of the roster 
and will presumably have full control to  allocate Judges to these 
Permanent Benches. Hence, the apprehension that the establishment 
of Permanent Regional Benches will affect the unitary character of 
the Supreme Court is unfounded." 
29. The Committee feels that the demand for having regional benc hes of 
the Supreme Court of India is about 'access to justice,' which is a 
fundamental right under the Constitution. There has been a long -standing 
demand for having regional benches of the Highest Court in the country 
for taking justice to the doorstep of  the common citizen. The regional 
benches may also be seen as a solution to the overflowing caseload of the 
judiciary and to reduce the litigation cost to the common man. 
  
30. The Delhi -centric Supreme Court causes a big hurdle for those 
litigants who are coming from far-flung areas of the country. First, there is 
a language problem for them, and then finding lawyers, the cost of 
litigation, travel, and staying in Delhi makes justice very costly.  
 

18 
 
31. This Committee has also been recommending for a long t ime on 
establishment of regional benches of the Supreme Court in the Country. 
The Committee still holds the view that the Supreme Court of India may 
invoke Article 130 of the Constitution for establishing its regional benches 
at four or five locations in t he Country. The interpretation of Constitution 
and Constitutional matters may be dealt at Delhi and the regional benches 
may decide appellate matters. However, the appellate benches may not be 
made as another layer of the judiciary by treating their decisions as final.  
 
--- 
 
 
 

19 
 
III. EXPLORING THE POSSIBILITIES OF INCREASING THE 
RETIREMENT AGE OF HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT 
JUDGES 
Constitutional position 
 
32. Clause (1) of Article 217 of the Constitution of India provides that every 
Judge of a High Court s hall hold office until he attains the age of sixty -two 
years. Clause (3) of Article 224 of the Constitution provides that no person 
appointed as an Additional or Acting Judge of a High Court shall hold office 
after attaining the age of sixty-two years. 
 
33. The retirement age of High Court Judges, which was fixed at 60 years in 
the beginning, was revised to 62 years w.e.f. 5.10.1963 by the Constitution 
(Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 pursuant to the increase in the retirement age 
of Central Government emplo yees from 55 to 58 years w.e.f. 1.12.1962 on the 
recommendations of the Second Central Pay Commission, mainly relying upon 
the increase in life expectancy in India. 
 
34. In the Chief Justices' Conference held in September, 2002 at New Delhi, 
a resolution was passed on raising the age of retirement of High Court Judges. 
 
35. This Committee had also recommended in its 39th Report presented to the 
Parliament on 29.04.2010 for increasing the retirement age of Judges of High 
Courts from 62 to 65 to be at par wit h the retirement age of Judges of the 
Supreme Court. 
 
Stand of Government on Increasing the retirement age of Judges 
 
36. The then Chief Justice of India proposed for increasing the retirement age 
of High Court Judges on June 21, 2019.  However, as of now,  the Government 
has informed that there is no proposal to increase the retirement age of Judges, 
Additional and Acting Judges of the High Courts. They have further informed 
that any requirement for increasing the retirement age of High Court Judges in 
the future will be considered by the Government at an appropriate time in 
consultation with the various stakeholders. Therefore, the Government, as of 
now, does not feel the need to increase the retirement age of the High Court 
Judges. 

20 
 
37. The Government feels  that the increase in the age of retirement of the 
High Court would bring parity in the retirement of Judges of the High Court and 
Supreme Court and would reduce attraction among High Court Judges for 
getting elevated to Supreme Court. The probable consequ ence of enhancing the 
age of High Court Judges could be that the High Court Judges may prefer to 
remain in High Courts being their Parent High Court either as Judges or as 
Chief Justices, in case the retirement ages of the Supreme Court and High Court 
Judges is the same. Supreme Court may lose good judicial talent coming into 
Supreme Court. Further, bringing parity in the retirement age of the Supreme 
Court and High Court Judges may result in consequential demand for an 
increase in the retirement age of the  Supreme Court Judges.  Many retired 
Judges of High Courts are appointed as members of Tribunals. An increase in 
the retirement age to 62 may deprive the tribunals of having Presiding 
Officer/Judicial Members from retired High Court Judges. 
 
38. The Govern ment has also submitted that it would be appropriate if the 
increase in retirement age is considered along with other measures to ensure 
transparency and accountability in the appointments to the Higher Judiciary and 
a concerted effort is made to fill up the existing vacancies.   
 
39. According to them, any such increase may lead to a situation where there 
will be no regular vacancies for the post of High Court Judges for the enhanced 
years of service and the authorities would totally be deprived of the opp ortunity 
to recruit deserving and meritorious candidates from feeder channel i.e. Judicial 
Officers, Advocates. Enhancement of the age of retirement might extend 
benefits in terms of extended years of service in certain non-deserving cases and 
lead to non -performing and underperforming judges to continue. There will be 
no limit to it and in the future, there may be efforts to increase the age further.  
Besides this, other public agencies i.e. Tribunals, Commissions, etc. may also 
follow suit starting a chain reaction.   
 
ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
40. It is worthwhile to note that when life expectancy in the country was 
around 40 years in the 1960s, the age of retirement of judges was 62, and which 
has remained the same till date despite t he life expectancy reaching 70 years in 
the country due to advancement in science and technology, medicine, better 
infrastructure, and life style. In fact, many retired Chief Justice of High Courts 

21 
 
and Judges are designated as Senior Advocates by the Supre me Court of India 
in the last few years, and many are healthy and mentally agile and still hold 
positions in Tribunals even after reaching 70 years of age. This shows that 
Judges upon retirement are keen on continuing to work in the legal field in one 
capacity or the other.  
 
41. Time and again Members of this Committee have suggested that to deal 
with the issues of vacancy positions of judges and pendency of cases in the 
country working days of judges may be increased. The Members of the 
Committee in its p revious reports have also suggested for increasing the age of 
retirement of judges of the judiciary to compensate for the large number of 
vacancies existing in High Courts.  This Committee in its previous reports had 
accordingly recommended for raising the  retirement age of High Court judges 
to 65 years. 
 
42. The Committee feels that increasing the age of retirement of judges 
would not only help the judicial system but also the public at large, specifically 
the litigants before the Courts. The judicial syst em would be greatly benefited 
because a person with a wealth of experience under his or her belt by virtue of a 
long tenure in the High Court would continue to serve the High Court for a 
further period. The wealth of judicial experience gained over a decad e or so in 
the High Court cannot be replaced by a newly elevated Judge. Longer tenures 
may also ensure the impartiality of Judges as often raised criticism is that 
Judges begin looking for post -retirement jobs in the last year of their service. 
Similarly, the litigant public would also be benefited, since the occurrence of 
vacancies would be less frequent and consequently, there would be Judges to 
hear and dispose of cases.  
 
43. In the year 2000, the National Commission to Review the Working of the 
Constitution (NCRWC) also known as Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah 
Commission (2000) had also recommended for increasing the age of retirement 
Judges of the High Court and the Supreme Court of India. The Constitution 
(114th Amendment) Bill, 2010 was tabled to increas e the age of High Court 
Judges to 65 years, however, this Bill could not be passed. Internationally, the 
age of retirement of Judges is well above the current age of 62 for High Courts 
and 65 years in the Supreme Court. The age of retirement of Judges in 
developed countries with good medical facilities and infrastructure is around 70 

22 
 
for the lower judiciary and 75 years to a lifetime for Supreme Court and Federal 
Judges. The retirement age of judges of the Supreme Court/Federal Courts of 
some of the developed democratic countries is as under: 
 
(i) United States of America : In the United States, there is no fixed 
retirement age for judges in the Supreme Court or the Federal Courts. 
Justices of the U.S. Supreme Court serve for life, but they can choose to 
retire voluntarily. Federal judges in the lower courts also serve for life, 
subject to good behavior. Still, they can take senior status at age 65 or 
older, which allows them to continue hearing cases with a reduced 
workload. 
(ii) United Kingdom:  In the United Kingdom,  the retirement age for 
judges in the Supreme Court is 70. However, judges appointed before 
April 1995 may continue to serve until the age of 75. The retirement age 
for judges in other courts, such as the High Court and the Court of 
Appeal, is generally 70. 
(iii) Canada: In Canada, the retirement age for judges in the Supreme Court 
is 75. The retirement age for judges in the Federal Court and Federal 
Court of Appeal is also 75. 
(iv) Australia: In Australia, the retirement age for judges in the High Court 
(the highest court) is 70. The retirement age for judges in other federal 
courts, such as the Federal Court and the Family Court, is also generally 
70. 
(v) Germany: In Germany, the retirement age for judges in the Federal 
Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht) is 68. However, 
judges can continue to serve beyond this age if their term of office has 
not expired. The retirement age for judges in other federal courts, such 
as the Federal Court of Justice (Bundesgerichtshof), is generally 67. 
 
44. The Committee is also in agreement with the views of the government 
that if the increase in retirement age is considered it should be along with other 
measures to ensure transparency and accountability in the appointments to the 
Higher Judiciary and a concerted effort be made t o fill up the existing 
vacancies. However, the apprehension of the government that an increase in the 
retirement age of judges will lead to similar demands from the civil servants is 
unfounded. Judges cannot be compared to any service under the government.  
Already many states have increased the retirement age of Doctors and 

23 
 
Professors due to their shortage. Such demands should be considered on a case -
to-case basis.  
45. Shri P Wilson, while stressing the need for Increasing the retirement age 
of High Courts  and Supreme Court Judges has vociferously pointed out the 
following: 
 
“One of the primary causes of delay in disposing of cases is the large 
number of vacancies in High Courts across the country. This 
situation is further worsened by the fact that when ju dges retire, 
appointment of new judges in their places is not immediate. The old 
Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges states that the 
process of filling up of vacancies must commence six months prior to 
the expected date of retirement of High Court Judges, so that the 
vacancy is immediately filled upon retirement of a judge. However, 
due to various reasons, this process is not completed on time leading 
to large number of vacancies as stated above.  
One of the ways in which this situation can be  ameliorated is by 
increasing the age of retirement of High Court Judges from 62 to 65 
years and Supreme Court Judges from 65 to 70. When the 
Constitution was originally enacted, Article 217(1) fixed the age of 
retirement of High Court Judges as 60 years. Subsequently, within 13 
years, it was realized that the human body and mind do not become 
so incapacitated at the age of 60 that the Judge must retire at that 
age. Hence, by the virtue of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) 
Act, 1962, the age of retirem ent was increased to 62 years. From 
1963 onwards, the age of retirement has remained at 62 for High 
Court Judges. Over the past five decades, advancement in science 
and technology, medicine, better infrastructure and lifestyle has 
allowed Indians in other walks of life to be efficient, functional a 
work well up to the age of about 75 years. In fact, in the year 2016, 
26 such retired Chief Justices and Judges of the High Court were 
designated as Senior Advocates by the Supreme Court and in the 
year 2018, 25 retired Chief Justices and Judges of various High 
Courts were designated as Senior Advocates by the Supreme Court. 
This shows that the Judges upon retirement are keen on continuing to 
work in the legal field in one capacity or the other. This is due to two  
reasons:  

24 
 
The mind of an intellectual who has worked tirelessly as a Judge of 
the High Court cannot remain idle at the age of 62 when much 
energy, enthusiasm and zeal is still left to contribute. 
Judges need to continue working to maintain a good standard  of 
living since their pensions are insufficient to maintain themselves and 
their families in urban cities”... 
… “When Supreme Court judges upon retirement are functioning 
effectively as Chairman and Members of various important Tribunals 
where the workloa d is sometimes heavier, why do we assume they 
cannot continue functioning as Judge of the Supreme Court till 70 
years of age?” 
46. In view of the above observations the Committee feels that the age of 
retirement of judges needs to be increased in sync with  the increase in the 
longevity and advancement in medical sciences leading to improved health 
of the population. The Committee accordingly, recommends that relevant 
Articles of the Constitution of India need to be amended and the age of 
retirement of Judge s of the Supreme Court and High Courts may be 
increased appropriately.  
47. However, while increasing the age of retirement for judges, the 
performance of Judges may be reassessed based on their health conditions , 
quality of judgements,  number of judgments  delivered etc. For this, a 
system of appraisal may be devised and put in place, by the Supreme Court 
collegium, before any judge is recommended for enhancement of their 
tenure.  
48. Many stakeholders had also raised objections to the post -retirement 
assignments given to judges, and the Committee is accordingly, of the view 
that with the increase in the age of retirement of judges, the practice of 
post-retirement assignments to judges of Supreme Court and High Courts 
in bodies/institutions financed from pub lic exchequer may be reassessed to 
ensure their impartiality.  
 
--- 
 
 
 

25 
 
IV. VACATIONS IN THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
Extant Constitutional/Legal Provisions 
 
49. Vacations for the Supreme Court and various High courts are prescribed 
as per the rules fr amed by the respective courts for which they have been 
empowered under the provisions of the Constitution. The Supreme Court of 
India, in the exercise of the powers conferred on it under Article 145, the 
Constitution of India is empowered to make rules for  regulating the Court’s 
practice and procedures which include its sittings and vacations, etc.  
 
50. Accordingly, the Supreme Court has framed the ‘Supreme Court Rules, 
2013 which was notified on 27.05.2014. Order II of Part I of the Supreme Court 
Rules, 2 013 provides for sittings of the Supreme Court, length of summer 
vacation, and the number of holidays of the Court and also the Benches of the 
Hon’ble Judges during summer vacation and winter holidays. The Supreme 
Court Rules, 2013, inter-alia, provided that the period of summer vacation shall 
not exceed seven weeks and the length of the summer vacation and the number 
of holidays for the court and the offices of the court shall be such as may be 
fixed by the Chief Justice and notified in the official Gazette so as not to exceed 
one hundred and three days, excluding Sundays not falling in the vacation and 
during court holidays. The earlier rules i.e. Supreme Court Rules, 1966 
provided for a period of summer vacation in the Supreme Court for 10 weeks. 
Accordingly, on an average the Supreme Court sits for 214 days a year. 
 
51. Similarly, the duration of vacations in the High Court is regulated by the 
Rules/Procedures framed by the concerned High Court as per the powers vested 
unto High Courts under Article 225 of the Constitution of India to make rules of 
the Court regulating its practice & procedures including its sittings and 
vacations. 
 
Present Status 
 
52. As per the information provided by the Supreme Court of India to the 
Government, during the last three ye ars, the average number of court working 
days of the Supreme Court were 224 (Year 2019), 217 (Year 2020), and 202 
(Year 2021).  
 

26 
 
53. The High Courts generally enjoy 20 holidays in a year beside Christmas 
and winter holidays and summer vacations. According to the available 
information, all High Courts in the country normally have on an average 210 
working days in a year. 
 
54. In year 2009, the Law Commission in its 230 th Report on “Reforms in the 
Judiciary – Some suggestions” has suggested that the number of  working days 
must be increased considering the huge pendency of cases at all levels of 
judicial hierarchy. The Report recommended that the vacations in the higher 
judiciary must be curtailed by at least 10 to 15 days and the court working hours 
be extende d by at least half an hour. The Report was duly forwarded by the 
Government to the Chief Justices of all High Courts to consider the suggestions 
for adoption. 
 
Views of the Government 
 
55. The Department of Justice, in their written submission before the 
Committee informed that previously in the year 2002-03, they had examined the 
matter of increasing the number of working days in Courts. In order to reduce 
the huge pendency prevailing in the High Courts, the Department requested all 
the High Courts to fix the period of vacations in such a way that the number of 
working days of High Courts generally do not fall below 222 days in a year.  At 
present, as per the information available with the government, on an average 
High Courts function for 210 days. 
 
56. The Department of Justice has stated that court vacations particularly 
summer vacations spanning 7 weeks (10 weeks prior to 2013) are customary 
practice continuing from colonial days. Vacations of Supreme Court and High 
Courts need to be relooked in a holisti c way vis-à-vis the present practice in the 
higher courts of other countries as well as other constitutional institutions in the 
country and also in the context of existing huge pendency of arrears of cases 
and increased volume of fresh cases being instituted on regular basis.  
 
ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
57. The need for judicial vacations has been questioned time and again by 
various stakeholders considering the huge pendency of cases and long delays in 
disposing off the cases, there ha s been a demand to curtail long court vacations 
and revise the working hours of the court. 
 

27 
 
58. At the same time, it can also be seen that as far as the Supreme Court of 
India is concerned it has the highest caseload among the apex courts around the 
world and it also works the most. In terms of the number of judgments delivered 
too, with 34 judges, the Supreme Court of India is way ahead of others. 
 
59. A comparative statement of working days of apex courts of some 
democratic countries during the calendar y ear 2020, compiled from the 
available calendars of the respective countries, is as follows: 
Countries Days 
marked as 
holidays 
Months with 
no oral 
arguments 
Number of 
sitting days 
Australia 10 2 97 
Bangladesh 84 1 180 
India 94 1 190 
Singapore 33 2 145 
UK 1 2 189 
United States 10 3 79 
Source: Numbers pulled from calendars of respective apex courts. 
 
60. During the deliberations on this issue, most of the members were of 
the opinion that the need of the hour is an efficient judiciary that is not 
only committed to meeting the needs and interests of the citizens but also 
communicates this commitment by modifying its practices to suit the needs 
of the country. The judiciary, therefore, needs to be sensitized from 
shutting down courts en masse for a couple of months a year. 
 
61. Shri Vivek K. Tankha, one of the Members of the Committee expressed 
the following opinion on this issue: 
 
"The point that I have always been raising is that vacations came as 
a concept from the British days, when Britishers used to go  back to 
England to enjoy their holidays.   My case is that there can be no 
vacation of a High Court or the Supreme Court.   Judges can be on 
vacation; staff can be on vacation; a sovereign body does not go on 
vacation.  That was an imperial concept or alien concept.  So, if there 
is a way of refashioning it, let every judge be entitled to ‘X’ number 
of days of holidays, which he himself will decide.  It could be spread 
over the year, while the court functions on all days, except on 
Saturdays and Sundays.  This would mean that about 100 days would 
come back as court’s working.  And, if 100 days come back as 

28 
 
court’s working, see the number of cases that would also get 
addressed and decided." 
62. However, on the contrary, some of the members were of the view t hat in 
a profession that demands intellectual rigor and long working hours, for both 
lawyers as well as judges' vacations are much needed for rejuvenation. 
 
63. Shri P. Wilson in his submission has expressed his opinion in the 
following manner on this issue: 
 
" .... (a) layman does not understand that the Judges and lawyers do 
not stop working after Court hours. After Court hours, the Judges 
tend to dictation and correction of judgements, research, reading 
case files for the next day etc. Similarly, it is only during the vacation 
time that Judges get to pen judgements in complicated cases 
requiring elaborate judgements. That apart, in a highly stressful 
profession like legal profession, adequate mental and physical break 
is required to ensure that there is n o strain on mental and physical 
health. Very few professions have such a constant level of stress on 
an everyday basis as lawyers and judges experience. Therefore, it 
would not be prudent to extend Court hours or reduce Court vacation 
days.  
However, in my  considered view the vacation courts a minimum 
number of judges can work by rotation and can sit on all days of the 
week, albeit in reduced numbers, hearing only urgent cases. This is 
because, often we see that judges of Vacation Courts sit from 10.30 
am t o as late as 9 or 10 pm and thereafter correct orders. If both 
sides counsel’s are agreeable final hearing cases can also be listed 
and heard during the vacation." 
64. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani expressed a similar sentiment on the issue stating 
that: 
 
"As far  as duration of holidays is concerned, you will see that the 
judges do a lot of work.  The present Chief Justice of India wakes up 
at 3.30 in the morning.  ........ Judges are supposed to read hundreds 
of briefs and then they need time to give reasoned jud gement.  There 
is high amount of litigation.   Please don't blame the judiciary for 
this.  We have the most litigious population in the whole world and 

29 
 
we have the lowest number of Judges per litigant.  We need more 
judges.  Reducing holidays will cure eve rything will never be the 
answer.   As we know the Supreme Court is doing a very good job, 
we have to find out the reasons with regard to the High Courts.  
There may be the question that they need to curtail holidays of the 
High Courts or there may be the question of increasing Bench 
strength, which has not yet been implemented, to be gone into by the 
judiciary or by the Government, or maybe it is due to lack of 
candidates.  It may be simplistic thing to take away holidays and 
expect that litigation or arre ars will go away.   There are other 
reasons.  Judges need holidays, the staff needs holidays.  There is a 
large number of employees working in the courts.  They also need 
holidays.  Quality will suffer if you do not give them a break.  You 
need good judgem ents.  You need time to consider the rival 
arguments because often the Supreme Court or the High Courts deal 
with important Constitutional issues and a lot of thinking and input is 
involved in these cases.  It is not that the Supreme Court judges are 
going to foreign countries in the holidays.  Judges are also working 
and giving judgements in the vacation period." 
65. The demand for doing away with vacations in the Courts emanates 
primarily due to two factors, one is the huge pendency of cases in our 
courts, and the other is the inconvenience faced by the litigants during the 
vacations of the courts. A common man holds a perception that despite 
having such huge pendency of cases their judges go on long vacations. 
Further during the vacations, the litigants h ave to suffer a lot despite 
having a handful of vacation courts/benches.  
66. Though in this connection it may be noted that for the past few years, 
the pendency in the Supreme Court has remained static and in the year 
2022 the disposal of cases was more t han the number of cases instituted in 
that year. Thus it can be seen that as far as the disposal of cases is 
concerned, the performance of our Supreme Court is quite good. The 
problem lies with the legacy arrears of about 35000.  
67. With regard to High Co urts, the pendency is humungous. More than 
60 lakh cases are pending as on date, which is a reason for deep concern. 
Though it is also a grim fact that almost all the High Courts have a very 
high level of vacancies. As on 31.12.2022 overall vacancies in th e High 

30 
 
Courts stood at 30% of the sanctioned strength and in many of them had 
vacancies ranging from 40 - 50%. Thus vacations are not the only cause of 
high pendency in the higher judiciary.  
68. Replying to the criticism of the Judiciary on vacations, the  Chief Justice 
of India Shri DY Chandrachud, i n one of his interviews given to the India 
Today1 recently, had inter alia stated the following: 
“What people don’t know is, that most of the time in the vacation is 
spent on preparing judgements which you have kept in reserve 
because you’ve just no time during the week when you are working 
seven days just trying to keep ahead of the curve to deal with your 
cases” 
He further stated that:  
“It’s not just about the statistics. It’s about thinking through your 
cases. It’s about reading the law, reading about where the law is 
going in other jurisdictions, thinking about where you want our 
society to be in terms of the output which you are going to produce. 
So unless you give your judges time to introspect, reflect, th ink about 
the work which you are going to do, you are not going to have a 
quality of justice” 
69. From the foregoing discussion it can be seen that vacations in the 
Judiciary are not the only factor for pendency. For reducing pendency 
there is a need to have a multipronged strategy. However, at the same time, 
it is an undeniable fact that vacations in the judiciary are a 'colonial legacy' 
and with entire court going on vacation en mass causes deep inconvenience 
to the litigants.  
70. In this scenario, the C ommittee is of the view that the suggestion of 
the former Chief Justice of India Shri RM Lodha on court vacations, that 
instead of all the judges going on vacation, all at one time, individual judges 
should take their leave at different times through the y ear so that the 
courts are constantly open and there are always benches present to hear 
cases, should be considered by the Judiciary.  
--- 
 
                                           
1 https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/vacation-spent-on-cji-dy-chandrachud-on-off-days-for-supreme-court-
judges-2348459-2023-03-18 

31 
 
V. MANDATORY DECLARATION OF ASSETS BY THE JUDGES 
OF THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
Mandatory provision for Civil Servants to declare Assets 
71. As per existing norms for the purpose of making a parity salaries 
admissible to the level of Secretary to the Government of India is used as a 
yardstick for determination of salaries of Judges of Supreme Court of India and 
High Courts.  Therefore, it would be prudent to examine the extant provision 
regarding the declaration of Assets in the case of Civil Servants. 
(i) As per Rule 16(1) of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, every 
person shall, where such person is a memb er of the Service at the 
commencement of these rules, on his first appointment to the Service, 
submit a return of his assets and liabilities regarding the movable, 
immovable and valuable property owned by him or inherited or acquired 
by him, either in his own name or in the name of any member of his 
family. 
(ii) As per Rule 16(2) of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, every 
member of the Service shall submit an annual return giving full 
particulars regarding the immovable property inherited by him or o wned 
or acquired by him, either in his own name or in the name of any member 
of his family. 
(iii) As per Rule 18(1)(i) of Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964, 
every Government servant shall on his first appointment to any service or 
post submit a return  to his assets and liabilities giving the full particulars 
regarding the movable, immovable and valuable property inherited by 
him, or owned or acquired by him, either in his own name or in the name 
of any member of his family. 
(iv) As per Rule 18(1)(ii) of Cen tral Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964, 
every Government servant belonging to any service or holding any post 
shall submit an annual return giving full particulars regarding the 
immovable property inherited by him or owned or acquired by him either 
in his own name or in the name of any member of his family. 
Provisions for Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts to declaration of 
assets 
(i) As per the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Services) 
Act, 1958 and the High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of 

32 
 
Services) Act, 1954 and rules framed thereunder, there is no provision to 
declare assets by Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts. 
(ii) Earlier, the Department of Justice had prepared a comprehensive Bill 
called "The Judicial Standards and Accou ntability Bill", with the aim to 
achieve the objectives of creating a statutory mechanism for enquiring 
into individual complaints against Judges of the High Courts and 
Supreme Court and recommending appropriate action, enabling 
declaration of assets and l iabilities of Judges and laying down judicial 
standards to be followed by Judges. This Bill intended to replace the 
Judges Inquiry Act 1968 while retaining its basic features. 
(iii) On dissolution of 15 th Lok Sabha, the Bill lapsed and was not presented 
thereafter. 
72. “The Restatement of Values of Judicial Life” adopted by a full Court 
Meeting of  the Supreme Court on 07.05.1997 lays down certain judicial 
standards which are to be followed by the Judges of the Supreme Court and the 
High Courts. As adopted by the  Full Court of the Supreme Court in its meeting 
dated 07.05.1997 providing further to make it mandatory for every Judge of the 
Supreme Court and the High Courts including the Chief Justices, to make a 
declaration of his/her assets and liabilities at the ti me of appointment and 
thereafter in the beginning of every year. 
73. Further, the Full Bench in its meeting dated 26.08.2009 decided to 
disclose the statement of assets submitted by Judges on the basis of Resolution 
dated 07.05.1997 to the public by putting it on the Supreme Court website. 
74. Again the Full Court in its meeting dated 08.09.2009 resolved to put the 
declaration of assets in the Supreme Court website on or before 31.10.2009 and 
that is purely on a voluntary basis. Presently, the website of th e Supreme Court 
shows that 55 number of Judges have so far uploaded their Assets Declaration 
with last updation done on 31 st March, 2018. The ‘Restatement of Values of 
Judicial Life’ does not have any legal authority for its enforcement.    
Views of the Government  
75. Salaries & other service conditions of Supreme Court Judges/ Judges of 
High Courts are benchmarked as per the salary scale of the Secretary to the 
Government of India. Service Conditions & Conduct Rules of Civil Servants 
stipulate mandatory filing of annual returns of assets and the same can be made 
applicable to judges of Supreme Court/HCs. 

33 
 
76. Other Constitutional Authority like the Comptroller & Auditor General of 
India are uploading their latest assets declaration on the website under thei r 
Code of Ethics. The Council of Ministers also declares assets as per the Code of 
Conduct for Ministers issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
77. For the Judges of the Supreme Court of India and High Courts, there is a 
need to institutionalize the mechanism for regular filing of assets and uploading 
them in the public domain. 
ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
78. As a general practice, all constitutional functionaries and 
government servants must file annual returns of their assets and liabil ities. 
The Supreme Court has gone to the extent of holding that the public has a 
right to know the assets of those standing for elections as MPs or MLAs. 
When so, it belies logic that Judges don't need to disclose their assets and 
liabilities. Anybody hold ing public office and drawing a salary from the 
exchequer should mandatorily furnish annual returns of their property.  
79. As stated earlier, the full bench of the Supreme Court on 8 th September, 
2009 resolved to put the declaration of assets on the Supreme Court's website on 
or before 31st October, 2009, purely on a voluntary basis. However, till date, the 
website of the Supreme Court contains data with respect to 55 of former Chief 
Justices of India and Judges of the Supreme Court, with the last updation  as on 
31st March, 2018.  So far as High Courts are concerned, presently only five 
High Courts have data on their website related to the declaration of assets by a 
few Judges of concerned High Courts.   
80. During the deliberations of the Committee on this  issue Shri P. Wilson, 
Member of the Committee has opined as under:  
"Judges of constitutional courts routinely review and interfere with 
legislation, government policies and even award of tenders etc. by 
governments. While so, to ensure transparency and a ccountability it 
is the need of the hour to ensure that Judges are transparent about 
their assets and any disproportionate change there on. If the Minister 
who decides about awarding a tender has to disclose his assets, why 
not the Judge who decides if the  Minister’s decision is right or 
wrong? Both are public authorities discharging public functions." 
 

34 
 
Accordingly, he recommends the following: 
"The present deadlock in the issue of the declaration of assets and 
liabilities of judges can be resolved only by Parliament by an 
amendment to the service conditions of the Judges. Considering the 
rights of litigants to know about their Judges, I am of the firm view 
that the Judges during their tenure in Higher Judiciary i.e. (High 
Court and Supreme Court) have to ne cessarily declare their assets 
and liabilities at every succeeding year and necessary law mandating 
to do the same has to be brought, by bringing suitable amendments to 
The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act 
1958, High Court Judg es (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act 
1954..." 
81. Declaration of assets by the Judges of the Higher Judiciary will only 
bring more trust and credibility into the system. As the last resolution of 
the Supreme Court on the declaration of assets by Jud ges on a voluntary 
basis is not complied with, the Committee recommends the Government to 
bring about appropriate legislation to make it mandatory for Judges of the 
higher judiciary (Supreme Court and High Courts) to furnish their 
property returns on an annual basis to the appropriate authority.  
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
VI. PREPARATION AND PUBLICATION OF ANNUAL REPORTS 
BY THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
82. The Annual Report is an introduction of the activities and achievements 
of the Ministry/Department/Organizatio n of the Government of India for the 
information of the General Public.   It basically forms a public disclosure 
document published on an annual basis and generally hosted on the 
administrative Ministries’ website for wider dissemination.   
 
Position in respect of Ministries/Departments of Government of India 
 
83. The requirement for preparation of Annual Reports of the 
Ministries/Departments has been stipulated in the “Manual for Handling 
Parliamentary Work in Ministries,” the first edition of which was br ought out 
by the then Department of Personnel & Administrative Reforms in July, 1973.   
The work was subsequently transferred to the M/o Parliamentary Affairs in 
1976, which, Ministry then brought out the second edition of the Manual in 
1989.   The extant instructions relating to the publication of Annual Reports by 
the Ministries/Departments are contained in the Third Edition of the Manual 
published in June, 2004, by the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs. 
 
84. As per this Manual, the Departments are expect ed to prepare Annual 
Reports well in advance of the discussions of their Demands for Grants.  The 
purpose of the Annual Report is to enable the Members of Parliament to 
appraise the performance of each Ministry/Department.  The Annual Reports 
are usually made available to the Hon’ble Members after the presentation of the 
Budget, but before the Demands relating to a particular Ministry are discussed 
in the House. Annual Reports are also required to be made available to 
Members of Parliament simultaneously be fore the Demands for Grants are 
referred to the concerned Departmentally-related Standing Committees for their 
consideration.   The Annual Reports of the Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India for the year 2022 -23 reflects the actual data from 1 st 
January, 2022 to 31 st December, 2022 and provides projections or estimates for 
the period from 1 st January, 2023 to 31 st March, 2023.  The 
Ministry/Department has to ensure that its Annual Report is released in the 
public domain only after the presentation of the Budget.  The copies of the 
Annual Report are also to be forwarded to various authorities including Press 
Information Bureau to be made public. 

36 
 
Instructions regarding Annual Reports of Government Societies / 
Autonomous Bodies Receiving Grant-in-aid 
 
85. The instructions of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure 
with reference to the provisions of the General Financial Rules, 2017 stipulate 
that the Autonomous Bodies/Government Societies receiving Grant - in-Aid are 
required to lay their Ann ual Reports and Audited Accounts before the 
Parliament within 9 months after the close of accounting year in accordance 
with the time frame as prescribed by COPLOT Committee of Rajya Sabha in its 
first report in 1976. 
 
Private/Voluntary 
Organisation/Autonomous Bodies 
receiving Grant in Aid 
(Recurring &Non-Recurring) 
 
Remarks 
▪ Recurring Rs.10 lakh to less than 50 
lakhs; & 
▪ Non-recurring – Rs.10 lakh to less than 
Rs.5 crore. 
 
Statement showing the quantum of funds 
provided to each organization and the purpose 
for which utilized; to be included in the Annual 
Report of the Administrative 
Ministry/Department, for the information of the 
Parliament. 
▪ Recurring Rs.50 lakh and above &;  
▪ Non-recurring – Rs.5 crore and above. 
To be laid on the table of both the House of  
Parliament within 9 months of the close of the 
succeeding financial year of the Grantee 
Organisation. 
 
POSITION IN RESPECT OF THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH 
COURTS 
 
Supreme Court of India 
 
86. The Supreme Court of India publishes and displays its Annual Repo rt on 
its website.   Part 2 of its Annual Report contains the details of all the High 
Courts relating “Brief Introduction, Initiatives for the Judicial Year, 
Administrative Achievements, Technological Accomplishments, high -
resolution photographs of High Co urt buildings and statistical details (staff 
Strength, Budget of the High Court, High Court Statistics and Subordinate 
Court Statistics).”  On the request made by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, 
the High Court prepare its Annual Report, which is then f orwarded to the 

37 
 
Hon’ble Apex Court.  The Hon’ble Supreme Court, thereafter, publishes a 
consolidated Annual Report for the India Judiciary incorporating all the Reports 
received from the different High Court. 
 
87. The publication of the Annual Report of th e Supreme Court of India was 
started in the year 2003-04 and up to 2008-09.   From the year 2009 to 2013, no 
annual report was published.   The Annual Report 2014 was released in April, 
2015 during the Chief Justice Conference -2015 as per the direction of the then 
Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, vide Order dated 17.11.2014 for resumption of 
publication of “Annual Report 2014” containing profiles of the Hon’ble Judges, 
an overview of the Supreme Court of India and its activities, information on 
other activities such as role in training and education, legal services, ADR and 
mediation, landmark Judgments and official publications etc.  Since then, 
Annual Report is being published regularly. 
 
88. A comprehensive Annual Report in the year 2015 -16 of the “Indian 
Judiciary” as against the earlier practice of only compiling activities of the 
Supreme Court of India was published and released on 26.11.2016.  This 
included separate Chapters on each High Court with details of Judges, 
sanctioned and vacant posts, Institu tions, Disposal, and Pendency figures, etc.  
Similar details about Subordinate Courts were also included.  The Annual 
Report is being published on this pattern since then. 
 
High Courts 
 
89. There are 25 High Courts, with some High Courts having territorial  
jurisdiction over more than one State/UT.  About 50% of the High Courts 
prepare & publish Annual Reports and upload them on their websites.  
However, in the case of some High Courts, the Annual Activities are normally 
published in the form of an Annual Ne wsletter (in the case of the High Court of 
Manipur); in the form of Quarterly Court Magazine (in the case of Uttarakhand 
High Court); several yearly statements relating to (i) average time taken in 
disposal of case in High Court, (ii) yearly age -wise pendency position in High 
Court & Subordinate Court, (iii) Case Clearance Rate (CCR) in High Court & 
Subordinate Court, (iv) Staff strength, working strength, vacancy of Judicial 
Officers as well as infrastructure status (in the case of Patna High Court). 
90. The Annual Reports by the respective High Courts are being prepared 
and published based on the administrative directions in the case of High Courts 

38 
 
of Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madras, and Rajasthan which have emanated 
upon receipt of the reference dated 1 6.10.2015 from Shri D.V. Sadananda 
Gowda, the then Minister of Law & Justice, Govt. of India, wherein it was 
stated to be mentioned that an Annual Report of each High Court can play an 
essential role in highlighting the work of Judiciary as a public institution. 
 
91. It may be pertinent to mention that the Annual Report of all High Courts 
which highlights the work of the Judiciary as a public institution is already 
reflected in the Annual Report of the Supreme Court and uploaded on its 
website, in public domain, for information of all concerned.  
 
92. The Government of India's instructions on the preparation of Annual 
Reports and making them available to Members of Parliament is generally 
applicable to the executive. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and Hi gh 
Courts are Constitutional Entities. 
 
93. Some of the High Courts are preparing and publish the Annual Reports 
based on administrative decisions issued by the respective High Courts. 
Currently, no specific rules are prescribing  the manner of preparation and 
publication of Annual Reports by the High Courts. 
 
94. The preparation and publication of Annual Reports play an essential role 
in highlighting the work of the Judiciary as a public institution as it records the 
court's performance  in the Administrative as well as Judicial side through a 
document accessible to the public. While some High Courts have uploaded 
Annual Reports on their respective websites, the details on all the High Courts 
are already being depicted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in  its Annual 
Report. 
 
Views of the Government 
 
95. The Government of India believes that all the High Courts may be 
requested to bring out their Annual Reports and forward them to the Supreme 
Court of India. The same may be placed in the public domain by uploading it on 
their website also, if not being done presently, for easy accessibility to the 
people and broader dissemination of their activities and achievements.   
 
 

39 
 
ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
96. While deliberating on this issue Shri P. Wilson, a member of the 
Committee referring to the Orissa High Court made the following submissions: 
 
"The Orissa High Court set a new precedent in judicial 
accountability by publishing an annual report on its performance 
post-COVID. This is a notable p ublic introspection exercise by the 
judiciary to ensure accountability of the court. The report provides a 
district-wise breakup of cases and the availability of judges. It 
contains a section explaining the reasons for delays and backlog at 
the level of th e district judiciary. The tendency of higher courts to 
“stay” proceedings, the uneven distribution of cases amongst judges 
in trial courts, and the non -availability of witnesses due to transfers 
are among the major reasons cited by it for delays. The repor t also 
sheds light on the administrative functioning of the court. In addition 
to listing the judges on each administrative committee, the report 
acknowledges the work done by them). For instance, the committee 
that deals with the appeals by the employees of the district judiciary 
against orders passed by disciplinary authorities had 40 appeals, out 
of which it disposed of only 13 appeals. This is useful information if 
one wishes to assess the administrative workload of judges and the 
efficiency with which they discharge their tasks. Most High Courts do 
not share this information with ordinary citizens even if requests are 
made for the same under the RTI Act." 
Underlining the need for every High Court to prepare and publish its Annual 
Report Shri Wilson made the following observations: 
 
"Although, one may argue that the Supreme Court publishes an 
Annual Report regarding the performance of each and every High 
Court and District Court, publishing Annual Reports by each High 
Court can ensure a detailed and more comprehensive report on the 
performance of such Courts. The Annual Reports are a good 
indicator for analyzing the efficiency and efficacy of the Indian 
Judicial System. It could become a golden document in setting 
judicial standards and for assessing judge s for elevation to the 
Supreme Court. This would not only maintain the quality of Judges 

40 
 
appointed but would also highlight the infirmities of the High Court 
as an institution." 
97. The Committee notes that the preparation and publication of the 
Annual Report is like an appraisal of what that institution has done over 
the past year. There is no harm if each Court also, at the beginning of every 
year, takes stock of work that it had transacted last year. After all, Courts 
are also public institutions, and th e preparation and publication of the 
Annual Report will highlight the work of the Judiciary and make it 
accessible to the public. The Supreme Court is already publishing its 
Annual Report also depicting the work done by all High Courts of the 
Country.  
 
98. For High Courts, only some of them are publishing their Annual 
Report on their own volition, the others need to do the same. Accordingly, 
the Committee recommends the Department of Justice to approach the 
Supreme Court of India requesting them to issue necessary directions to all 
the High Courts to prepare and publish their Annual Reports regularly, on 
their respective websites. In this regard, the Supreme Court may suggest 
the items to be included in the Annual Report, so that there is uniformity in 
the Report to be prepared by different High Courts.  
 
*** 
  

41 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
SOCIAL DIVERSITY IN APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES IN THE 
SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
 
1. As per the data provided by the Government on the social status of 
the Judges of the High Courts and otherwise also, it can be seen that our 
higher judiciary suffers from a 'diversity deficit'. The representation of 
SCs, STs, OBCs, Women, and Minorities in the higher judiciary is far 
below the desired levels and does not reflec t the social diversity of the 
country. In recent years there has been a declining trend in representation 
from all the marginalized sections of Indian society. (Para 12) 
2. Though there is no provision for reservation in the judicial 
appointments at High C ourts and Supreme Court level, the Committee 
feels that adequate representation of various sections of Indian society will 
further strengthen the trust, credibility, and acceptability of the Judiciary 
among the citizens. (Para 13) 
3. The Hon’ble Supreme Co urt of India itself, in its judgment dated 
06.10.1993 in the Supreme Court Advocates -on-Record Assn. v. Union of 
India (Second Judges Case) has inter-alia recorded the following: 
 “…Along with other factors, such as, proper representation of all 
sections o f the people from all parts of the country, legitimate 
expectation of the suitable and equally meritorious Judges to be 
considered in their turn is a relevant factor for due consideration while 
making the choice of the most suitable and meritorious amongst  them, 
the outweighing consideration being merit, to select the best available 
for the apex court.” (Para 14) 
4. Further, the Government has informed that the need for ensuring 
adequate representation has also been acknowledged by the Supreme 
Court Collegi um, which while sending their comments on the draft MoP 
vide CJI’s letter dated March 2017 agreed to the following provision: 
“Merit and integrity shall be the prime criteria for appointment of a 
judge in the High Court.  As far as possible, representation  shall be 
given to women and marginalized sections of society.  However, in case 

42 
 
of judicial officers, due weightage shall also be given to their inter -se 
seniority.” (Para 15) 
5. Thus the Committee is of the view that while making 
recommendations for appo intments to the Higher Judiciary, both the 
Supreme Court and the High Court's Collegiums should recommend an 
adequate number of women and candidates from the marginalized sections 
of the society including minorities. This provision should be clearly 
mentioned in the Memoranda of Procedure (MoP), which is presently 
under finalization. (Para 16) 
6. Further, as of now, data related to the social status of High Court 
judges are available from 2018 onwards, the Committee recommends the 
Department of Justice find  ways and means to collect such data in respect 
of all judges presently serving in the Supreme Court and High Courts. For 
doing this, if required, necessary amendments may be brought in the 
respective Acts/service rules of the judges. (Para 17) 
 
FEASIBILITY OF REGIONAL BENCHES OF SUPREME COURT 
7. The Committee feels that the demand for having regional benches of 
the Supreme Court of India is about 'access to justice,' which is a 
fundamental right under the Constitution. There has been a long -standing 
demand for having regional benches of the Highest Court in the country 
for taking justice to the doorstep of the common citizen. The regional 
benches may also be seen as a solution to the overflowing caseload of the 
judiciary and to reduce the litigation cost to the common man. (Para 29) 
  
8. The Delhi -centric Supreme Court causes a big hurdle for those 
litigants who are coming from far-flung areas of the country. First, there is 
a language problem for them, and then finding lawyers, the cost of 
litigation, travel, and staying in Delhi makes justice very costly. (Para 30) 
 
9. This Committee has also been recommending for a long time on 
establishment of regional benches of the Supreme Court in the Country. 
The Committee still holds the view that the Supreme Court o f India may 
invoke Article 130 of the Constitution for establishing its regional benches 
at four or five locations in the Country. The interpretation of Constitution 

43 
 
and Constitutional matters may be dealt at Delhi and the regional benches 
may decide appel late matters. However, the appellate benches may not be 
made as another layer of the judiciary by treating their decisions as final. 
(Para 31) 
 
EXPLORING THE POSSIBILITIES OF INCREASING THE 
RETIREMENT AGE OF HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT 
JUDGES 
 
10. In view of the above observations the Committee feels that the age of 
retirement of judges needs to be increased in sync with the increase in the 
longevity and advancement in medical sciences leading to improved health 
of the population. The Committee accordingly , recommends that relevant 
Articles of the Constitution of India need to be amended and the age of 
retirement of Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts may be 
increased appropriately. (Para 46) 
11. However, while increasing the age of retirement for j udges, the 
performance of Judges may be reassessed based on their health conditions , 
quality of judgements,  number of judgments delivered  etc. For this, a 
system of appraisal may be devised and put in place, by the Supreme Court 
collegium, before any judge  is recommended for enhancement of their 
tenure. (Para 47) 
12. Many stakeholders had also raised objections to the post -retirement 
assignments given to judges, and the Committee is accordingly, of the view 
that with the increase in the age of retirement of  judges, the practice of 
post-retirement assignments to judges of Supreme Court and High Courts 
in bodies/institutions financed from public exchequer may be reassessed to 
ensure their impartiality. (Para 48) 
 
VACATIONS IN THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
 
13. During the deliberations on this issue, most of the members were of 
the opinion that the need of the hour is an efficient judiciary that is not 
only committed to meeting the needs and interests of the citizens but also 
communicates this commitment by modifying its practices to suit the needs 

44 
 
of the country. The judiciary, therefore, needs to be sensitized from 
shutting down courts en masse for a couple of months a year. (Para 60) 
 
14. The demand for doing away with vacations in the Courts emanates 
primarily due to two factors, one is the huge pendency of cases in our 
courts, and the other is the inconvenience faced by the litigants during the 
vacations of the courts. A common man holds a perception that despite 
having such huge pendency of cases their j udges go on long vacations. 
Further during the vacations, the litigants have to suffer a lot despite 
having a handful of vacation courts/benches. (Para 65) 
15. Though in this connection it may be noted that for the past few years, 
the pendency in the Supre me Court has remained static and in the year 
2022 the disposal of cases was more than the number of cases instituted in 
that year. Thus it can be seen that as far as the disposal of cases is 
concerned, the performance of our Supreme Court is quite good. Th e 
problem lies with the legacy arrears of about 35000. (Para 66) 
16. With regard to High Courts, the pendency is humungous. More than 
60 lakh cases are pending as on date, which is a reason for deep concern. 
Though it is also a grim fact that almost all th e High Courts have a very 
high level of vacancies. As on 31.12.2022 overall vacancies in the High 
Courts stood at 30% of the sanctioned strength and in many of them had 
vacancies ranging from 40 - 50%. Thus vacations are not the only cause of 
high pendency in the higher judiciary. (Para 67) 
 
17. From the foregoing discussion it can be seen that vacations in the 
Judiciary are not the only factor for pendency. For reducing pendency 
there is a need to have a multipronged strategy. However, at the same time, 
it is an undeniable fact that vacations in the judiciary are a 'colonial legacy' 
and with entire court going on vacation en mass causes deep inconvenience 
to the litigants. (Para 69) 
18. In this scenario, the Committee is of the view that the suggestion of 
the former Chief Justice of India Shri RM Lodha on court vacations, that 
instead of all the judges going on vacation, all at one time, individual judges 
should take their leave at different times through the year so that the courts 
are constantly open and t here are always benches present to hear cases, 
should be considered by the Judiciary. (Para 70) 

45 
 
MANDATORY DECLARATION OF ASSETS BY THE JUDGES OF 
THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
19. As a general practice, all constitutional functionaries and 
government servants must file annual returns of their assets and liabilities. 
The Supreme Court has gone to the extent of holding that the public has a 
right to know the assets of those standing for elections as MPs or MLAs. 
When so, it belies logic that Judges don't n eed to disclose their assets and 
liabilities. Anybody holding public office and drawing a salary from the 
exchequer should mandatorily furnish annual returns of their property. 
(Para 78) 
20. Declaration of assets by the Judges of the Higher Judiciary will only 
bring more trust and credibility into the system. As the last resolution of 
the Supreme Court on the declaration of assets by Judges on a voluntary 
basis is not complied with, the Committee recommends the Government to 
bring about appropriate legislation to make it mandatory for Judges of the 
higher judiciary (Supreme Court and High Courts) to furnish their 
property returns on an annual basis to the appropriate authority. (Para 81) 
 
PREPARATION AND PUBLICATION OF ANNUAL REPORTS BY THE 
SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
21. The Committee notes that the preparation and publication of the 
Annual Report is like an appraisal of what that institution has done over 
the past year. There is no harm if each Court also, at the beginning of every 
year, takes stock of wo rk that it had transacted last year. After all, Courts 
are also public institutions, and the preparation and publication of the 
Annual Report will highlight the work of the Judiciary and make it 
accessible to the public. The Supreme Court is already publis hing its 
Annual Report also depicting the work done by all High Courts of the 
Country. (Para 97) 
 
22. For High Courts, only some of them are publishing their Annual 
Report on their own volition, the others need to do the same. Accordingly, 
the Committee re commends the Department of Justice to approach the 
Supreme Court of India requesting them to issue necessary directions to all 
the High Courts to prepare and publish their Annual Reports regularly, on 
their respective websites. In this regard, the Supreme Court may suggest 

46 
 
the items to be included in the Annual Report, so that there is uniformity in 
the Report to be prepared by different High Courts. (Para 98) 
 
--- 
  

47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
 DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grieva nces, Law and Justice met at 03:30 PM on 22.12.2022 in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani     
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
 Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(viii) Smt. Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xii) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xiii) Shri A. Raja 
(xiv) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xv) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xvi) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 

49 
 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
(i) Shri  S. K. G. Rahate, Secretary  
(ii) Shri  Rajinder Kashyap, Additional Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members of the Committee 
and apprised them about the age nda of the meeting. He then informed the 
Committee that a new subject - 'Judicial Process and their Reforms' has been 
chosen for detailed examination. Under this subject various issues that have 
been suggested by Members of the Committee and are plaguing t he Judicial 
System of the country will be deliberated upon. He stated that the Committee 
would be taking one issue at a time under this subject, and then deliberate on it 
in detail before proceeding to other issues in a phased manner. Thereafter, he 
informed the Committee that it would be deliberating on three issues under this 
subject namely, (i) Social Diversity in the appointment of Judges in the High 
Court and Supreme Court; (ii) Feasibility of Regional benches of Supreme 
Court; and (iii)  Exploring the possibilities of increasing the retirement age of 
High Court and Supreme Court Judges. For this, he informed that the Secretary, 
Department of Justice has been called to hear the views of the Government on 
these issues. 
 
 (on arrival of witnesses) 
 
 3. On arrival of the Secretary, Department of Justice and his team, the 
Chairman first welcomed them and asked them to apprise the Committee about 
the views of Government of India on the issues selected for the discussion. 
Before offering their views, he asked them to give a background and latest 
developments on each of these issues.  
 
4. On the first issue i.e. Social Diversity in the appointment of Judges in the 
High Court and Supreme Court, the Secretary informed the Committee about 
the Constitutional positio n in this regard and gave category -wise (Gen, OBC, 
SC, ST, Minorities and Women) number of appointees to the High Courts 
which has been maintained by the Department since the year 2018. He informed 
the Committee that the Government has to go by the recomme ndations of the 
Collegium in appointment of Judges to the Higher Judiciary, though they have 

50 
 
been time and again requesting the Collegium for giving wider representations 
to all the social categories of the population.  
 
5. On Feasibility of Regional bench es of Supreme Court, the Secretary 
informed in detail the Constitutional position in this regard. He further informed 
the Committee that there has been a long pending demand for the establishment 
of regional benches of the Supreme Court. There have been re commendations 
of the Law Commission and also of the Department -related Standing 
Committee for creation of regional benches, however, the Supreme Court has 
not agreed to this demand.  
 
6. Lastly on exploring the possibilities of increasing the retirement ag e of 
High Court and Supreme Court Judges, the Secretary after giving the existing 
constitutional position in this regard informed the Committee about the last 
attempt for increasing the retirement age of High Court Judges from 62 to 65 in 
the form of const itutional 114 th amendment Bill, 2010, which lapsed on 
dissolution of the 15 th Lok Sabha. He apprised the Committee that the 
government of India is not very keen to enhance the retirement age of High 
Court Judges as they think that it will reduce the attrac tion of the Judges to get 
elevated to the Supreme Court, further certain non -deserving judges may get 
promoted, as they apprehend that there may be demands from other government 
employees for enhancement in their age of superannuation.  
 
 7. On conclusion of the presentation, the Chairman and Members of the 
Committee asked certain queries and clarifications from the Government on 
these three issues. The Secretary responded to some of the queries and informed 
the Committee that the rest of the queries will be replied in writing.  
 
(witnesses then withdrew) 
 
8. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9. The meeting adjourned at 05.52 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
22nd December, 2022                                                                      DIRECTOR 
 

51 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XII 
TWELTH MEETING  
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 02:00 PM on 02.03.2023 in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani     
(iv) Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vii) Shri P. Wilson 
 Lok Sabha 
(viii) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(ix) Shri Malook Nagar 
(x) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xi) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
(i) Shri  S. K. G. Rahate, Secretary  
(ii) Shri  Rajinder Kashyap, Additional Secretary  
 

52 
 
2. The Chairman first welcomed all the Members of the Committee and then 
informed them that this is the second meeting on the subject - 'Judicial Process 
and their Reforms'; wherein last time 3 issues were discussed on 22.12.2022. He 
then apprised the Members that this time three other important issues on the 
subject has been chosen for discussion viz. (i) Vacations in the Supreme Court 
and High Courts; (ii) Mandatory declaration of assets by the Judges of the 
Supreme Court and High Courts; and (iii) Preparation and publication of 
Annual Reports by High Courts has been selected for deliberations. For this, he 
informed that the Secretary, Department of Justice has been called to hear the 
views of the Government on these issues. 
 
 (on arrival of witnesses) 
 
 3. On arrival of the Secretary, Department of Justice and his team, the 
Chairman first welcomed them and asked them to apprise the Committee about 
the views of Government of India on the issue s selected for the discussion. 
Before offering their views, he asked them to give a background and latest 
developments on each of these issues.  
 
4. On the first issue i.e. Vacations in the Supreme Court and High Courts,  
the Secretary informed the Committ ee about the Constitutional position in this 
regard and stated that the Supreme Court and High Courts have framed their 
respective rules to regulate the Holidays, Vacations and sittings of their Courts. 
The Department has worked out average number of sitti ngs of the Courts which 
is 214 days for the Supreme Court and 210 days for the High Courts. The 
Government was of the view that there is a need for revision of Supreme Court 
Rules, which was last revised in the year 2013 and to have a relook into the 
number of days of Holidays and Vacations in the Supreme Court.  
 
5. On the issue of mandatory declaration of assets by the Judges of the 
Supreme Court and High Courts, the Secretary informed the Committee that in 
1997, the full court of the Supreme Court adopted a resolution which they called 
'Restatement of values of Judicial Life'. It mandated all Judges to mandatorily 
file declaration of their assets and liabilities at the time of appointment and 
subsequently every year. However, later on through another reso lution of the 
Court it was made voluntary. The Secretary apprised that for pay and other 
allowances for Judges the post of Secretary to Government of India is taken as 

53 
 
reference, thus there is a need to synchronize the other service conditions like 
declaration of assets and liabilities with them.  
 
6. Lastly on the issue of preparation and publication of Annual Reports by 
High Courts the Secretary informed that Annual Reports are brought out by the 
Supreme Court since the year 2003 -04, but they are not regu lar. The Supreme 
Court Annual Report consists of two parts, wherein the second part contains the 
report on each of the High Courts. For the High Courts, he informed that the 
practice of bringing out Annual Reports is not uniform. Some High Courts are 
regularly bringing out, where as some are not.  
 
 7. On conclusion of the presentation, the Chairman and Members of the 
Committee asked certain queries and clarifications from the Government on 
these three issues. The Secretary responded to some of the queries and informed 
the Committee that the rest of the queries will be replied in writing.  
 
(witnesses then withdrew) 
 
8. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9. The meeting adjourned at 04.07 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
2nd March, 2023                                                                      DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING  
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 PM on Monday, 31.07.2023, in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe Extension, 
New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(viii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
(xii) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xiii) Shri A. Raja 
(xiv) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xv) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xvi) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
(xvii) Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
(xviii) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
 

55 
 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
 
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the meeting of 
the Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. 
Consideration and adoption of the draft 131 st Report on the subject "Review of 
functioning of Recruitment Organizations of Government of India "; draft 132 nd 
Report on the subject "Specific Aspects of Election Process and their Reforms"; 
and draft 133rd Report on the subject " Judicial Processes and their Reforms". 
3.        The Committee discussed the draft Reports in  detail. Some members 
suggested minor modifications in the draft Reports which were agreed to. The 
Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Reports unanimously and authorized its 
Chairman to carry out the corrections as suggested by Members and other patent 
errors in the Reports. 
4.      Thereafter, the Committee decided to present these Reports to Both the 
Houses of the Parliament. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to 
finalise the exact dates of presentation of the Reports in both the Houses and t o 
nominate the Members for presenting the Reports. 
5.      The meeting adjourned at 4.00 PM. 
  
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
31st July, 2023                                                                                   DIRECTOR   
 
 
*** 
 