   DEPARTMENT-RELATEDPERSONNEL, PUBLIC
RajyaDecember,
ONE HUNDRED ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED ON "DEMANDS FOR GRANTS THE DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING(MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on
    PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEPUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
    Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)    
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT ON ON ONE HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE"DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)" PERTAINING TO  DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING (MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2025) Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2025) 
COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE REPORT NO. 159 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  (MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs 
 

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              i 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   ii 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                         iii-v 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                 1-40 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                      2-3                  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN          
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                 4-26 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                27-39                    
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
            (IV)  CHAPTER IV                                                                                                             40 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF       
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN          
RECEIVED 
            
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE   41-43 
  
6. ANNEXURES                                44-69 
 
 
 
  
 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Re-constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal         Chairman 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri N.R. Elango 
3. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
4. Shri Naveen Jain 
5. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri Kapil Sibal 
 
    LOK SABHA 
11. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Arup Chakraborty 
14. Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandanagouda 
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
16. Shri Varun Chaudhry 
17. Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
18. Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
19. Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
20. Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
21. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
22. Shri Radhakrishna 
23. Shri A. Raja 
24. Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao 
25. Shri Saleng A. Sangma 
26. Shri Pushpendra Saroj 
27. Shrimati Manju Sharma 
28. Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P. Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary  
Ms. Purva Khanna, Under Secretary 
___________ 
 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Fifty Ninth Report (159th) on Action Taken on 
One Hundred and Forty Fifth (145th) Report of the Committee on "Demands for Grants (2025-26)" 
pertaining to the Department Of Personnel & Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & 
Pensions.  
2. The One Hundred and Forty Fifth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya 
Sabha on 27th March, 2025 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 27th March, 2025. 
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions, furnished their Action Taken 
Replies on the One Hundred and Forty Fifth Report of the Committee on 03rd June, 2025.  
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Fifty Ninth Report and adopted the same 
in its meeting held on 2nd December, 2025. 
 
 
 
New Delhi           BRIJ LAL 
2nd December, 2025                    Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice 
  
  
  
  
        
                        
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ACC   Appointments Committee of the Cabinet   
ACTI   Augmentation of Capacity of Training Institutes 
ASIs Assistant Sub-Inspectors 
BE   Budget Estimates 
CAT   Central Administrative Tribunal  
CBC   Capacity Building Commission 
CBI   Central Bureau of Investigation   
CCS    Central Civil Services 
CET Common Eligibility Test 
CIC    Central Information Commission   
CPGRAMS   Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CPSE   Central Public Sector Enterprise 
CSCS                          Central Secretariat Clerical Service 
CSE   Civil Services Examination   
CSOI    Civil Services Officers' Institute   
CSS   Central Staffing Scheme  
CSS   Central Secretariat Services  
CSSS    Central Secretariat Stenographers Service  
CVC    Central Vigilance Commission   
DARPG  Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
DFFT    Domestic Funding for Foreign Training 
DoE   Department of Expenditure 
DoFS   Department of Financial Services 
DoPPW  Department of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare 
DoPT   Department of Personnel and Training 
DPC Departmental Promotion Committee 
DR Direct Recruitment 
EO    Establishment Officer   

iv 
 
EPF    Employees' Provident Fund 
EPFO   Employees' Provident Fund Organization   
ESIC   Employees' State Insurance Corporation 
GoI   Government of India 
IAS   Indian Administrative Service 
IBPS Institute of Banking and Personnel Selection 
IFS                              Indian Forest Service 
iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training 
IIPA   Indian Institute of Public Administration  
IPS                              Indian Police Service 
ISTM    Institute of Secretariat Training & Management   
JCM    Joint Consultative Machinery   
KS   Karmayogi Sarthis 
LBSNAA   Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration 
MCTP Mid-Career Training Programme 
MH Major Head 
MoF Minister of Finance 
MoS Minister of State 
NCGG    National Centre for Good Governance   
NDMC   New Delhi Municipal Committee 
NeGP    National e-Governance Plan   
NPCSCB    National Programme for Civil Services Capacity Building 
NRA National Recruitment Agency 
O&M   Organisation and Method 
OBCs   Other Backward Classes 
PESB    Public Enterprises Selection Board 
RE   Revised Estimates 
RRB Railway Recruitment Board 
RRCPS  Representation of Reserved Categories In Posts and Services in GOI 
RRFAMS Recruitment rules formulation, Amendment Monitoring System 
RRs Recruitment Rules 

v 
 
RTI    Right to Information 
S&V    Services & Vigilance   
SCS  State Civil Services 
SCs   Scheduled Castes 
SIs   Sub-Inspectors 
SSC    Staff Selection Commission   
STs   Scheduled Tribes 
TFA   Training for All 
UNCAC                      United Nations Convention Against Corruption 
UPSC    Union Public Service Commission  
UTs   Union Territories 

1 
 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Department 
of Personnel and Training (Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions) on the 
recommendations / observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred and Forty Fifth (145th) Report on 
"Demands for Grants (2025-26)", which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th March, 2025 and 
laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 27th March, 2025. 
2. The Committee had made 31 recommendations/observations in its 145th Report. Replies of 
the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized under four chapters on the basis of 
satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paras:- 2.14, 2.59, 2.63 and 6.15 (Total- 04) 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies given by the Ministry: Paras:- 2.8, 2.17, 2.22,  2.44, 2.49, 
3.3, 3.4, 3.7, 3.16, 4.19, 4.23, 5.7, 6.3, 6.9, 6.12, 6.25, 6.27 and 6.36 (Total- 18) 
Chapter – III:   Recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted 
the replies of the Ministry: Paras:-  3.15, 4.10, 4.14, 5.8, 6.6, 6.20, 6.30, and 6.33 
(Total- 8) 
Chapter-IV: Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the ministry 
have not been received: Paras:- 4.6 (Total- 1) 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in 
Chapter – III of this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the succeeding 
pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e., of 145th Report) have been 
mentioned at the end of each Recommendation/Observation.   
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1 The Ministry received an increased Revised Estimate (RE) for 2024-25 (₹2,576.15 crore) 
compared to Budget Estimates (BE) (₹2,328.56 crore), a 10.63% rise. However, as of January 31, 
2025, only ₹2,020.45 crore has been utilized, indicating underutilization of funds. DoPT has utilized 
only 80.22% of its RE. The Committee urge the Ministry to make realistic projection based on past 
expenditure trends.                      (Para 2.14) 
Action Taken 
1.2 Pace of expenditure during the initial part of the FY 2024-25 was on the slower side. 
However, against the RE 2024-25 allocations of Rs. 2576.15 crore, the actual expenditure incurred 
in FY 2024-25 was Rs. 2509.65 crore (97.42%).  
1.3 The suggestions by the Committee have been duly noted and measures to achieve higher 
pace and quality of expenditure are being implemented by various organizations of the Department 
to ensure an even pace of expenditure. The pace and quality of expenditure of all Departmental 
organizations is being closely monitored at senior levels in the Organizations as well as in the 
Department, regularly. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4 The budget allocation for the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) has increased 
marginally from ₹51.31 crore in BE 2024-25 and RE 2024-25 to ₹52.07 crore in BE 2025-26. While 
this marginal increase of ₹ 0.76 crore may acknowledge the Commission’s financial needs, it 
remains modest given inflation, operational expansion, and the increasing complexity of vigilance 
activities. The Committee observes that CVC’s expenditure trend indicate effective financial 
management and is in line with planned allocations. The Committee expects CVC to maintain 
efficiency in resource utilization while ensuring adequate funding for its critical vigilance functions.  
(Para 2.59) 
Action Taken 
1.5 Recommendation has been noted for compliance. 
 

3 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6 The Committee notes that audit observations from previous years have been progressively 
addressed, reducing pending issues to 10 in 2023-24. While progress has been consistent, the 
complete settlement of outstanding paras requires timely action. The Committee emphasizes the 
need for timely resolution of pending audit paras to maintain financial transparency and 
compliance. It recommends that UPSC expedite its responses and ensure quicker settlement of audit 
observations in the future.                   (Para 2.63) 
Action Taken 
1.7 The recommendation of the Committee for quick settlement of Audit Observations is noted 
for compliance. 
1.8 With regard to 10 pending Audit paras in 2023-24, it is submitted that out of 10 paras, 9 
Audit paras pertain to Audit conducted w.e.f 14.10.2024 to 25.10.2024 for which Audit Report 
2023-24 was received on 6.12.2024. Replies are being sent to Director General of Audit, Central 
Expenditure for settlement of the Observations. For the remaining 1 Para, reply has been sent to 
Audit. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.9 The Committee recommends that a Centralized Digital Case Repository (CDCR) should be 
established by the Central Vigilance Commission to store attested copies of all documents submitted 
to Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). Competent Authorities must be given secure access to 
retrieve case records instantly. A mandatory timeline may be in place/implemented for 
administrative authorities to submit their views on prosecution sanctions, with accountability 
measures for delays. Regular audits should be conducted to ensure compliance with record-keeping 
protocols. Further, an interdepartmental coordination mechanism should be introduced to expedite 
document sharing. Training programs must be conducted to ensure vigilance officers and 
administrators adhere to streamlined sanction procedures.               (Para 6.15) 
Action Taken 
1.10 Ministry of Electronics & IT (MeitY) has Centralised Digital Case Repository as 
DigiLocker, for accessing and managing documents by organisations.  Further its Digital Archiving 
and Management Division develops the record keeping applications for organisations. The 
recommendation of the Committee will be taken up with MeitY.   
 
***** 

4 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THECOMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1 The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances, and Pensions informed the Committee that 
it had projected an outlay of ₹3,859.97 crore to the Ministry of Finance during the Pre-Budget 
Meeting under Demand No. 74 for BE 2024-25. However, the Finance Ministry approved only 
₹2,328.56 crore, which is 60.32% of the projected amount. A detailed review of the Ministry's 
expenditure pattern for the same fiscal year reveals that, as of 31.01.2025, it had utilized only 
₹2,020.45 crore against the sanctioned BE of ₹2,328.56 crore. Despite this, the allocations were 
increased to ₹2,576.15 crore in the Revised Estimates (RE). This discrepancy highlights 
shortcomings in budget projection and expenditure planning. The Committee, therefore, urges the 
Ministry to adopt more accurate budget forecasting and expenditure planning to ensure optimal 
utilization of funds.            (Para 2.8) 
Action Taken 
2.2 Against the RE 2024-25 allocations of Rs. 2576.15 crore, the actual expenditure incurred in 
FY 2024-25 was Rs. 2509.65 crore which is 97.42% of RE allocation.   
2.3 A conscious effort is being made to fully utilize the allocated budget in FY 2025-26 and for 
this purpose, expenditure trends are being closely monitored regularly by Heads of various 
Organizations as well as by the Senior Officers of the Department. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4 The Committee notes that during the financial year 2024-25, out of 14 organisations, 
07 organisations, i.e., UPSC, SSC, LBSNAA, CAT, CBI, CVC and SPV Karmayogi Bharat have 
utilized above 77% of the funds allocated to them while PESB, IIPA, CIC and CBC have not 
been able to utilize the allocated funds optimally up to 31st January, 2025. The Committee 
observes that ISTM and Lokpal have poor utilization of funds spending below 50% of the 
allocations and moreover, data shows that NRA has not spent any money out of the BE and RE 
allocation of ₹10 crore. The Committee recommends that the Department may take corrective 
action in this regard.                     (Para 2.17) 
 

5 
 
Action Taken 
Comments of DoPT: 
2.5 PESB - PESB utilized 88% of the allocated fund as on 31/03/2025. The savings were 
mainly due to two vacant posts of Members in PESB and related expenditure thereto. 
2.6 IIPA - IIPA had fully Utilized the Grant-in-aid sanction/ release of Rs. 21 crore by DoPT in 
the Financial Year 2024-25 under Capital, General and Salary heads. 
2.7 CIC –  
1. As on 31.01.2025, Central Information Commission utilized Fund amount Rs. 21.60 crore 
out of Revised Estimated of Rs. 33.66 Crore i.e. 62.82%. An MOU amounting of               
Rs. 2.08 crore for upgradation of Web Application was under process.  
2. The said MOU has been concluded and the amount has been released. Accordingly, as on 
31.03.2025 the actual expenditure was Rs. 28.50 crore out of R.E. of Rs. 31.01 crore, i.e., 
91.90%. 
 
2.8 CBC -  CBC was allocated in BE 2024-25 (Rs. 41.69 crore) over RE 2024-25 (Rs. 41.34 
crore) and made expenditure of Rs. 28.63 crore which is 68.67% of the funds allocated. There was 
shortfall of utilization of budget due to various reasons, for instance, 100 Karmayogi Sarthis were to 
be recruited but this could not be done in 2024-25; National Learning Week was planned to be 
organized in Physical mode, but it was held through webinar/online mode, etc. However, 
commission is doing its best to onboard all 100 KSs in this FY. First phase of recruitment of KSs is 
going to finalize very soon and we are in the process of floating advertisement for 3rd phase. CBC 
has made an expenditure of Rs. 0.91 crore over the salary of KSs in FY 2024-25. 
2.9 ISTM -    
(i) ISTM has been consistently working towards maximizing the utilization of its budgetary 
allocation. Efforts have been made to ensure appropriate use of funds under both Revenue 
and Capital heads for each account category.  
(ii) The Institution has significantly ramped up efforts to fully utilize the fund in the Month of 
February and March 2025. The percentage of expenditure has significantly improved 
to 70.45% by the end of FY 2024-25. 
 

6 
 
(iii)ISTM has also been preparing a comprehensive Annual Procurement Plan to streamline 
expenditure and ensure timely implementation of activities. All concerned sections have 
been sensitized about the importance of advance planning and adherence to timelines. 
Procurement processes would be initiated early in the financial year, and regular monitoring 
mechanisms to be put in place. These steps aim to eliminate procedural delays and improve 
fund utilization efficiency. 
 
2.10 Lokpal – 
(i) Out of the total allocation (RE 2024-25) of Rs 67.65 crore, a sum of 57.41 crore was utilized 
during the 2024-25, resulting in a utilization percentage of 84.86%. 
(ii) Regular monitoring and review of fund utilization is being done. 
(iii)All efforts are being made to ensure efficient and timely utilization of allocated funds in the 
current Financial Year, i.e, 2025-26. 
 
2.11 NRA - In respect of National Recruitment Agency, the allocation of BE 2024-25 and RE 
2024-25 is as detailed below:                                                                      
(Amount in crore) 
S. No. Object Head BE 2024-25 RE 2024-25 
1 05.19.31: Grant in Aid: General 7.0 7.0 
2 05.19.35: Creation of Capital Assets 2.0 2.0 
3 05.19.36: Grant in Aid: Salary 1.0 1.0 
  Grand Total 10.0 10.0 
 
2.12 Against the above allocation, an amount of Rs. 3.75 crore in the Object Head 05.19.31: 
Grant in Aid: General was disbursed to NRA. As regards the proposed expenditure to be booked 
under the head Capital Assets & Salaries, it was observed that NRA had sufficient funds than 
required and hence no further release was made under these heads.    
2.13 The entire released amount has been utilised by NRA and the balance fund of Rs. 6.25 crore 
which was not released, has been reported as saving. 

7 
 
2.14 The suggestions by the Committee have been duly noted and various Organizations of the 
Department are implementing necessary measures to ensure higher pace and more efficient   
expenditure, maintaining uniformity throughout the financial period.  
Comments of Lokpal: 
2.15 (i) Out of the total allocation (RE 2024-25) of Rs 67.65 crore, a sum of 57.41 crore was 
utilized during the 2024-25, resulting in a utilization percentage of  84.86%. 
   (ii) Regular monitoring and review of fund utilization is being done. 
(iii) All efforts are being made to ensure efficient and timely utilization of allocated funds in 
the current Financial Year, i.e., 2025-26. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.16 The Committee notes that for LBSNAA Infrastructure, there is a notable increase in capital 
expenditure, with ₹82.02 crore spent till January 2025, demonstrating effective fund utilization. 
Training for All: Increased allocation in BE 2025-26 (₹26.16 crore) over RE 2024-25 (₹9.57 
crore), but only ₹5.72 crore spent till January 31, 2025, indicating slow fund utilization. Domestic 
Funding of Foreign Training: Drastic reduction from ₹12 crore (BE 2024-25) to ₹0.01 crore (BE 
2025-26), reflecting policy shift. ISTM Infrastructure: The Integrated Building for ISTM received 
₹55.00 crore in BE 2025-26, but expenditure remains extremely low at ₹1.44 crore till January 
2025, which indicates project execution delays. The Committee recommends that the Department 
may identify bottlenecks in low-spending schemes like Augmentation of Training facilities in ISTM 
and Integrated Building for ISTM and other Institute of DoPT. The Committee feels that there is a 
need for providing more funds to capacity building initiatives like Mission Karmayogi and Training 
for All.                     (Para 2.22) 
Action Taken 
2.17 Training for All -  
(i) As regards the fund utilization for the FY 2024-25, it is submitted that out of Rs. 9.57 crore 
(RE), expenditure to the tune of Rs. 9.56 crore was made in the FY 2024-25. 
(ii) In order to align the TFA Scheme with Mission Karmayogi, its components are under review. 
The courses in the SCTP/ TDP components were sponsored during 1st Qtr of FY 2024-25 could 
not be conducted by the State/ UT ATIs on account of a variety of reasons which, inter-alia, 
include general elections to Lok Sabha & State/ UT Assemblies in certain States/ UTs. One of 

8 
 
the important reasons for lesser number of courses is due to modest course fee, which is under 
review.  
(iii) Financial assistance under COMMIT component has been shelved from FY 2024-25 as the 
COMMIT component has been aligned with Mission Karmayogi and all the COMMIT courses 
made available through iGOT platform. 
(iv)  Revised modalities of another component of TFA, namely, Augmentation of Capacity of 
Training Institutes (ACTI) relating to setting up of Digital Learning Labs/ Digital Studios in 
State/ UT ATIs for creation of new e-content or convert existing content into e-learning content 
or upgrade content on identified competencies in line with objectives of Mission Karmayogi, 
National priorities and competency requirement of PRIs/ ULBs and other Government 
organizations in States/ UTs. 
(v) On the basis of proposals from ATIs, the approvals are being accorded on a regular basis. 
Financial assistance under ACTI is on reimbursement basis and as such, the funds release to 
ATIs will occur during the course of FY 2025-26. 
(vi)  The allocation at BE stage for the FY 2025-26 under TFA Scheme is Rs. 26.16 crore. 
(vii) Continuous handholding to State/ UT ATIs is being provided by DoP&T for submission of 
proposals/ claims under various components of TFA Scheme. 
(viii) Handholding is also provided to ATIs for assistance in Digital integration under NSCSTI and 
PM Gatishakti app. 
2.18 With these interventions coupled with sustained outreach program to ATIs, it is expected 
that the BE 2025-26 will be utilized fully during CFY. 
2.19 Domestic Funding of Foreign Training (DFFT) – DFFT is under review to further 
enhance its effectiveness. Further, Budgetary performance is being regularly monitored in the 
Senior Officers' Meeting and any unused amount is duly re-appropriated by the Accounting 
Authority of DoPT. As such, it is submitted that there is no failure in budgetary control in view of 
the aforementioned reasons. 
2.20 Integrated Building for ISTM - ISTM received Rs. 55.50 crore in BE 2024-25 the fund 
was reduced to Rs. 20.00 crore based on the revised requirement received from CPWD.As per the 
CPWD expenditure status, Rs. 12.15 crore fund has been utilised against Rs. 20.00 crore authorised 
in financial year 2024-25. The work was initially impacted due to GRAP restriction and a pending 
decision on transplantation of remaining trees in ongoing court case number 1149/2022 in Delhi 

9 
 
High Court. However, now with revised plan the progress of work has picked up and progressing 
well. For FY 2025-26, Rs. 55 crore has been allocated out of which Rs. 25 crore has already been 
sanctioned for issuance of Letter of Authorization to CPWD. 
2.21 CBC -  CBC has been allocated more funds in BE 2025-26 than last FY to meet the 
expenditures, as mentioned in reply of para 2.17 of the observation above, including others, viz., 
Learning Week, Creation of digital modules/courses for MoHUA; Creation of digital 
modules/courses for Panchayati Raj; Creation of content for Gyan Kosh et cetera and it proposes to 
utilize these funds. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.22 The Committee recognizes the financial constraints faced by IIPA due to the substantial 
increase in training programs, research projects, and academic activities, along with the urgent 
need for infrastructure renovation and expansion. The current allocation seems to be insufficient, 
potentially impacting the quality and efficiency of IIPA’s operations. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that an additional Grant-in-aid be provided, based on a comprehensive assessment of 
funding requirements, to support infrastructure improvements, meet growing academic demands, 
and sustain IIPA’s capacity to train officers effectively.                 (Para 2.44) 
Action Taken 
2.23 DoPT approved the allocation of Rs. 3.00 crore as additional grant in Capital Head for 
creation of capital assets and Rs. 3.00 crore under General Head in the RE 2024-25, over and above 
the approved Grant of Rs. 15.00 crore under BE 2024-25.   
2.24 DoPT has further approved the enhanced allocation of a total of Rs. 30.00 crore to IIPA in 
BE 2025-26 as compared to Rs. 15.00 crore allocation under BE 2024-25. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.25 Under Revenue Head for the scheme ‘improvement of infrastructure and upgradation of 
essential facilities at LBSNAA’, an amount of ₹17 crore was allocated in the Budget Estimates (BE) 
for 2024-25, which was later revised to ₹20.88 crore in the Revised Estimates (RE) for the same 
year. However, as of January 31, 2025, an amount of only ₹13.73 crore has been spent which is 
approximately 65.75% of the RE allocation. This expenditure falls below the standard set by the 
Ministry of Finance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that future budget projections be based 

10 
 
on realistic assessment of requirements and the expenditure should in line with the guidelines issued 
by the Ministry of Finance.                   (Para 2.49) 
 
Action Taken 
2.26 The expenditure during the financial year 2024-25 was undertaken based on the initial 
Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 17 crore. The Revised Estimates (RE) of Rs. 20.88 crore were 
communicated only in mid-December 2024, by which time a significant portion of the financial 
year had already elapsed. 
2.27 A large share of revenue expenditure, particularly related to repair and maintenance 
activities, is typically scheduled after the conclusion of the Foundation Course (FC). The 99th FC 
concluded on 29th November 2024, thereby determining the timeline for subsequent maintenance 
works. 
2.28 Additionally, prolonged rainfall season in Mussoorie led to unavoidable delays in executing 
several planned maintenance and repair activities. 
2.29 Furthermore, the severe winter conditions in Mussoorie from December to February 
necessitated considerable heating-related repairs and maintenance during this period, with a portion 
of the associated payments typically spilling over into the months of February and March. 
2.30 In view of the above, the expenditure pattern reflects the operational realities and seasonal 
dependencies inherent to the nature of works undertaken. However, the Academy takes note of the 
Committee's recommendation and will ensure that future budget projections are aligned with 
realistic assessments, and that expenditure is managed in accordance with Ministry of Finance 
guidelines. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.31 The existing shortage of 1316 IAS officers significantly impacts administrative efficiency and 
governance across various levels of the government. Given the urgency of filling these vacant posts, 
swift action is needed to enhance the recruitment process and meet the growing demands of public 
administration. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Chandramouli Committee’s report 
regarding the intake of direct recruit IAS officers may be studied and implemented at the earliest. 
(Para 3.3) 
 

11 
 
Action Taken 
2.32 A Committee had been constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri C. Chandramouli 
(former Secretary, DoPT) for making recommendations on various aspects concerning the IAS 
Cadre Strength including the determination of intake of Direct recruit IAS officers every year 
through Civil Services Examination from CSE 2022 to CSE 2030. The Chandramouli Committee 
has submitted its report to DoPT and its recommendations are under consideration.  
2.33 The recommendation of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee has 
been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.34 To ensure timely determination of vacancies in the IAS promotion quota, the Committee 
recommends that the Department of Personnel & Training may initiate an online tracking and 
submission portal for State Governments. This platform would allow State Governments to submit 
their proposals electronically, track the progress of their submissions, and receive automated 
reminders about deadlines. Additionally, the Department should set up a penalty system for delayed 
submissions, such as withholding consideration for promotion quotas from States that consistently 
fail to meet deadlines. This system would not only streamline the process but also incentivize prompt 
action, ensuring that the determination of vacancies and the subsequent promotion and selection 
processes occur without unnecessary delays.          (Para 3.4) 
 
Action Taken 
2.35 To ensure timely determination of vacancies in promotion quota, a circular in the form of a 
D.O. letter is issued annually at the level of Additional Secretary to the Chief Secretaries of all the 
State Governments requesting submission of proposals for determining vacancies in both the State 
Civil Services (SCS) and Non-State Civil Services (Non-SCS) categories. 
 
2.36 Till now, the existing mechanism has been functioning smoothly with the majority of the 
States submitting their proposals in a timely manner. Consequently, this Department is determining 
the vacancies without any delay. The delays from some States in submitting the proposals are 
generally due to pending litigations and may not due to systemic shortcomings.  
 

12 
 
2.37 Further, there have been no such demands for changes to the existing system from the key 
stakeholders, viz., UPSC and State Governments. 
 
2.38 As regards imposing penalty system, such as withholding consideration for promotion 
quotas, on States not adhering to the timelines, it is stated that any action to withhold promotion 
quotas from defaulting States could adversely affect the interests of individual officers, who are not 
at fault. Such measures could lead to widespread unrest among affected officers and trigger 
litigation by State Service officers who would have otherwise been eligible for the Select List for 
the relevant year. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.39 The Committee recommends that the Department may establish a Central Monitoring and 
Coordination Committee to oversee and ensure timely and effective implementation of the data 
collection and recruitment processes for reserved category vacancies. This committee should 
compose of senior officers from DoPT, key Ministries, and a specialized unit focusing on the 
identification and resolution of backlog vacancies. The Committee feels by following this approach, 
reserved category vacancies may get reduced to a large extent.        (Para 3.7) 
 
Action Taken 
2.40 Overall Responsibility for filling up of vacancies, including reserved vacancies lies with the 
concerned Ministry/Department. DoPT has already issued instructions to all the 
Ministries/Departments to take timely action for filling up of the vacancies. Insofar as backlog 
reserved vacancies are concerned, the Ministries/Departments have been requested to constitute an 
In-House Committee under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Admn.) to identify the backlog 
reserved vacancies, to study the root cause of such vacancies, to initiate measures to remove the 
factors causing such vacancies and to fill them up through special recruitment drives. As per the 
information furnished by various Ministries/Departments, such a committee has been constituted by 
several Ministries/Departments having a large number of employees. 
 
2.41 Further, there is a provision for designating an officer, at least of the rank of Deputy 
Secretary, as Liaison Officer for SCs/STs and OBCs whose duties inter alia include implementation 
of the policies of reservation and that negligence, if any, in this regard is reported by him to the 

13 
 
Secretary, who is required to take necessary action for effective implementation of the reservation 
policies.  
 
2.42 Further, DoPT actively monitors the implementation of the reservation policies in the 
Government of India as a whole. In this regard, DoPT has setup a portal titled ‘Representation of 
Reserved Categories in Posts and Services (RRCPS) on which each Ministry/ Department is 
required to regularly upload the data on representation of SC/ST/OBC/PwD/EWS, existing backlog 
vacancies in the Ministries, nomination of Liaison Officer by the Ministries/Departments and 
details of creation of Reservation Cell under the control of Liaison Officer. This portal presents an 
overall view of the status of implementation of the reservation policies in the Government of India. 
As per the information furnished by various Ministries/Departments on this portal, it is seen that as 
on 01.01.2024, the representation of SC and ST in Central Government employees, is as per the 
prescribed limit of 15% and 7.5% respectively. The representation of OBCs in direct recruitment 
has also consistently been more than 27% during the last 10 years. The percentage of representation 
of OBCs in the direct recruitment made during the years 2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023 was 28.83%, 
28.75%, 28.26% and 30.36% respectively. This shows a complete compliance of the instructions 
relating to reservation in services in the Government of India. Further, as on 1.1.2024, the 
Ministries/Departments have filled more than Four lakh backlog reserved vacancies since 2016 
reducing the backlog vacancies to less than 60,000, which is less than 2% of the strength of 32.50 
lakh employees reported by the Ministries/Departments on the RRCPS portal.  
 
2.43 It is also stated that DoPT holds frequent interactions with the representatives of Ministries/ 
Departments and requests them to ensure due implementation of the reservation rosters and to take 
necessary action to fill up all the reserved backlog vacancies in a time bound manner. During the 
year 2022 and 2023, three special workshops were organized by DoPT in which JS level officers 
(including Liaison Officers) of the Ministries/Departments participated.  
 
2.44 Secretary/Additional Secretary of DoPT addressed the participating officers and asked them 
to ensure complete compliance and implementation of the reservation policies of the Government to 
ensure due representation of the backward classes. During August, September and November 2024, 
JS (Reservation) of DoPT interacted with the concerned officers/ Liaison Officers of around 60 
Ministries/Departments and reviewed the status regarding representation of backward classes in 

14 
 
posts and services under the Central Government. Interaction with more than 30 
Ministries/Departments have also been held during the last 3 months.  
 
2.45 It is also stated that during January 2025, DoPT again conducted a special workshop in 
ISTM on reservation matters for the Liaison officers and other senior level officers which was 
attended to by more than 40 Ministries/Department.  
 
2.46   In addition, Institute of Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM), an attached office of 
DoPT, conducts training courses and workshop on reservation in services and Liaison Officers on 
regular basis for the officers of Ministries/Departments. Online training option has also been 
provided to the officers/Liaison Officers through the iGOT Karmayogi platform. This platform 
contains programmes titled ‘Reservation Policy - Reservation in Service’' and ‘Role of Liaison 
Officer in Reservation’. The programme on reservation policy is of the duration of 2 hrs. 55 min. 
and contains modules on constitutional and legal provisions on reservation, relaxation and 
concessions available to the reserved category persons, creamy layer criteria on OBC, verification 
of caste certificate, etc. The programme on Liaison Officer on this platform is of the duration of 45 
minutes and contains modules on roles and duties of Liaison Officer, creation of Reservation Cell 
under Liaison Officer, etc. Ministries/Departments have been requested to direct the Liaison 
Officers to mandatorily complete the above-mentioned online training programs available on the 
iGOT Karmayogi Platform. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.47 All organs of the Government of India are taken care of mainly by Central Secretariat 
Services (CSS) & Central Secretariat Stenographers’ Services (CSSS). They are the mainstay of 
Central Secretariat working. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that especially in 
CSS & CSSS all gazetted officers are rotated on the basis of sensitive and non sensitive postings and 
at sensitive places officers are replaced after tenure of 3 years. Similarly Ministries have also been 
categorized as economic and non-economic. The Committee notes that there has been a rotational 
policy for all officers but is not being implemented in toto and there are officers who are on 
potentially favorable Ministries/places for over 8-9 years, especially in economic and sensitive 
Ministries and are continuing their stay despite head of organizations been replaced 4-5 times. The 
Committee feels that this trend should be assessed. Longer stays at particular seats/places breeds 
corruption and remedial measures needs to be taken immediately and all transfers should be made 

15 
 
immediately as per policy and no officer should stay beyond the prescribed time limit in any 
Ministry. Secondly, the Committee wishes to point out that the Ministry of Finance has three 
department which have been categorized as economic and non economic, instances have come to 
the notice of the Committee that there are instances where officers have manoeuvred their postings 
in such a way that their whole career has been in the same Ministry and hence such lacuna needs to 
be plugged without any delay.                  (Para 3.16) 
Action Taken 
2.48 The Rotational Transfer Policy (RTP) is being implemented for the Officers of the Central 
Secretariat Service (CSS) and the Central Secretariat Stenographers Service (CSSS) to ensure 
systematic rotation of officers across various Ministries/ Departments. Transfers are carried out 
from time to time as per the RTP guidelines, on completion of the prescribed tenure of an officer in 
a Ministry/ Department. These transfers are a continuous administrative process aimed at effective 
cadre management and enhancing organizational efficiency. 
 
2.49 RTP is being implemented in a phased manner, in order to minimize the impact on the 
functioning of Ministries/ Departments due to the transfer of officers and to maintain institutional 
memory. 
 
2.50 To ensure efficiency and transparency, the implementation of RTP is being done through a 
dedicated module through the e-HRMS 2.0 portal (an online portal to provide end to end HR 
services to the Government employees).  
 
2.51 In the current financial year, process of RTP has already begun by circulating lists of 
Section Officers of CSS and Principal Private Secretaries of CSSS who will be covered in the 
current phase. Officers in other grades would be covered in subsequent phases of RTP.  
 
2.52 Further, in so far as the different Departments under Ministry of Finance are concerned, it is 
to submit that all these Departments have been classified under the same group (Group B) and 
typically officers from this group would be posted in a Ministry/Department falling under the other 
group, that is, 'Group A' on rotation transfer. 
The Department will ensure implementation of the RTP policy as stipulated. 
 

16 
 
2.53 With regards to Central Secretariat Stenographers’ Service (CSSS) Cadre, the inputs are as 
under: -  
 
1. The guidelines for rotational transfer of officers belonging to CSSS Cadre were issued, vide 
OM No.25/28/2014-CS.II(A) dated 22.07.2015, and subsequently modified vide OM 
No.9/01/2020-CS.II(A) (CN 3153489) dated 29.06.2020.   As per these OMs, the CSSS 
Officers are required to be transferred from Group 'A' Ministries/Departments to Group 'B' 
Ministries/Departments (Annexure-I and Annexure-II to OM dated 22.07.2015) and vice 
versa on completion of prescribed tenure. 
2. In line with the guidelines contained in DoP&T's OM dated 22.07.2015 and 29.06.2020, this 
Division is carrying out rotational transfer of CSSS Officers from Group 'A' 
Ministries/Departments to Group 'B' Ministries/Departments and vice versa at the time of 
monthly promotion in the grades of PSO, Sr. PPS and PPS since July, 2024.  Further, nearly 
165 officers were transferred in the above manner at the time of promotions in the grade of 
PS for SLY 2023 and SLY 2024 under Seniority Quota during December, 2024. 
3. In addition to above, the rotational transfers are being carried out in a phased manner to 
ensure minimal disruption to the functioning of Ministries and Departments.  RTP in the 
grade of Sr. Principal Private Secretary of officers who have completed tenure of 10 years 
has already been carried out. Rotational transfers in the grade of Principal Private 
Secretary is under active consideration and is likely to be carried out shortly through e-
HRMS 2.0 portal to ensure complete transparency.  The transfers under RTP in the grades of 
PS and PA will also be undertaken thereafter. 
4. The categorization of Divisions within Ministries/Departments as sensitive / non-sensitive 
and transfers from sensitive to non-sensitive posts are the mandate of concerned 
Ministries/Departments. 
5. The suggestions of the Committee are appreciated and will continue to guide future 
improvements in the posting and transfer mechanisms of CSSS officers. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.54 The Committee appreciates that NRA has conducted a study on recruitment systems across 
Central and State agencies to identify challenges in implementing the Common Eligibility Test 
(CET). However, the findings may emphasize the need for a structured, transparent, and efficient 
examination framework in place at the earliest. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 

17 
 
department should expedite the finalization and implementation of standardized Norms, Standards, 
and Guidelines for CBT to ensure uniformity, fairness, and security in recruitment exams. A phased 
rollout of the Common Eligibility Test (CET) should be piloted across select regions before its 
nationwide implementation to assess the efficiency and address potential challenges. Additionally, 
NRA should also establish a grievance redressal mechanism for handling candidate concerns and for 
ensuring transparency.          (Para 4.19) 
Action Taken 
2.55 NRA is in the process of drafting the Norms/Standards and Guidelines for the conduct of 
CBT mode of examinations. For this purpose, NRA is undertaking discussions with stakeholders 
such as SSC, RRB, IBPS, NTA and private service providers to draft and finalize the Norms/ 
Standards and Guidelines on priority. 
2.56 As regard conduct of first Common Eligibility Test (CET), NRA has conducted a detailed 
study of prevalent recruitment systems in Central and State governments by visiting various State 
PSCs and SSCs to understand the complexity involved in the recruitment process, and has 
examined the legal framework of examination systems in States. NRA has also held discussions 
with various stakeholders such as SSC, RRB, IBPS and private service providers. 
2.57 Further, Unified One Time Registration (UOTR) under National Digital Recruitment 
Platform is being developed by (National Informatics Centre) for job aspirant candidates, Public 
Examination Authorities (PEAs), and other stakeholders of the Public Examination ecosystem. 
2.58 A mechanism to handle the grievances/queries of the candidates may be considered through 
UOTR portal, if feasible. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.59 The Committee reiterates its concern over the significant gender gap in top managerial 
positions within CPSEs, where women constitute only 7% of the eligible pool and merely 7% at the 
Board level. Emphasizing that gender equality is crucial for an inclusive and accountable public 
administration, in line with the Government’s Nari Shakti policy, the Committee once again 
recommends that the Department, being the nodal agency for personnel management, must 
thoroughly examine the factors leading to the underrepresentation of women in leadership roles and 
implement concrete measures to eliminate barriers hindering their advancement.    (Para 4.23)  

18 
 
Action Taken 
2.60 As per the instructions issued by Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), Board of Director 
of PSUs includes Full time Functional Directors, Government Directors and Non-official part-time 
Directors. In case of Functional Director, every post is a single cadre specialized post and as per the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court judgement dated that 17.4.1998 in the case titled ‘Post Graduate Institute 
Of Medical Education And Research Chandigarh Vs. Faculty Association And Ors.’ there cannot be 
reservation in single post cadre. The selection is made keeping in view the performance of the 
candidates interviewed with special regard to her/his qualities of managerial capability, leadership, 
broad vision, track record, the available ACRs and the inputs provided by the Secretary of the 
concerned Administrative Ministry/ Department and CMD/MD/Chairman of the concerned CPSE. 
As regards Government Directors, it is stated that Government officers from concerned 
administrative Ministry or related Government agency are nominated as Government Directors on 
the Boards of CPSEs on ex-officio basis with no fixed tenure. Appointment of officers as 
Government Directors depends upon the charge they are holding in the Ministry/Department.  
 
2.61 In case of appointment of non-official Directors, it is stated that on the recommendations of 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry DPE, vide its OM dated 
18.4.2011, has informed all the Ministries/ Departments that if persons belonging to SCs, STs, 
OBCs and women candidates, who fulfill the prescribed criteria, and come forward, they shall be 
given preference. 
 
2.62 However, it is stated that it is the endeavour of the Government to provide more 
representation to women in appointments at the senior level positions under the Government of 
India. While taking up empanelment of officers to Joint Secretary rank, it is ensured that women get 
adequate representation. A total of 98 women were appointed under Central Staffing Scheme during 
the period 2023-24 including 41 women at Secretary/Addl. Secy. / Joint Secy. levels. During 2023-
24, a total of 35 female officers were also approved for the period for appointment as CMDs/MDs, 
Executive Directors, Functional Directors, Non-official Directors in PSUs/Banks, Financial 
Institutions and at various post in Indian Railways. During the same year, a total of 431 women 
officers were appointed as Member/ Chairperson / CEO, etc. in various Autonomous Bodies, 
Administrative Tribunals, Labour Courts, Regulatory Bodies and to posts of Joint Secretary Level 
and above in various organised central services excluding appointments under the Central Staffing 
Scheme. 49 women were approved for appointment in various Autonomous Bodies, Administrative 
Tribunals, Labour Courts, and Regulatory Bodies etc. during 2023-24. 

19 
 
 
2.63 In addition, steps have also been taken by the Government to enhance representation of 
women in other level of posts under the Government. The Central Government has provided 33 per 
cent reservation for women horizontally and in each category (SC, ST, OBC and others) in direct 
recruitment of non-Gazetted posts from Constable to Sub-Inspector in police forces of all the Union 
Territories. Further, the Government has provided horizontal reservation for women in Central 
Armed Police Forces (CAPFs). The Ministry of Home Affairs has also issued advisories to all the 
State Governments and Union Territories to increase the representation of women to 33 per cent of 
the total strength of the police personnel in the States/ UTs. Further, the Government has made 
enabling provision for increasing the representation of women in Armed forces such as granting 
permanent commission to women including in combat roles such as fighter pilots, allowing entry of 
women in National Defence Academy (NDA), admission of girls in Sainik schools, etc. The 
Government has also taken various women centric initiatives which may encourage participation of 
more women in Government service. These, inter-alia, include availing Child Care Leave (CCL), 
leaving headquarters and proceeding on foreign travel during CCL, Special Allowance @Rs. 3000 
per month to women employees with disability for child care, special dispensation for women 
officers of All India Service of North East cadres, leave up to 90 days to the female Government 
Servants who have been allegedly sexually harassed, exemption of fee from competitive 
examination for women, posting of husband and wife at the same station, etc. The States/ UTs have 
also been advised to increase the number of women bus drivers, conductors and tourist guides. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.64 As per the information provided to the Committee, ISTM has been facing an acute shortage 
of staff –both faculty and non-faculty officers in the past few years due to a variety of reasons. ISTM 
has a total sanctioned strength of 95 out of which 29 posts are vacant. The Committee recommends 
Department to take immediate steps to fill up the vacant posts in ISTM as shortage of staff impacts 
the effective functioning of the institution.               (Para 5.7) 
Action Taken 
2.65 Vacant faculty posts have been advertised on periodical basis or as and when the vacancy 
arises. Presently 04 posts (01- Additional Director, 02 Deputy Director and 01 Assistant Director) 
are vacant. Progress to fill the above posts is as follows: - 
a. The Post of Additional Director has been advertised. 

20 
 
b. Posts for DD (MS) and DD (OM) (incl. anticipated vacancy) had been advertised. 
Subsequently, interviews were conducted on 16th April, 2025 and 7th May, 2025 for the 
said posts respectively. The candidate selected for the post of DD (MS) is likely to join 
soon. Selection process for DD (OM) is likely to be completed soon. 
c. Post for AD (Account) has been advertised from 28th December, 2024- 03 January, 2025. 
The screening of the application is in process at the Training Division.  The interview is 
likely to be conducted shortly. 
 
2.66 (a) Several reminders/ requests have been sent to DoPT for the filling up the vacant post in 
ISTM. 
(b)  Posts of MTS have been intimated to SSC for filling up being the cadre controlling 
authority the post. 
(c)  The institute has projected its requirement of non-Faculty staff in different platforms. 
Besides new measures/ initiatives have also been taken up to cope with the additional 
requirement.  The following initiatives have been taken: - 
 
(aa) Revision of sanctioned strength – initiated in 2008. 
(ab) Proposal to increase sanctioned post - request for additional 24 (CSS/CSSS/CSCS) 
sanctioned  posts in ISTM. 
(ac) 4th Cadre restructuring. Vide ISTM OM A-11013/3/2022-ISTM dated 
09th January 2023, the additional requirement of CSS/CSSS/CSCS was forwarded to 
CS Division. 
(ad) Creation of separate cadre of CSS/CSSS/CSCS for ISTM. 
(ae) Administrative set up - The report of Administrative Set up for additional 35 
(CSS/CSSS/CSCS) staff has been forwarded to DoPT, Training Division for approval 
of Secretary (P) in March 2025.  
2.67 In addition, reminders have been issued to Official Language, MHA from time to time to fill 
up the vacancies of CSOLS. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.68 To reduce reliance on deputation, the Committee recommends that CBI develop an 
independent recruitment framework by allowing direct recruitment for core ranks like Dy. S.Ps 
Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors through SSC, UPSC, or a dedicated CBI exam. It should also 
introduce lateral entry for specialists in cybercrime, forensics, financial fraud, and legal domains. 

21 
 
The CBI should strive to establish a permanent cadre with structured career progression, this in turn 
will help CBI in ensuring long-term stability. An in-house expertise team should be constituted which 
will make it less reliable on outside experts. Deputation may be retained only for select senior 
positions requiring diverse experience, but streamlining recruitment procedure and reforms will help 
CBI in enhancing operational efficiency and investigative capabilities.      (Para 6.3) 
Action Taken 
2.69 The notified Recruitment Rules, especially, of Investigating Officers i.e. from Sub-Inspector 
of Police to Dy. SP are as under:- 
 
Rank Mode of Recruitment 
Dy. Supdt. of Police Filled by 80:10:10 Promotion: Deputation: LDCE through UPSC 
Inspector of Police Filled by 50:50 Deputation: Promotion 
Sub-Inspector Filled by 70:15:15 
Direct Recruitment through SSC: Promotion: LDCE 
 
2.70 In this context, it is submitted that after due consultations with DoPT and UPSC and 
keeping in view the functional requirements of the Organization and to ensure a greater career 
progression for sub-Inspectors/Inspectors in CBI, the earlier system of Direct Recruitment has been 
done away with and Limited Departmental Competitive Examination (LDCE) has been introduced. 
LDCE will ensure that competent and meritorious personnel are encouraged by fast-track 
promotion. 
2.71 Sub-Inspectors who are directly recruited by CBI are technically and professionally 
competent as many of them have qualifications like B. Tech, B.E., LLB, MBA and BCA. Due to 
the fact that they have not been getting requisite opportunities at promotion, the attrition rate in the 
cadre is high. So, it is quite essential to provide them opportunities within the organization itself for 
career growth. 
2.72 Sub-Inspectors and Inspectors are eligible to become Dy. SP through the LDCE route after 
putting in only four years of service. Thus, the more meritorious and efficient among them would 
become Dy. SP with sufficient professional competence to take on Dy. SP's responsibilities. As Dy. 
SP in CBI is given very important investigations of high-profile matters, it is in the best interest of 
the Bureau to have sufficiently experienced officers. 

22 
 
2.73 Hence, direct recruitment in CBI has been kept at the level of SI, the feeder grade for Dy. SP 
and above, who would be able to acquire career progression to hold supervisory ranks. 
2.74 Services of specialists in the field of cybercrime, forensics, financial fraud, and legal 
domains are used as per the need of the case. Further, banking officers are also inducted on 
deputation. 
2.75 Based on the requirement of case, investigating officers are assisted by a team of subject 
experts, law officers, forensic experts and technical experts for effective investigation. Further, CBI 
Academy conducts training courses on different domains/fields wherein CBI investigating Officers, 
Law Officer and Technical Officers are trained from time to time. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.76 The Committee notes that eight states have withdrawn general consent for CBI 
investigations limiting severely its ability to investigate corruption and organized crime. To address 
this problem, the Committee feels a separate/new law granting CBI wider investigative powers 
without state consent for cases affecting national security and integrity may be enacted by taking 
views also from State Governments. The law should also include safeguards to ensure impartiality, 
preventing state governments from feeling powerless. This reform is essential to ensure timely and 
unbiased investigations, prevent delays which will not undermine public trust. The Committee urges 
action on this front which will strengthen the authority of CBI keeping in view the federal balance. 
(Para 6.9) 
Action Taken 
2.77 The CBI is governed by the Delhi Special Police Establishment (DSPE) Act, 1946. The 
primary jurisdiction is in Delhi and other Union Territories. As per the statute, DSPE (CBI) needs 
the consent of the State Govt., in whose territorial jurisdiction, it needs to conduct investigation. 
Section 6 of the DSPE Act stipulates that without the consent of the Govt. of the State, the members 
of the DSPE (CBI) cannot exercise powers and jurisdiction in any area in the said State, which is 
not a Union Territory or Railway area. Section 5 of DSPE Act entitles the ’Central Government’ to 
extend the jurisdiction and powers of CBI to the States for investigation of specified offences, after 
consent of State Government.  
 

23 
 
2.78 Presently, the following States have withdrawn general consent previously granted to 
DSPE(CBI) under section 6 of the DSPE Act:- 
S.No. Name of the State 
1. West Bengal 
2. Kerala 
3. Jharkhand 
4. Punjab 
5. Meghalaya 
6. Telangana 
7. Tamil Nadu 
8. Karnataka 
2.79 With regard to amendment in the DSPE Act and the need for enacting a new law, it is 
submitted that there is no such proposal presently under consideration. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.80 The Committee recommends periodic review on the effectiveness of Vigilance Case 
Monitoring System (VCMS) and based on it, improvements should be made. An oversight committee 
may be formed comprising representatives from the Central Vigilance Commission, CBI, vigilance 
departments, and technical experts. It should focus on reducing delays by setting clear timelines for 
case resolution, improving inter-agency coordination, and leveraging AI for case prioritization. 
This committee should also ensure user training and address any technical challenges faced by 
stakeholders. Additionally, it should submit bi-annual reports highlighting systemic issues and 
suggesting policy reforms to enhance efficiency and effectiveness of the vigilance framework. 
(Para 6.12) 
Action Taken 
2.81 Vigilance Case Monitoring System (VCMS) is an internal monitoring tool provided for 
senior officers of the Commission to monitor and review the status of vigilance cases. It provides 
different reports based on the timelines for various stages like disposal of complaints (investigation 
report to be submitted in 3 months), implementation of Commission’s First Stage Advice (2 
months), conclusion of Departmental Proceedings (6 months), etc.  
 
2.82 The Ministries/ Departments/ Organisations (MDOs) are not linked with the VCMS. 
However, the information received in respect of the complaints/ vigilance cases from MDOs are 

24 
 
entered into the VCMS by Commission’s users only and used by senior authorities for monitoring 
the progress. Periodic review meetings with the concerned MDOs provide an opportunity to address 
systemic issues, including delays, if any.  
 
2.83 Based on the user feedback and monitoring requirements, improvements are being 
implemented in the system to enhance its effectiveness.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.84 The Committee recommends that to ensure the timely completion of digitization and full 
implementation of ACIS in CAT, e-Courts/Smart Courts which are yet to be made fully functional 
under ACIS, needs to be made operational. The DMS should be tested rigorously, with feedback 
loops from judicial officers and litigants to ensure user-friendliness. Training programs should be 
conducted for court staff to enhance digital adoption. A performance review mechanism should be 
introduced to assess the impact of ACIS on case disposal rates and recommends further 
technological enhancements for efficiency.                 (Para 6.25) 
 
Action Taken 
2.85 The work of scanning and digitization of judicial records is being done in phase wise 
manner in all the Benches, which would be completed at different point of time during the current 
years in different Benches. In Principal Bench, it would be completed by June, 2025 (tentatively) 
enabling Principal Bench to implement DMS (paperless Court) by July, 2025 (tentatively) in testing 
phase in Principal Bench of CAT and same will be implemented in all the Benches of CAT as and 
when the Scanning and Digitization of Judicial records will be completed on the end of this year, 
i.e., December, 2025. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.86 The information provided indicates that the CAT Kolkata Bench is functioning from the 
CGO Complex, occupying 23,789 sq. ft., with a monthly license fee of ₹ 8,56,404. While the current 
arrangement meets operational needs, long-term financial implications should be considered. 
Renting space indefinitely results in recurring costs without asset creation. Constructing a 
dedicated building would ensure financial prudence, institutional stability, and better infrastructure 
customization. Therefore, the Committee recommends that a feasibility study be conducted to assess 
the cost-benefit of constructing a permanent building. If viable, the necessary budgetary allocations 

25 
 
should be made to initiate the project in a phased manner, ensuring cost efficiency while 
maintaining uninterrupted functioning of the Bench.               (Para 6.27) 
 
Action Taken 
2.87 CAT Kolkata Bench, as of now, is operating from a premises (GPOA) located at CGO 
Complex in Kolkata for which the Bench is making monthly payment in the form of licence fee 
payout. Currently, the rate of licence fee in case of a GPOA located up to 4th storey is Rs. 29 per sq 
ft and above the 4th storey is Rs. 36 per sq ft across the country. These rates were fixed way back in 
the year 2017 and have been continuing at the same level till now, thereby offering a fair sense of 
stability in terms of financial implication. Further, the complex is owned and maintained by the 
Directorate of Estates, i.e., a government organization. 
 
2.88 The monthly rental transaction is from one organization of the Government to the other 
organization. The license fee outgo in any case ends up only in government coffers and contributes 
exclusively to maintaining an asset of the government that has already been created and only 
reinforces financial prudence.  
 
2.89 CAT Mumbai Bench and CAT Bangalore Bench are also operating from space provided in a 
similar manner, i.e., GPOA and the space occupied at these Benches also involve monthly outgo in 
the form of licence fee payment. An amount of Rs. 6,32,160/-  And Rs. 5,40,900/- is being paid in 
the form of monthly licence fee payment for the GPOA occupied by CAT Mumbai Bench and CAT 
Bangalore Bench respectively.          
 
2.90 This arrangement has particularly been resorted to owing to the distinctive location 
advantage that these complex offer in terms of proximity to High Court and other Tribunals in these 
cities. Also, the premises currently under occupation at Kolkata offers sufficient space required for 
functioning of two DBs. 
 
2.91 Further, the possibility of availability of suitable land parcels in that location in Kolkata will 
be fairly slim and shifting of Bench to a new location may cause inconvenience to advocates who 
have expressed no such apprehension about the current location. 
 

26 
 
2.92 While a feasibility study as suggested can be undertaken to reaffirm the cost-benefit 
analysis, preliminary review suggests that the existing arrangement offers both financial and 
operational efficiency, with minimal disruption and strong stakeholder support. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.93 The Committee recommends that a structured mechanism should be introduced to ensure 
timely submission of comments by public servants and competent authorities for timely completion 
of preliminary inquiries under the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. A fixed timeline may be 
enforced strictly for response submission, with automatic escalation for non-compliance. Digital 
platforms should be implemented for secure and real-time submission of comments to minimize 
procedural delays. A dedicated monitoring unit within the Lokpal may track compliance, issue 
reminders, and report persistent delays.                 (Para 6.36) 
 
Action Taken 
Comments from DoPT and Lokpal: 
2.94 The statutory mandate in sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the Act of 2013 postulates 
obtaining ‘comment’ of the concern Public Servant and the Competent Authority on the allegations 
made in the complaint, on the basis of the material, information and documents collected during 
such preliminary inquiry, by the Inquiry Officer, to authenticate or so to say, to form his conclusion. 
The Bench of Lokpal, while considering the report in a complaint, has recently issued directions 
regarding the process of submission of comments by public servants and competent authorities 
during preliminary inquiries. The said order has been forwarded to the concerned agencies for 
issuing appropriate instructions to all concerned dealing with the conduct of preliminary inquiries 
ordered by the Lokpal of India. A copy of the said order has also been uploaded on the website of 
the Lokpal of India for public information. Further, a dedicated Wing in Lokpal of India (i.e. 
Judicial Wing) already tracks compliances and places the matter before the Bench for directions, in 
case of non-compliance, to avoid any potential delays. In addition, an automated digital 
infrastructure is being set up for timely processing of complaints. 
***** 

27 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND 
REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that a Centralized Compliance Monitoring 
Mechanism may be established to ensure timely filing of IPRs by all IAS officers. This mechanism 
should involve creation of a dedicated task force within the Department responsible for tracking 
and filing status of all officers. Additionally, the Committee proposes to introduce penalties or 
corrective actions for non-compliance, including automatic escalation procedures for officers who 
fail to file their IPRs despite reminders. This will strengthen accountability and ensure timely filing, 
making the process more robust and ensure greater adherence to the requirements.        (Para 3.15) 
Action Taken 
3.2 As per extant rules and instruction, every member of the service is required to submit annual 
immovable property return by 31st January of the next year. Failure on the part of the members of 
the Service to comply with the requirements of the aforesaid provision constitutes good and 
sufficient reason for institution of disciplinary proceedings, among other things as provided in this 
Department’s OM No. 104/33/2025-AVD-1 dated 29.10.2007 and 07.09.2011, against them.  
 
3.3 The Vigilance Clearance is denied for non-filing/ late filing of IPR. Subsequently, this 
department condones the delay of Submission of filling of IPR on request from State Government. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.4 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Expert Committee to review the 
issue of non-filing of Immovable Property Returns (IPRs) by IAS officers. However, it notes 
with concern that this remains a long-standing issue, despite repeated recommendations made 
by the Committee in its 122nd and 126th Reports. The Committee observes that the number of 
cases has not declined between 2023 (73 cases) and 2024 (91 cases), indicating limited progress 
in ensuring compliance. Moreover, the Committee notes that, out of 73 Officers who failed to 
file their IPRs in 2023, Vigilance Clearance was denied to only 15. This raises concerns 
regarding the adequacy of deterrence against non-filing of IPRs. In view of this, the 

28 
 
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation for establishing a Centralized Compliance 
Monitoring Mechanism within the Department, with a dedicated task force. Penalties and 
corrective actions may also be revisited to ensure compliance across all States. Such a 
mechanism would go a long way in strengthening accountability and promoting greater 
adherence to the prescribed rules. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.5 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should set a clear timeline for 
implementing the Baswan Committee recommendations. A dedicated team can be formed to 
prioritize key issues such as answer key disclosures and examination structure. Additionally, 
stakeholder consultations, including candidates and subject experts, may be conducted for effective 
and visible reforms. Regular progress updates should be published to maintain transparency and 
accountability. If any of the recommendations require policy changes, then they should be escalated 
for prompt government approval. A structured implementation roadmap will help modernize the 
UPSC examination process while addressing concerns about fairness, transparency, and efficiency.  
(Para 4.10) 
Action Taken 
3.6 A two-member Committee was constituted by this Department for examination of the report 
the Baswan Committee along with views of Union Public Service Commission. The Committee 
submitted its report on, which is currently under examination in this Department.  
3.7 The recommendation of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee has 
been noted. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.8 The Committee notes the Department’s response, however, it observes that no clear 
timeline has been indicated for the consideration and implementation of the Baswan 
Committee’s recommendations. The Committee reiterates that a definitive implementation 
schedule may be prepared, outlining short-term and long-term actions to be taken by the 
Department on the subject involving multiple aspects pertaining to Civil Services 
Examination reforms. 
 

29 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.9 SSC submitted that without empirical data, it is unclear whether reinstating descriptive 
tests, either in CBT mode or traditional format, would affect the recruitment cycle. A detailed 
assessment is necessary to evaluate whether descriptive evaluations enhance candidate selection 
without causing delays in the hiring process. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to conduct a comprehensive study on the impact of descriptive tests on recruitment 
effectiveness, selection quality, and process efficiency. This study should compare recruitment 
outcomes before and after their discontinuation, assessing whether descriptive evaluations improve 
candidate competency for management posts. Based on the study, if reintroduction is proved 
beneficial, a hybrid approach—combining objective tests with limited descriptive components—
could be piloted.                   (Para 4.14)  
Action Taken 
3.10 Descriptive tests have been discontinued w.e.f. September, 2022. 
3.11 It may be mentioned in this context that the 2nd ARC, in para 7.5.5. of its report, had 
recommended that examination system for recruitment at Group B and Group C level should be 
based on a well-designed objective type question paper. There are significant advantages of quick 
evaluation and total objectivity in an objective-type system. Further, the shortening of the 
examination process would allow the candidates to join at least a year earlier, and a part of this time 
could be utilized for imparting the necessary training so as to upgrade the skills of the selected 
candidates. Moreover, the testing technology through objective type questions has evolved 
substantially and these tests can be designed to test various competencies of the candidates. 
3.12 It is felt that the existing system may be allowed to continue for sufficient time before any 
study is attempted or conclusions are drawn. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.13 The Committee notes that the Department has cited the 2nd ARC’s report for 
objective-type examinations, which mainly applies to Group B and Group C posts. However, 
the Committee’s earlier advice was directed only at Group B (Gazetted) posts, where higher-
level writing and analytical skills are essential. Since descriptive tests were discontinued for 
all posts from September 2022, the Committee recommends that the Department undertake a 

30 
 
comprehensive study specifically for Gazetted posts to assess the impact of descriptive tests on 
recruitment effectiveness, selection quality and process efficiency. This review will help 
determine if a limited descriptive component should be reintroduced for Gazetted posts, while 
continuing the objective-type system for Non-Gazetted and Group C posts as per existing 
practice. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.14 To a specific question about setting up of a study group to suggest reforms in the training 
imparted to civil servants, the Committee was informed that no specific Committee/ Panel/ study 
group to suggest reforms in the training imparted to civil servants at LBSNAA in the last five years 
have been set up by the Government of India. Though some changes may have been affected in the 
system of training during this period, but the time is evolving at a fast pace and training to civil 
servants requires alignment with the pace of time. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department should establish the National Committee on Civil Services Training Reforms 
(NCCSTR) to modernize civil servant training. Led by a senior bureaucrat, it should include experts 
from governance, academia, industry, and international institutions. Key focus areas may include 
AI and digital governance, experiential field learning, ethical leadership, crisis management, and 
global best practices. The committee may submit initial recommendations in 6 months and a final 
report in 12 months, with pilot implementation at LBSNAA. This will ensure future-ready, citizen-
centric, and effective governance, enhancing the capability of civil servants to address evolving 
administrative challenges.         (Para 5.8) 
Action Taken 
3.15 The report of the R.V. Vaidyantha Ayyar Committee to review the training syllabus of the 
IAS Induction Training was constituted by the DoPT on 27thMarch, 2005. This committee 
submitted its recommendation in June, 2007. The next report of the committee to review the content 
& duration of Induction Training of IAS Officers, under the chairpersonship of Kiran Aggarwal was 
presented on February, 2014. 
3.16 Although, no formal committee has recently been setup to suggest reforms in the training 
imparted to civil servants, the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, 
continuously upgrades and updates its syllabus, curriculum and training pedagogy, including 
training through Physical mode of blended courses so as to provide the probationary Civil Service 

31 
 
Officers the latest inputs in a diverse array of topics and sectors in keeping with the needs of the 
country and its citizens. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.17 The Committee desires to be apprised of the specific reforms introduced by LBSNNA 
in recent years to modernize training for both newly inducted officer trainees and mid-career 
civil servants. Given the changing nature of governance and administration, the Committee 
reiterates the need for a more structured and forward-looking mechanism. LBSNAA may also 
provide detailed information on the initiatives undertaken in areas such as digital governance, 
AI and data literacy, ethical leadership, experiential field learning, crisis response, and 
integration of global best practices. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.18 The Committee emphasizes the need for greater transparency in functioning of CBI by 
making case statistics and the Annual Report publicly available on its website. The Centralized 
Case Management should allow public access to non-sensitive case details which will enhance 
accountability, efficiency, and trust in operations of CBI. The Committee believes that proactive 
disclosure of information will also empower citizens while ensuring responsible governance. The 
Committee urges CBI to implement these measures swiftly, balancing investigative confidentiality 
with the public’s right to information for a more transparent and responsive system. (Para 6.6) 
Action Taken 
3.19 Investigation is carried out as per provisions of law.  Upon completion of the investigation, 
all the relevant documents pertaining to the case, filed along with the final report, are available in 
Courts. 
3.20 In pursuance of the directions passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, FIRs are 
uploaded on the CBI Website.  Besides, details of important searches, arrests, charge-sheets, 
conviction, etc., are regularly posted on the CBI website, which is in public domain. 
3.21 The Annual Report contains details of such cases which are submitted to CVC, MHA, DOPT 
and Parliamentary Standing Committee.  Annual Reports of DOPT are available on its website. The 
outcome of investigation is submitted to the Court of competent jurisdiction in the form of charge-
sheet/closure report, thus, ensuring accountability and transparency. 

32 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.22 The Committee notes the steps taken by CBI in uploading FIRs and select case-related 
information on its website. However, the Committee reiterates that proactive disclosure of 
case statistics and publication of the Annual Report in the public domain, as recommended 
earlier in the 126th and 145th reports, remains unfulfilled. On similar lines, the Committee 
recalls its repeated recommendation made in the 122nd, 126th and 145th reports to establish a 
Centralized Case Management System enabling systematic and publicly accessible tracking of 
non-sensitive case data. While the Committee has taken note of the initiation of certain digital 
measures, it desires to be apprised of the current status of the Centralized Case Management 
System, its operationalization, and the timeline for making relevant information accessible to 
citizens. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.23 The Committee recommends that to enhance efficiency, the Tribunal should institutionalize 
a permanent framework for Single-Member Benches in all pension-related and other 
straightforward service matters. A fixed timeline of 90 days for case disposal should be introduced, 
with periodic monitoring to ensure adherence. Additionally, digital case management tools should 
be deployed for tracking pending senior citizen cases, prioritizing those pending for extended 
periods.                    (Para 6.20) 
Action Taken 
3.24 This institution (Central Administrative Tribunal) has always remained mindful/ cognizant 
of the fact that the procedural requirement of hearing of a case by a Division Bench can delay the 
resolution process of cases involving straight forward question of law.  
3.25 In order to ensure that such cases are not left unheard simply for want of a Division Bench, 
CAT, during the framing of CAT Rules of Practice, 1993 earmarked certain types of cases 
(including pension related cases) which can be heard by a Single Bench under Rule 154 of the ibid 
rules.           
 
3.26 To further ease the procedural requirement, review of cases is being carried out from time to 
time by the CAT and after necessary assessment, if a case is found to be fit for adjudication by a 

33 
 
Single Member Bench, same is earmarked as a Single Bench matter by Hon’ble the Chairman, CAT 
by issuance of a specific order in this regard.  
 
3.27 Last such review of cases was carried out in the year 2021 and on that occasion, the 
following two more type of cases were earmarked as Single Bench matters: 
1.   Change of Date of Birth. 
2.   Posting/Transfer. 
 
3.28 As such, a framework to the effect of hearing such cases by Single Member Bench is 
already in place in CAT.                
 
3.29 As for the second part of recommendation regarding instruction of a fixed timeline of 90 
days for disposal of cases, it is stated that necessary guidelines for timely disposal of cases already 
exist in the form of Rule 14(2) of CAT Procedure Rule, 1987 wherein a period of 6 months, as far 
as possible, has been prescribed for the disposal of cases.  
 
3.30 Appropriate action/steps will be taken in consultation with the NIC to expeditiously deploy 
digital case management tools for tracking pending senior citizen cases, and prioritizing 
cases pending for extended periods due to any reason. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.31 The Committee acknowledges that a framework to hear pension-related cases by a 
Single Member Bench is already in place. However, given the significant gap in senior citizen-
related case disposal, the Committee reiterates expanding Single-Member adjudication to 
other straightforward service matters pertaining to senior citizens. While the Committee 
notes that under Rule 14(2) of CAT Procedure Rule, 1987, a period of 6 months is prescribed 
for the disposal of cases, it is important to point out that this guideline is generic in nature. 
The Committee therefore reiterates fixing a timeline of 90 days for case disposal of pension-
related and other straightforward matters and expeditiously deploying digital case 
management Tool for tracking pending Senior Citizen Cases. 
 
 

34 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.32 The Committee recommends that workforce shortages in the CIC should be addressed. The 
revival of deemed abolished ASO and MTS posts should be prioritized through urgent approvals. 
CIC should coordinate with SSC for filling vacant ASO, SA, and Stenographer posts and 
completing the recruitment process within a specified timeframe. Further, a workforce planning 
framework should be introduced to anticipate future vacancies and streamline recruitment cycles. 
(Para 6.30) 
Action Taken 
3.33 On the proposal of the Commission for revival of 61 deemed abolished posts of ASOs , 
MTSs and other posts to Department of Personnel & Training, the DoP&T has conveyed the 
approval of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for the revival of following posts: 
 
S.No. Name of the post No. of posts 
proposed for revival 
No of posts revived 
by DoE 
1. Sr. PPS 3 3 
2. Section Officer 8 2 
3. ASO 11 6 
4. PA 7 2 
 
3.34 Indents were placed on SSC for filling up 03 post of ASO & 06 posts of SAs through SSC 
CGLE-2024. On the basis of the result of CGLE-2024, 03 ASOs and 05 SAs have been 
recommended by SSC for appointment. The other posts are being filled up as per prescribed RRs.  
 
3.35 The matter for revival of the remaining 48 deemed abolished posts which include Principal 
Private Secretary, Section Officer, Private Secretary, Asstt. Section Officer, Personal Assistant, 
Hindi Translator, Staff Car Driver and MTS is under consideration. 
 
3.36 The Commission regularly monitors the vacancies to be requisitioned from SSC and duly 
submits the requirements to them for filling up vacancies falling under Direct Recruitment quota. 
  

35 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.37 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by CIC to fill up the vacancies in the ASO 
and SA grade by taking up the matter with SSC. However, the Committee notes with concern 
the delay in revival of the remaining 48 deemed abolished posts which includes positions like 
Principal Private Secretary, Section Officer, Private Secretary, Asstt. Section Officer, 
Personal Assistant, Hindi Translator, Staff Car Driver and MTS. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the matter may be given high priority as a stable workforce with 
streamlined recruitment cycles becomes imperative to ensure administrative efficiency and 
operational effectiveness. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.38 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may take urgent steps to 
constitute the Inquiry and Prosecution Wings of Lokpal, preferably within a period of six months. 
The structure, staffing, and jurisdiction of these wings should be well defined. Recruitment of 
qualified personnel, including investigators, legal experts, and prosecutors, may be given top 
priority. Until these wings become fully operational, a dedicated coordination mechanism may be 
set up with CVC and CBI to streamline the ongoing cases.              (Para 6.33) 
 
Action Taken 
Comments of DoPT: 
3.39 Lokpal has formally constituted the Inquiry Wing of the Lokpal of India on 05.09.2024. 
3.40 The proposed “The Lokpal Officers and Staff (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 2024” 
defining qualifications, experience and other eligibility conditions, etc., is under consideration in 
this Department for finalizing staffing structure in the Lokpal.   
3.41 The Lokpal is also exploring the option of appointing serving officers on deputation in view 
the legislative intent for conduct of inquiries by Lokpal’s own Inquiry Wing. 
3.42 As regards the Prosecution Wing, the number of cases referred by the Lokpal to the court 
post sanction so far is nominal (only seven involving 13 public servants), the constitution of 
Prosecution Wing has been kept on hold for some time. Presently, the work related to prosecution is 
being dealt with by the Full Bench of Lokpal by calling upon the Investigating Officer in the 
concerned case to submit status report regarding the progress of the matter before the Court.  

36 
 
Comments of Lokpal: 
3.43 It is stated that as per Section 11(1) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, the Lokpal is 
mandated to constitute an Inquiry Wing headed by the Director of Inquiry for the purpose of 
conducting preliminary inquiry into any offence alleged to have been committed by a public servant 
punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and as per Section 12(1), the Lokpal is 
mandated to constitute, by notification, a Prosecution Wing headed by the Director of Prosecution 
for the purpose of prosecution of public servant in relation to any complaint by the Lokpal under 
this Act. 
3.44 As per Section 10(2) of the Act of 2013, there shall be a Director of Inquiry and the Director 
of Prosecution not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent, 
who shall be appointed by the Chairperson from a panel of names sent by the Central Government. 
 
3.45 The Lokpal, vide letters dated 15.01.2020, 10.06.2020, 27.07.2021 and 07.08.2024, as also 
D.O. Letters dated 02.02.2021, 26.03.2021 and 30.05.2024, has requested the Department of 
Personnel & Training to send a panel of names of officers of the rank of Additional Secretary for 
consideration for appointment as Director of Inquiry in Lokpal of India by the Hon’ble 
Chairperson under Section 10(2) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. The panel is awaited. 
 
3.46 In exercise of powers conferred under Section 34 of the Act of 2013, the Lokpal has 
finalized its Organogram spelling out the organizational structure and staffing pattern which, inter 
alia, includes the Inquiry Wing, Prosecution Wing, Public prosecutors and Legal Adviser including 
the number of supporting staff in the respective Wings.  
 
3.47 In terms of Section 11 read with Section 34 of the Act, 2013, the Full Bench of the Lokpal 
in exercise of its administrative and financial powers has resolved in its meeting dated 30.08.2024, 
to formally constitute an Inquiry Wing of the Lokpal and authorized the Chairperson to take such 
steps as may be necessary in that regard including commencement of selection process for the 
appointment of suitable persons as officers and staff thereat, as specified in the approved 
Organogram so as to provide logistical assistance in the functioning of the Inquiry Wing. Pursuant 
to this Resolution, the Chairperson of the Lokpal has formally constituted the Inquiry Wing of the 
Lokpal of India on 05.09.2024, headed by the Director of Inquiry and supporting officers and staff 
as per the Organogram.   

37 
 
3.48 As the Inquiry Wing has been duly constituted by the Lokpal, to be headed by the Director 
of Inquiry of Lokpal and supporting officers and staff as specified in the approved Organogram, 
efforts were made to make the Inquiry Wing functional by engaging retired officers as Consultants 
to begin with until the draft Lokpal Officers and Staff (Conditions of Service) Regulations were to 
be shortly published. However, the same could not fructify as none of the applicants was found 
suitable in view of stringent criteria applied by the Lokpal for assessment of suitability of 
applicants due to confidential nature of the work of Lokpal as per provisions of the Act of 2013. 
3.49 The Lokpal is trying to fast-track regular appointment of officers and staff in the Inquiry 
Wing and in terms of Section 60(2)(a) of the Act of 2013, the Lokpal has already finalized the 
proposed “The Lokpal Officers and Staff (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 2024” defining 
qualifications, experience and other eligibility conditions and duly vetted by the Learned Attorney 
General of India. The same have been sent to DoPT for placing it before Hon’ble President of India 
for approval relating to their salaries, allowances, leave or pension, in terms of Section 10(4) of the 
Act. This approval is awaited. In other words, de jure Inquiry Wing of the Lokpal of India has been 
constituted but de facto it is not so - as the Lokpal is unable to commence the regular appointment 
process. 
 
3.50 As the proviso in Section 11(1) of the Act of 2013 predicates that till such time the Inquiry 
Wing is constituted by the Lokpal, the Central Government shall make available such number of 
officers and other staff from its Ministry or Departments, as may be required by the Lokpal, for 
conducting preliminary inquiries under this Act. Therefore, the Lokpal in its Full Bench Meeting 
held on 03.03.2025, has resolved to request the DoPT to make available such number of officers 
and other staff from the Central Bureau of Investigation or other investigating agencies in terms of 
provision in Sub Section (1) of Section 11 of the Act, until the Lokpal is in a position to make 
regular appointments against the specified posts in the Organogram as given below:- 
S.No. Name of Post Number of Post(s) 
1.  Deputy Director / Superintendent of Police 
(Lokpal) (L-12) 
3 
2.  Inquiry /Investigation Officer (L-10) 6 
3.  PS (L-8) 1 
4.  PA (L-7) 3 
5.  Assistant Inquiry/ Investigation Officer (L6) 6 

38 
 
3.51 Accordingly, the Lokpal of India has sent two communications dated 12.03.2025 and 
02.04.2025 to DoPT for posting of Officers/officials for Inquiry Wing. Response of the 
communications is awaited. As aforementioned, although the Inquiry Wing has been de jure 
constituted by the Lokpal, it has not become de facto functional for unavoidable circumstances not 
ascribable to the Lokpal as such.   
 
3.52 The Lokpal will soon make yet another attempt to make the Inquiry Wing functional at the 
earliest, by exploring the option of appointing serving officers on deputation. This may be possible 
on the same logic as adopted in the Full Bench Meeting held on 07.03.2025 and 24.04.2025 
resolving to fill up various posts in Lokpal of India on deputation basis as a stop gap arrangement. 
Accordingly, the process for appointment on deputation of serving officers for some of the vacant 
posts specified in Department of Expenditure’s ID Note No.21934/ECI/2014 dated 03.03.2024 and 
/ or corresponding to the posts in the Organogram and also for the posts of Registrar (I.T.) and 
Assistant Registrar (I.T.) approved in the Organogram is under way.  
 
3.53 In the similar manner, the Lokpal will start process of appointing serving officials on 
deputation in the Inquiry Wing and Prosecution Wing keeping in view the legislative intent for 
conduct of inquiries by Lokpal’s own Inquiry Wing and recommendations of the Department 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its 
145th Report. 
 
3.54 As regards the Prosecution Wing, the Lokpal of India is obligated to constitute a Prosecution 
Wing as per Section 12 of the Act, for which the Full Bench has resolved on 30.08.2024.  
However, as the number of cases referred by the Lokpal to the court post sanction, so far is 
nominal (only seven involving 13 public servants), the constitution of Prosecution Wing has been 
kept on hold for some time. Presently, the work related to prosecution is being dealt with by the 
Full Bench of Lokpal by calling upon the Investigating Officer in the concerned case to submit 
status report regarding the progress of the matter before the Court. The Lokpal vide letters dated 
12.11.2024 and 14.02.2025 (Annexure-III) has requested the Central Government to constitute 
Special Court in terms of Section 35 of the Act of 2013 to exclusively hear and decide the cases 
arising out of the PC Act of 1988 under the Act of 2013 (owing to the sanction accorded by the 
Lokpal under Section 20(7) of the Act of 2013), at least one at Delhi by notifying one of the 
Special Judge dealing with the cases arising from offence  of corruption under PC Act 1988. This 

39 
 
request is now pending with the DoPT. Constitution of a dedicated Special  Court for the cases 
arising out of the Act of 2013 is in a way indispensable keeping in view the avowed object of the 
special legislation being the Act of 2013.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.55 The Committee takes cognizance of the steps taken by the Lokpal in formally 
constituting the Inquiry Wing and in approving the organisational structure of both the 
Inquiry and Prosecution Wings. The Committee also notes the interim efforts made to utilise 
deputation-based arrangements until regular appointments are made. However, 
operationalisation of these statutory wings remains incomplete. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the latest status of the communications sent to DoPT along with the action taken 
by them regarding posting of officers requested by the Lokpal. 
3.56 With regard to the Prosecution Wing, the Committee notes that although the Full 
Bench has resolved to constitute it, progress has been limited in view of the small number of 
cases presently before courts. The Committee, however, reiterates that statutory compliance 
cannot remain contingent on the volume of cases and urges that the constitution of the 
Prosecution Wing be taken forward expeditiously. The Committee further seeks an update on 
the status of the Lokpal’s request to DoPT for notifying a Special Court under Section 35 of 
the Act of 2013 to exclusively hear cases arising from the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 
pursuant to sanctions granted under Section 20(7). 
3.57 In view of its earlier recommendation that both Wings be fully constituted within six 
months, the Committee reiterates that urgent steps be taken to operationalise the Inquiry and 
Prosecution Wings through regular appointments or deputation, so that the Lokpal may 
effectively discharge its statutory mandate without further delay. 
***** 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.1 UPSC informed the Committee that it publishes the preliminary examination answer key 
only after completing the entire selection process. This delays candidates' ability to challenge 
potential errors before advancing to the next stage, undermining transparency and fairness. Such a 
practice can demoralize candidates and raise concerns about the validity of the examination. 
Despite rigorous scrutiny, the possibility of errors in the answer key cannot be entirely ruled out. 
To enhance credibility, fairness, and candidate confidence, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation contained in para 4.5 of its 126th  report that UPSC may explore and take steps to 
release the answer key immediately after the preliminary examination and provide candidates with 
an opportunity to raise objections before proceeding further.     (Para 4.6) 
 
Action Taken 
4.2 The Commission opens a Representation Window on its web-portal for a week for the 
candidates of the said examination to represent against any of the Questions of the Examination. 
The observations made by the candidates in their representations are carefully considered in the 
Commission through the subject experts and remedial action is taken, if required. So far as releasing 
of Answer Keys is concerned, it is stated that answer keys of objective type examinations 
conducted by the Commission are disclosed only after the entire process of the examination.  
4.3 Further, the matter of releasing answer key after completion of Preliminary Examinations, 
i.e., before the final result of the respective Examinations is presently sub-judice in 
W.P.(C)No.118/2024 filed by Shri Himanshu Kumar & Ors Vs UPSC &Ors, pertaining to Civil 
Services Examination, before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. The court has appointed Shri 
Jaideep Gupta, Sr. Advocate as Amicus Curiae in this regard. 
***** 
 
 

41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
MINUTES 

42 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on 02.12.2025 in Room No. 3, PHAE,  
New Delhi – 110001. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Shri Brij Lal - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
3.  Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
4.  Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
5.  Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandangouda 
6.  Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
7.  Shri Varun Chaudhry 
8.  Shri Saleng A Sangma 
9.  Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
10.  Smt. Manju Sharma 
11.  Shri M Mallesh Babu 
12.  Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
13.  Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
14.  Shri Arup Chakraborty 
15.  Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
16.  Shri A. Raja 
17.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
18.  Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
19.  Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
20.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
(i) Shri P. Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
(ii) Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
(iii) Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary 
(iv) Ms. Purva Khanna, Under Secretary 

43 
 
2.  The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members of the Committee and informed them 
about agenda of the meeting. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following 
draft reports of the Committee:- 
 
i. *              *       * 
 
ii. *              *       * 
 
iii. *              *       * 
 
iv. *              *       * 
 
v. Draft 159th Report on Action Taken on 145th Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the Department of Personnel and Training (Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions). 
 
3.   *                          *                    * 
The Committee also adopted the draft 159th Report with minor modifications. The 
Committee decided that these Reports would be presented to the Parliament on 4th December, 2025. 
Shri Varun Chaudhry , M.P. and in his absence Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao, M.P. were 
nominated to lay the Reports in Lok Sabha while in the absence of Chairman, Shri Harsh Vardhan 
Shringla, M.P. was nominated to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. 
 
4.   *     *      * 
 
5.  The meeting adjourned at 03.15 PM. 
 
INDIRA CHATURVEDI VAIDYA 
DIRECTOR 
 
New Delhi 
2nd December, 2025 
 
 
 
To, 
The Chairman and Members of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
*pertains to other matters 
 
  

44 
 
 
 
 
  
 
ANNEXURES 

45 
 
  
Annexure I 

46 
 
  


47 
 
  


48 
 
  


49 
 
 


50 
 
  


51 
 
  


52 
 
  


53 
 
  


54 
 
  


55 
 
 


56 
 
 


57 
 
  


58 
 
 
  
Annexure II 

59 
 
 
  


60 
 
 
  
Annexure III 

61 
 
 
  


62 
 
 
  


63 
 
 
  


64 
 
 
  


65 
 
 
  


66 
 
 
  


67 
 
 
  


68 
 
 
  


69 
 
 
