DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GR
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT OF THE 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JU
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON THE SUBJECT 
"APPOINTMENT OF NOTARIES" 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08 August, 2025)
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08 August, 2025
 
 
 Y STANDING COMMITTEE ON IEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE REPORT NO. 152 
 ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT OF THE ) 08 August, 2025) 

 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs 
 

 
3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                             4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                       5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                 6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                        7-8    
  
(I) CHAPTER   I                                                                                      9-11 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT 
(II) CHAPTER   II                                                                                12-13 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY 
THE DEPARTMENT  
(III) CHAPTER   III                                                                                          14-18 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
DEPARTMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS   
(IV) CHAPTER   IV                                                                                                                 19 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED   
 
5.        RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE*              20 
 
 
 
 
*to be appended at later stage 
 
 
 
  

 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
3. Ms. Swati Maliwal 
4. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
7. Shri C.Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. *Shri Sana Satish Babu 
10. **Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Arup Chakraborty 
14. Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandanagouda 
15. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
16. Shri Varun Chaudhary 
17. Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
18. Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
19. Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
20. Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
21. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
22. Shri Radhakrishna 
23. Shri A. Raja  
24. Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao 
25. Shri Saleng A. Sangma 
26. Shri Pushpendra Saroj 
27. Shrimati Manju Sharma 
28. Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri P. Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
3.  Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Divyanshu, Security Assistant 
 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 07.01.2025 
**   Nominated w.e.f. 06.08.2025 

 
5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
        
,    I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred 
Fifty Second Report (152nd) on the Action Taken on One Hundred Fortieth Report 
(140th) of the Committee on the subject "Appointment of Notaries.” 
 
2. The One Hundred Fortieth Report (140th) of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice 
was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 11th December, 2023 and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on the 11th December, 2023. 
 
3. The Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and Fortieth Report (140th) of the 
Committee on 03rd December, 2024. The Committee considered the draft One 
Hundred Fifty Second Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 07th 
August, 2025. 
 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi             BRIJ LAL 
08th August, 2025   Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
  

 
6 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AIBE All India Bar Examination  
BCI Bar Council of India 
DOLA Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of  Law & Justice, Govt. of 
India 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
GST Goods and Service Tax 
PwBD Persons with Benchmark Disabilities 
OBC Other Backward Classes 
SC Scheduled Castes 
ST Scheduled Tribes 
UTs Union Territories  
 
  

 
7 
 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken 
by the Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) on the 
recommendations / observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred 
Fortieth (140th) Report of the Committee on "Appointment of Notaries” pertaining to 
the Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice), which was presented to 
Rajya Sabha on the 11th December, 2023 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 
11th December, 2023. 
2. The Committee had made 14 recommendations/observations in its 140th 
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized 
under four chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have 
been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 3.3, 3.9, 3.15, 3.19 and 3.23 of 
the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has 
accepted those recommendations (Total- 5) 
Chapter – II:     Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. 
in respect of paras 3.6, 3.11, 3.17 and 3.21 of the Report. The 
Committee is satisfied with the explanations advanced by the 
Department and does not wish to pursue those as of now (Total- 4).  
Chapter – III:      Recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee 
has not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. with regard to 
paras 3.14, 3.16, 3.26, 3.27 and 3.29 of the Report. The Committee 
does not accept the reasons given by the Department and reiterates 
the same (Total- 5). 
Chapter – IV:   Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government have not been received. 
-Nil- 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and 
detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further 
Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in Chapter – III of this 
report. 

 
8 
 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e. of 
the 140 th Report) have been mentioned at the end of each 
recommendation/observation.   
---- 
  

 
9 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT 
Raising the stature of Notaries in India  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1 Notaries do not receive any remuneration or pay from the government. The 
only source of their income is the fees they charge from their client. The fees to be 
payable to a notary for doing any notarial act are prescribed under Rule 10 of the 
Notaries Rules, 1956. The prescribed fee is meagre, and it was last updated in the 
year 2014. Thus, there is a need to appropriately raise the fees commensurate with 
inflation so that the notaries can have a decent standard of living. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that the government to increase the fee payable to notaries 
and make it inflation-linked. It should be revised at regular intervals, preferably every 
five year. (Para 3.3) 
Action Taken: 
1.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been, in principle, accepted and 
accordingly, Rule 10 of the Notaries Rules, 1956 is being suitably amended to 
rationalize and increase the fees to be charged by the Notaries for various purposes. 
 
Sanctioned Strength of Notaries  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 It is the considered view of the Committee that the criteria for deciding the 
sanctioned strength of notaries in a state is very vague and lacks objectivity at all. 
The sanctioned strength of notaries in a particular state should be determined on the 
basis of its population, volume of litigation, economic and commercial activities in 
that state, etc., and it should be reviewed regularly. (Para 3.9) 
Action Taken: 
1.4 The number of Notaries to be appointed by the Central Government in various 
States and UTs has been re-calibrated with reference to the State-wise data of 
population (Census: 2011); Gross State Domestic Product at Current Price for 2021-
22 (Source: RBI); State-wise GST collection for the month of November, 2023 and 
pending cases as on 22.12.2023 (Source: National Judicial Data Grid of Department 
of Justice). The geographical landscape and area of the States have also been taken 
into consideration. Based on these rational parameters, the strength of Notaries to be 
appointed by the Central Government in various States has been revised, vide the 

 
10 
 
Notaries (Amendment) Rules, 2024, notified on 24th February, 2024.  In view of this, 
the recommendation of the Committee stands accepted and implemented. 
 
Use of technology in appointment and notarial work  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.5 Presently, the Notary Portal of the Department of Legal Affairs 
(https://notary.legalaffairs.gov.in/) is used for submitting applications and declaring 
results only. With the advancement of technology, the Department needs to harness 
its full potential for making significant improvements in the appointment process. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the government make this portal a one-stop 
place for advertising vacancies of notaries, making applications, submitting fees, 
publishing results, and downloading e-certificates of practice. The entire process of 
renewal of the certificate of practice should be made through this portal only. 
Further, the annual returns under rule 14 of the Notaries Rules, 1956, should also be 
filled online through this portal. (Para 3.15) 
Action Taken 
1.6 The Department has launched a new Notary Portal (https://notary.gov.in) on 
3.9.2024.  It provides an online interface between the notaries and the Government 
for various services like submission of applications for appointment as notaries, 
issuance and renewal of Certificates of Practice, change of practice area, submission 
of annual returns, etc.  With the launch of the Notary Portal, the Central Notaries will 
not be required to submit applications/ requests in physical mode.  They can submit 
applications online; monitor its progress; and download digitally signed Certificates 
of Practice from their digilocker accounts.   
  
1.7 The Notary Portal has different modules, to be rolled out in phases. In the first 
stage, module relating to issue of Certificate of Practice to the provisionally selected 
Notaries has been launched. Other modules relating to renewal of Certificate of 
Practice, submission of Annual Returns, change of area of practice, etc will be rolled 
out gradually in a phased manner. 
  
1.8 All features recommended by the Committee are being incorporated in the 
Notary Portal.  In view of this, the recommendation of the Committee may stand 
accepted and complied, when all modules of the notary portal (https://notary.gov.in) 
will go live. 
 

 
11 
 
Diversity in notaries' profession  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.9 On this issue, the Committee feels that notaries' profession should reflect the 
diversity of the State in which they are appointed. This will further enrich the notarial 
profession and the legal system. Accordingly, it is recommended that the government 
should appropriately give representation to SCs, STs, OBCs, Women, Physically 
Challenged, Minorities, etc., in the appointment of notaries. Further, at the 
application stage, the candidate should be asked to furnish their category so that the 
Department maintains category-wise data. Accordingly, the rules may be amended to 
that extent. (Para 3.19) 
 
Action Taken:  
 1.10 In order to ensure proper representation of SCs, STs, OBCs, Women and 
PwBD, the applicants of these categories are required to have lesser experience, 
compared to other applicants. Further, the new Notary Portal will capture category 
wise data. Form I of the Notaries Rules, 1956 has also been amended vide the 
Notaries (Amendment) Rules, 2024, notified on 24.2.2024, wherein provisions have 
been made to capture the data related to SC, ST, OBC, Women, PwBD, etc.  
 
 
 
Change of Notarial Year for furnishing the annual return 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.11 The demand for changing the Notarial Year from calendar year to financial 
year seems logical, and this will help the notaries to synchronize their returns with 
that of Income Tax returns. Accordingly, the Committee recommends changing the 
Notarial Year from Calendar to Financial Year. (Para 3.23) 
 
Action Taken: 
1.12 The recommendation of the Committee to change Notarial year from Calander 
to financial year has been accepted and necessary amendment in this regard is being 
made in the Notaries Rules, 1956. 
 
 
 
  

 
12 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE DEPARTMENT 
 
Appointment of Notaries  
Recommendation/Observation 2.1  The Committee accordingly recommends doing away with interview-based 
appointment of notaries. Instead, the selection should be based on an objective type 
written examination along the lines of the All India Bar Examination (AIBE) 
conducted by the Bar Council of India (BCI). In fact, the Central Government may 
consider using the same examination i.e. AIBE, which is conducted twice a year by 
the BCI, for getting the panel of central notaries. (Para 3.6). Action Taken: 
2.2 The recommendation made by the Committee has been examined and the 
following alternatives are under active consideration of the Government for selection 
and appointment as Notaries: 
(i)         replacing the process of interview by written examination; or 
(ii)        introducing written examination for initial screening of the applicants and 
calling only such applicants who qualify the written examination for the interviews. 
 2.3 Since the appointment of Notaries as per existing provisions of the Notaries 
Rules, 1956 is already in progress, the above alternatives will, however, be made 
effective after completion of the current round of appointment process in the 
remaining States and UTs.   
 2.4 Accordingly, necessary amendment will be made in this regard in the Notaries 
Rules, 1956. 
 
Qualification for Appointment of Notaries  Recommendation/Observation 
2.5 On this, the Committee opines that the 10 years of practice as eligibility for the 
appointment is on the higher side, and it should be reduced to 5 years to attract young 
aspirant lawyers to this profession. At the same time, it should also be made 
mandatory for the applicant to have appeared in at least 100 cases. (Para 3.11) 

 
13 
 
 
Action Taken:  
 2.6 The recommendation of the Committee has been examined and it has been 
decided, in principle, to reduce the experience prescribed for appointment as a Notary 
to 7 years, relaxable to 5 years for SC/ ST/ OBC/ PwBD and Women applicants. 
 Accordingly, a suitable proposal to amend the Notaries Rules, 1956 is being moved. 
 2.7 As regards the recommendation regarding prescribing minimum number of 
appearances in Courts, it is mentioned that presently there is no such requirement of 
appearance in cases for being considered for appointment as a Notary.   It may be 
functionally and administratively very difficult to verify the claims of the applicants 
on this aspect.  Therefore, the present system may continue.  
 
Training of Notaries  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.8 Notaries should be equipped to handle electronic transactions, digital 
documents, and online notarization. For this training of notaries should be made. 
(Para 3.17) 
 
Action Taken: 
2.9 It is proposed to make the Notary Portal user friendly. Further, a detailed 
booklet for the help of the users will also be developed and made available on the 
Notary Online Portal. 
 
Designated areas for sitting of notaries  Recommendation/Observation 
2.10 The Committee recommends the government to ensure designated areas for the 
sitting of notaries in every Court complex from where they can do their notarial work 
in a dignified manner. (Para 3.21) 
 
Action Taken:  
 2.11 The recommendation of the Committee is outside the jurisdiction of this 
Department.  The recommendation of the Committee is being forwarded to the State 
Governments for taking appropriate action on the recommendation. 
 
 

 
14 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE DEPARTMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Renewal of certificate of practice  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1 Almost all the stakeholders flagged the issue of delay in the renewal of 
certificate of practice. They all brought to the notice of the Committee that there are 
allegations of corruption and misuse of discretion in the renewal process. On the 
renewal process, the Committee think that it is being done only to know about the 
antecedents of the applicant and to ensure that the applicant is alive and nobody else 
is practicing in their place.  The Committee is, therefore, of the view that renewal of 
certificate of practice every five years should be done away with. After their 
appointment, notaries may be allowed to practice till a particular age prescribed by 
the government. As the government has the power to suspend or remove notaries on 
a complaint received against them, this will empower the government to tame the 
erring/defaulting notaries. In order to access the antecedent of the notaries and 
confirm they are alive, the Committee desires that a system like online self-
certification or otherwise may be suitably devised by the government. (Para 3.14) 
 
Action Taken: 
3.2 Several steps have been taken to ensure that Certificate of practice of the 
Notaries are renewed in a timely manner. More than 4900 Certificates of Practice 
(CoP) of Central Notaries have been renewed since January, 2023.  Further, the 
Government has launched a new Notary Portal, i.e. https://notary.gov.in, which will 
enable the Notaries to submit their applications for renewal online after the module 
relating to renewal of Certificates of Practice is made live. The Government is also 
working on replacing the physical CoP by digitally signed CoP, which will also be 
available on Digi-locker.  Incidentally, CoPs to the newly appointed notaries are 
digitally signed and are being issued online and are also available in the Digi-locker 
of the Notaries concerned.     

 
15 
 
3.3 Considering the above, the present system may continue.  However, the 
recommendations made by the Committee have been noted and based on the 
experiences gained after full operationalization of the online system, and after 
stakeholder consultation, further improvement in the system will be brought, so as to 
bring more transparency and efficiency.  After reviewing the functioning of the 
Notary Portal, the possibility of reforming the renewal process by amending the 
Notaries Act, 1952 will be explored.  
 
Further Observation and Recommendation: 
 
3.4 The Committee welcomes the steps taken by the Department to renewal of 
Certificates of Practice on time. However, the core concern regarding 
eliminating periodic renewal still remains unaddressed. The Committee's 
recommendation to allow notaries to practice until a prescribed age, subject to 
disciplinary oversight, aims to reduce discretion. The Government should 
consider this proposal after full portal implementation and if necessary consider 
a statutory amendment to introduce one time certification till the prescribed age 
with periodic self-declaration, ensuring both accountability and procedural 
simplification. 
 
Use of technology in appointment and notarial work   
Recommendation/Observation  
3.5 Additionally, the general public should be provided with a state-wise list of 
public notaries, updated on a real-time basis, for verifying the credentials of notaries.  
The public may also be allowed to raise grievances/complaints against notaries 
through this portal. In the long run, the services of this portal may be extended to the 
States and UTs so that the common public can access central and state notaries in one 
place. (Para 3.16) 
 
Action Taken: 
3.6 Once all modules in the Notary Portal become operational, the Register of 
Notaries, as provided in the Notaries Rules, 1956, will get updated on real time basis 
and will be in public domain on the Notary Portal.  To this extent, the 
recommendation made by the Committee will stand accepted and implemented after 
all the modules of the Notary Portal go live. However, as regards recommendation of 
the Committee regarding raising grievances against Notaries through online portal, it 

 
16 
 
is stated that Rule 13 of the Notaries Rules, 1956 prescribes an elaborate procedure 
for inquiry into the allegations of professional or other misconduct of a Notary.  It 
requires that every complaint shall contain the acts and omissions which, if proved, 
would render the person complained against unfit to be a Notary; and the oral or 
documentary evidence relied upon in support of the allegations made in the 
complaint are subjected to examination and corroboration.  The said Rule further 
prescribes that a copy of the complaint shall be sent to the Notary for a written 
statement in his defence verified in the same manner as a pleading in a civil court.  It 
further provides for inquiry in the matter by the Competent Authority.  Considering 
the complexities involved, implementation of the recommendation of the Committee 
does not appear feasible.  However, in order to expedite disposal of complaints 
against Notaries, the Central Government has designated an Officer of the 
Department of the level of Deputy Legal Adviser as Competent Authority solely for 
the purpose of Rule 13 of Notaries Rules, 1956. 
 
Further Observation and Recommendation: 
 
3.7 While the real-time public availability of the Register of Notaries is a 
welcome step, the non-acceptance of an online grievance mechanism limits 
public accessibility and transparency. Considering the increasing digitalization 
of public services, the Committee is of the opinion that a preliminary online 
grievance submission system may be introduced to streamline complaint intake, 
which can then proceed under the existing Rule 13 framework.  
  
 
 
Notarizing of documents  Recommendation/Observation 
3.8 The notarial work should be modernised and digitised, and the use of 
electronic signatures, stamps, and seals should be encouraged. The notarial records 
and certificates should be stored and maintained in a centralised online database, 
which can be accessed and verified by the concerned authorities and parties. The 
notaries should also adopt uniform formats and standards for their documents and 
certificates. (Para 3.26) 
3.9 The Committee accordingly, recommends the government to ensure that all 
public notaries maintain a digital register to keep records of documents notarised by 

 
17 
 
them. Digitalizing records will help avoid fraud, deceit, and tampering of records. 
The concept of digital signature should be introduced so that records are not 
antedated and to identify such notaries who indulge in fabrication or falsification of 
documents. (Para 3.27) 
 
Action Taken:  
 3.10 Implementation of this recommendation involves developing an appropriate 
software for the works performed by the Notaries. Such software will need to have an 
interface between the Notaries and the Public at large. There will also be a 
requirement of necessary infrastructure at the end of Notaries, in the absence of 
which the entire exercise will be futile. The burden on Notaries for procuring and 
maintaining digital infrastructure and their readiness to shift to digital mode also 
needs to be looked into in greater details. The implementation of this 
recommendation also involves the question of data security and privacy.  Cost of 
digital infrastructure also needs to be weighed in. Further, in order to maintain 
uniformity with the States/ UTs, the availability of digital infrastructure with these 
Governments needs to be looked into.   
3.11 While the Department is committed to bringing transparency and efficiency in 
the system, the implementation of recommendation required further deliberations 
with the stakeholders. 
 
Further Observation and Recommendation: 
 
3.12 The committee is of the opinion that the digitization of notarial records, 
introduction of digital signatures, and maintenance of a centralized database is 
crucial for ensuring transparency and preventing tampering. While 
infrastructure and cost concerns are valid, the lack of a definitive timeline or 
roadmap delays critical reform. The Department should initiate this process 
with willing notaries and pilot states, by providing necessary support and 
training.  
Training of Notaries Recommendation/Observation 
3.13 Thus the Committee is of the view that the notaries should be provided with 
regular training and guidance, and their performance and conduct should be 
monitored and evaluated by an appropriate government/ authority. Also, some ethical 
and professional standards should be laid out by such government/ authority to which 

 
18 
 
notaries should adhere to. Further, any complaints or grievances against the Notaries 
should be promptly addressed and resolved. (Para 3.29) 
 
Action Taken:  
 3.14 The Department has launched a new Notary Portal (https://notary.gov.in), 
which will work as a dedicated platform for all issues related to the Notaries.  As 
regards prescribing ethical and professional standards for the Notaries, it is stated that 
even after appointment as Notaries, they continue to be legal practitioners, and as 
such, are bound by the ethical and professional standards prescribed in the Advocates 
Act, 1961.  Other recommendations made by the Committee has been noted for 
further action. 
Further Observation and Recommendation: 
3.15 Launching of Notary Portal is a positive step, the absence of dedicated 
ethical and professional standards specifically tailored for notarial functions is 
absent. Notarial duties differ from general legal practice and require distinct 
accountability mechanisms. The government should frame specific codes of 
conduct and performance benchmarks for notaries, establish a monitoring 
framework to ensure timely grievance redressal through the portal, which will 
enhance transparency and public trust in notarial services. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

 
19 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 