Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO.
99
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on rd January, )3 2019
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on rd January, )3 2019
Action Taken on Ninety-Sixth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2018-19)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice
NINETY-NINTH REPORT
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in

39
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LA W AND JUSTICE
NINETY-NINTH REPORT
Action Taken on Ninety-Sixth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2018-19)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd January, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd January, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 197

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv -v)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-30
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry ............................................................................................... 1-11
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry ................... 12-18
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which committee
has not accepted replies of the Ministry ................................................... 19-28
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies
of the Ministry have not been received................................... ............. 29-30
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE ........................................................... 31-33
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 35-37

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav   — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri Prabhat Jha
4. Shri Majeed Memon
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
8. Shri V . Vijayasai Reddy
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
10. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan
13. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
14. Shri Sharadkumar Maruti Bansode
15. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury
16. Shri (Adv.) Joice George
17. Shri Pralhad Venkatesh Joshi
18. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
19. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
20. Shri Bhagwant Mann
21. Shri B.V. Naik
22. Shri Vincent H. Pala
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
24. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
26. Dr. Anirudhan Sampath
27. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah
28. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
29. Shri M. Udhayakumar
30. Shri Anshul Verma
31. Shri Kaushal Kishore
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P .P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok  K.  Sahoo, Additional Director
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mohammad Amin Ansari, Assistant Research Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Ninety-ninth Report on Action Taken on Ninety-sixth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2018-19) pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice.
2. The Ninety-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 14th March, 2018.
3. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department, Department of Justice and Department of
Legal Affairs) furnished the Action Taken Replies on the Ninety-sixth Report of the Committee on 8th June,
13th August and 24th October, 2018, respectively. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted
the same in its meeting held on 27th December, 2018.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
BHUPENDER YADAV
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
27th December, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausa 6, 1940 ( Saka) Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
A2J : Access to Justice
A2J-NEJK : Access to Justice –NE and J&K
ADR : Alternate Dispute Resolution
AIJS : All India Judicial Service
AT R : Action Taken Report
BCI : Bar Council of India
COS : Committee of Secretaries
CSS : Centrally Sponsored Scheme
ECI : Election Commission of India
ECIL : Electronics Corporation of India Limited
EPIC : Electoral Photo Identity Cards
EVMs : Electronic V oting Machines
ICADR : International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution
ICPS : Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies
ICT : Information and Communication Technology
ILDR : Institute of Legislative and Drafting Research
ILI : Indian Law Institute
ITAT : Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
LAN : Local Area Network
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MNREGA : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
NALSA : National Legal Services Authority
NHPC : National Hydroelectric Power Corporation
NIC : National Informatics Centre
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
NJA : National Judicial Academy
OLW : Official Language Wing
(iv)

SLP : State Litigation Policy
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
UNDP : United Nations Development Programme
UC : Utilisation Certificates
WAN : Wide Area Network
(v)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Law and
Justice on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its Ninety-sixth Report on the Demands for Grants
(2018-19) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
the 14th March, 2018.
2. The Action Taken Replies of Legislative Department, Department of Justice and Department of Legal
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned
Report were received on 8th June, 13th August and 24th October, 2018, respectively. However, it is pertinent
to mention that Action Taken Replies relating to Election Commission of India are still awaited inspite of
reminder from Secretariat. Replies of the Departments have been categorized as follows:
Chapter – I : The Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry i.e., in
respect of paras 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 5.7, 5.14, 5.18, 5.27, 6.10, 6.11, 6.20, 6.29, 6.45, 6.71,
6.73, 6.75, 6.80 and 6.91 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the
Ministry has accepted its recommendations.
Chapter – II : The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the replies given by the Ministry i.e., in respect of paras 5.5, 5.28, 6.72 and
6.85 of the Report. The Committee has accepted the explanations furnished by the
Ministry and does not wish to pursue them further as of now.
Chapter – III : The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted
replies given by the Ministry i.e., with regard to paras 3.7, 5.6, 5.13, 5.34, 5.46, 6.36,
6.37, 6.70 and 6.79 of the Report. The Committee expresses its concern for not accepting
the recommendations of the Committee dealt with in Chapter – III of this Report and
reiterates its recommendations.
Chapter – IV : The Recommendations/Observations on which final replies of the Ministry of Law and
Justice have not been received. The Committee expresses its deep concern that it did
not receive the replies from the Election Commission in respect of Committee’s
recommendations. Similarly, the reply of Department of Justice was not received in
respect of Committee recommendation vide Paras 6.53, 6.88 and 7.2. The Committee
desires that Legislative Department/Election Commission of India should furnish action
taken report in respect of recommendations mentioned in Chapter – IV without any
further delay.

CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE MINISTRY
LEGISLATIVE  DEPARTMENT
Recommendation/Observation
1.0 There are twenty two languages specified under VIII Schedule of the Constitution which includes six
classical languages i.e. Tamil, Sanskrit, Malayalam, Kannad, Telugu and Odia.  Article 343 stipulates
that the official language of the Union shall be in Hindi in Devanagri Script and English. The Official
Language Act, 1963 and the Official Language Rules, 1970, promotes use of Hindi progressively in
official work in addition to English.  Article 345 of the Constitution mentions that official languages of
a State may be one or more languages or Hindi or English.  Article 120 of the Constitution mentions that
the business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English.  Similarly Article 210 mentions that
the business in the legislature of a State shall be transacted in the official languages of the State or in
Hindi or in English.  Article 351 cast duty upon the Union Government to promote Hindi having special
reference to composite culture of India and for its vocabulary reliance is placed primarily on Sanskrit
and secondarily on other languages.  Article 350 gives a constitutional right to every citizen of the
country to send petition to any authority of the Union or the State in any languages used in the Union
or in the State as the case may be. (Para 3.4)
1.1 Out of twenty two languages specified in VIII Schedule of Constitution.  The Legislative Department
brings out authoritative texts of Constitution in sixteen languages.  Those are Assamees, Bengali, Gujarati,
Hindi, Kannad, Telugu, Tamil, Kashmiri, Konkani, Malayalam, Marathi, Punjabi, Odia, Urdu, Sindhi, Sanskrit
and Nepali. The Legislative Department is responsible for translation of Central Legislation both supreme
and subordinate in languages mentioned in VIII Schedule of the Constitution.  The Constitution of India
also needs to be made available in those languages.  The Legislative Department in their submission
informed the Committee that the updated diglot edition of Constitution is to be published, while Constitution
in other languages have not yet been updated in other languages.  The Committee, therefore, exhorts the
Department to expedite authoritative translation of Constitution and other Central Legislation complied on
Bharat Sanhita (India Code ) for popularisation of law amongst people speaking those languages .
(Para 3.5)
Action Taken
1.2 So far the Constitution of India has been translated and published in 15 languages i.e. Assamese,
Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu, Sanskrit, Sindhi, Nepali
and Konkani apart from Hindi.  The work of Publishing the Constitution of India in Dogri language is at an
advanced stage and likely to be published shortly. The translation and publication of Central Acts as Authoritative
Texts into eleven regional languages i.e. Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia,
Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu is being done in close collaboration and cooperation of the respective State
Government through their Agencies/Departments under their control.  Four more languages i.e. Konkani,
Manipuri, Nepali and Santhali have been added but the recruitment of officers of these languages is still
underway.  The suggestion of DRSC has been noted and the Department will expedite the translation of
Constitution and other Central Legislations.
2

3
Further Observation
1.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation/Observation
2.0 The Constitution (One Hundred and Thirteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010 changed the name of Orissa to
Odisha and the Oriya language to Odia. However , in the Annual Report, 2017-18 of the Ministry old
nomenclature is still used. The Department is accordingly, recommended to update and use the new
nomenclature in future reports. (Para 3.6)
Action Taken
2.1 The recommendation has been noted and in future Annual Reports new nomenclature ‘Odisha’ and
‘Odia’ will be used.
Further Observation
2.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL  AFFAIRS
Recommendation/Observation
3.0 The Committee observes that 
` 70 crore has been allocated to Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT)
under the Budgetary sub-head ‘Capital Outlay’ in BE 2018-19 but the same will not be sufficient and may
affect the construction work of the ongoing projects. It has an additional requirement of funds to the tune of
` 47 crore. The Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation for acquisition of land and construction
of building for ITAT under the Major head 4070 should be enhanced from ` 70 crore to ` 117 crore in RE
2018-19 so that their projects are not stalled. The Committee also notes that under this sub-head, the pace
of utilization of funds by ITAT has been slow over the years, leading to steep reduction of funds at the RE
stage. The Budget allocation for 2017-18 was 
` 71 crore, which was reduced at the RE stage to ` 31 crore.
ITAT has been able to utilize only 43.98% of the funds allocated in RE 2017-18 up to 5th February, 2018.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ITAT and the Department should ensure proposed projects
timely commence, and there should be strict monitoring of their progress and the pace of expenditure, so as
to avoid fund reduction at the RE stage by the Ministry of Finance.
 (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
3.1 The construction of building office and other capital assets are undertaken by ITAT under the
“Capital Outlay” Budget. The approval, financing and monitoring of such capital projects is done by ITAT,
in close concert with CPWD, the implementing agency specified by the Government. All out efforts are
made to ensure implementation of construction of projects and utilization of allocated money therefor, on
time. In addition, the phasing of expenditure as per the projects pace of implementation is also done to
ensure optimal utilisation of allocated funds. This inter-alia,  include strict monitoring of project progress
and pace of expenditure, as also noted by the Committee. Keeping in view in the dynamic nature of these
projects, given the fact that the acquisition of land and construction of building is dependent on various
external factors also, the consequent expenditure forecasting, though not predictable, is kept on leash by
close monitoring. As recommended by the Committee, ITAT have further assured to take utmost care and

4
coordination, in advance, with CPWD to fully utilize allocations under Capital Outlay Budget for the year
2018-19.
Further Observation
3.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation/Observation
4.0 The Committee expresses it serious concern over the acute shortage of officers in the Department,
Particularly of the ILS cadre. The Indian Legal Service (ILS) officers are the Principal Legal Advisers to
the Government and play a pivotal role in both advisory as well as in drafting work and their persistent
shortage is sure to affect adversely the functioning of the Government. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the causes responsible for this state of affairs should be identified and proactive steps,
including expediting the amendment of Indian Legal Service Rules, 1957, must be undertaken to fill up
the existing vacancies in a time bound manner. Present pace of efforts to fill up vacancies is inadequate
and an effective mechanism in consultation with the concerned agencies like DoPT, UPSC and SSC,
should be evolved for timely filling of vacancies. The Committee further suggests that the Department
should proactively pursue the court cases for early decisions. Further, in the Action Taken Replies to this
Report, the Committee may be informed about the timelines for filling up of vacancies in different grades
in the Department. (Para 5.14)
Action Taken
4.1 There are four grades in Legal Adviser Cadre of ILS namely Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser (JS &
LA), Additional Legal Adviser, Deputy Legal Adviser, and Assistant Legal Adviser. The Department of Legal
Affairs was able to fill three posts of JS and LA through direct recruitment and one by deputation in the year
2017-18.  Presently, the Department of Legal Affairs has requested the UPSC to fill up of the 6 vacancies in
the grade of JS and LA (through Direct Recruitment) and the process is in final stage. Hopefully, these
vacancies are likely to be occupied by the end of this year. A proposal for diversion of 8 posts of Additional
Legal Adviser grade from promotion quota to DR quota was taken up with DoP&T by Department of Legal
Affairs, however the same has not been agreed to so far. Apart from this, a proposal for filling up of two
posts of Addl. Legal Adviser by DR quota is also under litigation. However, the UPSC had recommended
name of one candidate but the said person on being subsequently selected as JS & LA in this Department has
joined the said post. Further, Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure have issued order No. 752985/
2018/E.Coord.I dated 13th April, 2018 regarding filling up of vacant posts by downgradation on account of
non-availability of eligible officers in feeder grade. In pursuance of these orders, some of the posts of
Additional Legal Adviser level may be temporarily downgraded to the DLA level and filled by promotion of
eligible Assistant Legal Advisers. The amendment to the ILS Rules, 1957 is also being considered to ensure
the timely filling of vacancies and prevent unnecessary litigation.
Further Observation
4.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
LAW OFFICERS
Recommendation/Observation
5.0 The Committee observes that of the total sanctioned strength of 25 Law Officers, 9 posts (36%) are

5
presently laying vacant, including the post of Solicitor General of India, who is second law officer of
the country and assists the Attorney General of India. The Law Officers are entrusted with the
responsibility of advising the Government of India on legal matters referred to them; appearing before
the Supreme Court and any High Court on behalf of the Government of India in cases in which the
Government of India is concerned as a party or is otherwise interested; representing the Government of
India in any reference made by the President to the Supreme Court under Article 143 of the Constitution,
etc. In view of such important duties entrusted to them, the Committee feels that it is vital for the
Government to fill these vacancies expeditiously so that its functioning is not affected adversely.
           (Para 5.18)
Action Taken
5.1 The Department of Legal Affairs has since filled up 3 (three) posts of Law Officers (Additional
Solicitor General) in the Supreme Court of India. After some time one of these 3 (three) newly appointed
Law Officer (ASGs) has resigned.  One of the Additional Solicitor General of India has been appointed as
Solicitor General of India. As such, presently 7 (seven) post of Law Officers are vacant. However, the
Department will soon fill the vacant posts of Law Officers.
Further Observation
5.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT)
Recommendation/Observation
6.0 The Committee observes that as per the data provided by the Department, a large number of vacancies
exist in the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal across the board. This is a long standing issue and is a matter of
services concern, particularly with respect to vacancies in the post of Members of the Tribunal. The Committee
fails to understand why no solution has been found to deal effectively with this problem even after so many
years. The Department has itself admitted that due to vacancy in the posts of Members, some of the Benches
are not functioning regularly, resulting in increased pendency. The Committee expresses its dismay over this
state of affairs and urges the Government to analyse the causes responsible for the perennial problem of
shortage of manpower in the Tribunal and take immediate remedial measures to fill the vacancies in a time
bound manner so that the Tribunal functions optimally. Also, in the Action Taken Replies on the
recommendations contained in this Report, the Department should submit a roadmap for filling of vacancies
in the post of Members well in time to ensure that all the Benches of the Tribunal can function regularly.
           (Para 5.27)
Action Taken
6.1 The Government has taken in recent past, pro-active remedial measures to lessen the shortage of
man power in the ITA T, as also highlighted by the Committee. The Department has taken the selection of
President and Vice-President in ITA T to its logical conclusion, after following due procedure through
stipulated post of Members were thoroughly analysed and examined. The Government had invited
applications for appointment of 21 posts of Judicial Member and 16 posts of Accountant Members in the
ITA T in July, 2018. The Selection process in this regard is undertaken to fill up all existing vacancies in
the post of Member in ITA T in the short term. Apart from inviting application for filling of the 37 post of
Members (Judicial/Accountant) in the ITA T, eleven (11) more members of the ITAT has been authorised

6
to sit singly for hearing of appeals involving assessed income upto ` 50 lakhs under Section 255 (3) of the
Income Tax Act, 1961.
6.2 During the year, the Selection Committee to recommend candidates to the post of Vice President in
ITAT had submitted its recommendations.  Taking in to the consideration of the recommendation of the
Selection Committee, the Appointment Committee had approved the appointment of 07 Vice-Presidents in
the ITAT.  Accordingly, 07 Vice-President, have been appointed in the ITAT. During the year, Mr. Justice P.P.
Bhatt, former Judge of the Hon’ble High Court of Gujarat, has been appointed as President of the ITAT. On
the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee 10 officials of the ITAT has been promoted
to the post of Assistant Registrar in the ITAT.
Further Observation
6.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
E-Courts Mission Mode Project (MMP)
Recommendation/Observation
7.0 The e-Courts Mission Mode Project is being implemented to put in place a justice delivery system with
efficiency, accessibility, affordability and is also more transparency. The Committee notes that there is a
shortfall 
` 268 crore in BE 2018-19 allocations for this Project. Inadequate funding would adversely affect
the implementation of important components of the Project, leading to delays in its completion. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that adequate funds may be provided for the Project so that it is not stalled and
accomplishes its set targets and timelines. The Committee, further, recommends that periodic evaluation of
the project be carried out so as to make timely intervention, if any, needed for completion of the project, as
scheduled. (Para 6.10)
Action Taken
7.1 The process of floating a request for proposal by Department of Justice for evaluation of e-Courts
Mission Mode Project is under progress.
Further Observation
7.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendations/Observations
8.0 The Committee is apprised that the National Judicial Data Grid provides a variety of information
to the litigants and judicial administration at various levels for Case Management and Court
Management. The Judicial administration of High Courts and District Courts can make use of it for
policy planning on cases and Court management, equal and sufficient work to judicial officers, planning
for more courts, human resources, infrastructure, etc. It has feature to evaluate judges’ performance.
The Committee feels that this could potentially be an important breakthrough for judicial administration
at various levels. The Committee suggests that the Department should constitute a suitable body to
analyse the data and put it to use so that the Grid serves the purpose of unclogging the system.
(Para 6.11)

7
Action Taken
8.1 As per Policy and Action Plan document of the e-Courts Project, the project now needs to move
towards more comprehensive and in-depth analysis of the huge treasure of data available on NJDG. The e-
Committee, Supreme Court of India is working on Data Analytics and its implementation through software.
Being highly technical and specialized, NIC has arranged a training course for technical teams of the project
on data analytics.
Further Observation
8.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
SCHEMES OF ACTION RESEARCH AND STUDIES ON JUDICIAL REFORMS
Recommendations/Observations
9.0 The Committee observes that though the allocation for the Project in BE 2018-19 has been doubled
from that BE 2017-18; however, there is still a shortfall of 
` 3.5 crore from the projected amount. The
reduced allocation may impact the activities proposed in the project in FY 2018-19, which centre around
developing capacities of marginalized people to secure justice and supporting justice delivery organisation
in serving people better. The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate funds should be made available
at RE state for the Project in FY 2018-19 so that the activities proposed under the Project are not hampered.
 (Para 6.20)
Action Taken
9.1 At the RE stage, the requirement of funds will be re-assessed after considering the expenditure already
incurred in FY 2018-19, projects under implementation, anticipated expenditure for the remaining period of
the FY 2018-19. Additional funds, as required, shall be sought from the Ministry of Finance at RE stage.
Further Observation
9.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES FOR DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES
FOR THE JUDICIARY
Recommendations/Observations
10.0 The Committee appreciates the activities under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Infrastructure
Development for Subordinate Judiciary and is of the view that infrastructure development of courts is
critical for timely delivery of justice. The Committee observes that for achieving the measurable targets of
construction of 1000 court halls and 600 residential units per year, the Government has approved an outlay
of 
` 3,320 crore for three years (` 1000 crore for 2017-18, ` 1110 crore for 2018-19 and ` 1210 for 2019-20).
However, so far reduced allocations have been made for the Scheme. In 2017-18, there was a shortfall of
around ` 370 crore and in BE 2018-19, it is ` 480.80 crore. The Committee feels that such a huge reduction
in allocation for this Scheme would make it impossible to achieve the measurable targets, which would
ultimately affect the justice delivery system. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the allocation
under the CSS may be suitably enhanced at the RE Stage so that the activities under the scheme do not
suffer. (Para 6.29)

8
Action Taken
10.1 The observations of the Committee have been noted. Proposal for enhancement of allocation under
the CSS Scheme will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at RE Stage.
Further Observation
10.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
NYAYA MITRA PROGRAMME AND TELE LAW PROJECT
Recommendations/Observations
11.0 The Committee appreciates the new initiatives of Nyaya Mitra Programme, Tele Law Project and Pro
Bono Legal Service Scheme launched by the Government to improve access to justice and feels that all the
three schemes are conceptually strong. As these initiatives are presently at a nascent stage, their true potential
would only be known in the coming times. However, the Committee recommends that the Government should
take all necessary steps, including providing adequate financial backing, to make these schemes successful
on the ground level. (Para 6.45)
Action Taken / proposed
11.1 Nyaya Mitra, Tele-Law and Pro Bono Legal services were launched as part of the Access to Justice
Schemes being implemented by Department of Justice. A comprehensive review of these initiatives has been
undertaken.  Based on consultations with various stake holders, several improvements in each of these
initiatives are being made which includes preparing a revised scheme for Nyaya Mitra, preparing a dashboard
for Tele Law to make the programme more effective, targeted and useful to the beneficiaries; and development
of mobile app for Pro Bono Legal service.
Further Observation
11.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendations/Observations
12.0 The Committee, therefore, recommends that NALSA should re-examine the ground realities and take
all necessary measures, like establishment of Legal Services Clinics in all the jails, appointment of
adequate number of remand advocates, working with under trial Review Committee in close coordination,
to ensure that the constitutional rights of these prisoners are protected from the stage of first remand itself
and the prisoners are decongested. (Para 6.71)
Action Taken
12.1 NALSA is committed to providing of the free legal services to the prisoners in custody. Number of
persons in custody who have been provided legal aid during the year 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 are
65,093, 1,12,948 and 1,47,662, respectively. Year after year, there is an increase in the number of Legal
Services Clinics in jails. It is pertinent to mention that only around 68 significantly small jails remain where
Legal Services Clinics are yet to be started, and NALSA has instructed State Legal Services Authorities to
complete the process.  However, in the said jails, as mentioned in para 6.71, legal services are provided and
the various activities are carried out for the prisoners. There are regular visits of the Panel Lawyer, Secretary,
DLSA in the jails. District Judges, who are also the Chairperson of the DLSA visit the jails so that they

9
become familiar with the ground reality and take remedies accordingly. UTRCs are headed by the District
and Session Judges, who are also the Chairperson of the DLSAs. In addition, Secretary, DLSA is also a
member of the Committee, and hence, Legal Services Authorities are aware of the ground realities and take
appropriate actions permissible under the law of land. Legal Services Authorities also ensure that during
remand, proper and effective representation is provided to the unrepresented accused.
Further Observation
12.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendations/Observations
13.0 The Committee notes that the projected demand of NALSA has been curtailed by 
` 60 crore, which may
affect the working during the current financial year. Furthermore, human resources constraints may have
impact on its functioning. The Constitutional commitment of the State to afford equal opportunity to all to
secure justice may be hampered due to inadequacy of funds or human resources constraints. The committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government should appropriately enhance Grants-in-aid made available to
the Authority and also take immediate measures to fill vacant posts so that the activities of NALSA do not
suffer. (Para 6.73)
Action Taken
13.1 Enhancement of budgetary allocation to NALSA will be considered at the time of Revised Budget
Estimates 2018-19.
Further Observation
13.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
SECOND NATIONAL JUDICIAL PAY COMMISSION (SNJPC)
Recommendations/Observations
14.0 The Committee is happy to note that the Government has constituted the second National Judicial
Pay Commission to examine the pay/emoluments/service conditions of subordinate judiciary in the country.
The objective of the Commission for bringing parity amongst the judges (5927) in subordinate courts of
similar rank across the States is laudable, The Committee is of the view that the recommendations of the
Commission would help in strengthening subordinate judiciary, thereby promoting judicial efficiency and
administration in the country. (Para 6.75)
Action Taken
14.1 The Second National Judicial Pay Commission (SNJPC), which was appointed on 16/11/2017, has
since submitted its Interim Report on 14.03.2018. The Commission is expected to give its final report within
next six months.
Further Observation
14.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendations/Observations
15.0 The Committee is pained to note that huge pendency of cases exists in the Subordinate Judiciary. The

10
pendency is highest in the States of Uttar Pradesh (61,61,822), Maharashtra (33,36,574), West Bengal
(17,70,820), Bihar (16,58,292) and Gujarat (16,41,355). The Committee in its Sixty-seventh Report on the
Infrastructure Development and Strengthening of Subordinate Courts (2014) expressed its serious concern
over the large number of vacancies existing in the Subordinate Courts and recommended that vacancies of
judicial officers need to be filled-up as both vacancy of judicial officers and pendency of cases are closely
related to each other. The Committee further recommended that regular conducting of morning/evening,
holiday courts, lok adalats, alternative dispute redressal mechanisms, etc., wherever feasible, can help in
reducing the problem of pendency of cases in Subordinate Judiciary.  Sincere efforts are also required on the
part of State Governments to fill the existing vacancies in the Subordinate Courts, so that the disposal rate
of cases may be enhanced. (Para 6.80)
Action Taken
15.1  Filling up of vacant posts in Subordinate Judiciary is the responsibility of the State Governments and
respective High Courts.  Government has requested the High Courts and State Governments to prepare an
Action Plan to fill up vacancies in subordinate Judiciary. Some of the main factors responsible for pendency
of cases in courts are increasing number of State and Central legislations, accumulation of first appeals,
continuation of ordinary Civil Jurisdiction in some of the High Courts, vacancies of Judges, appeals against
orders of quasi-judicial forums going to High Courts, number of revisions/appeals, frequent adjournments,
indiscriminate use of Writ Jurisdiction, lack of adequate arrangement to monitor, track and bunch cases for
hearing.
Further Observation
15.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN IN JUDICIARY
Recommendations/Observations
16.0 Since Independence, only 6 women Judges have been appointed in the Supreme Court of India, first
being in 1989. The Committee, accordingly, desires that the Bench of Higher Judiciary be reflective of
composition of the society and its diversity and recommends that suitable measures be taken to include more
and more Women judges in both Higher and Subordinate Judiciary. Certain States like Bihar (35 per cent),
Andhra Pradesh (33.33 per cent) Odisha (33.33 per cent), Telangana (33.33 per cent, Assam (30 per cent),
Rajasthan (30 per cent) Tamil Nadu (30 per cent), Karnataka (30 per cent), Uttarakhand (30 per cent),
Uttar Pra desh (20 per cent) and Jharkhand (5 per cent) have introduced r eservation for women in
subordinate judiciary. The Committee is further of the view that quota of supernumerary (over and above
the actual intake) as done in the case of Indian Institute of Technology may be replicated in the admission
of five year law programmes, particularly in the National Law Universities. The Committee reiterates the
recommendation in its Eighty-fourth Report on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) that the strength of
women judges should be around 50 per cent of the total strength of the judges. The Committee desires that
the Department should request the State Governments to introduce quota for women in Law Universities
and subordinate judiciary recruitment.
           (Para 6.91)
Action Taken
16.1 There are 73 Women Judges working in different High Courts as on 23.03.2018, which in percentage
terms is 10.89% of working strength. The appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and the High

11
Courts are  made under Articles 124 and  217 of the Constitution of India, which does not provide for
reservation for any caste, class or gender of persons. Therefore, no caste or class-wise data relating to High
Court Judges is maintained. The Government has, however, been  requesting the Chief Justices of the High
Courts that while sending proposals for appointment of Judges, due consideration be given to suitable
candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities and Women.
This is being done to ensure a fair representation of different sections of the society in the Higher Judiciary.
There is no proposal for amendment in Articles 124 and  217 of the Constitution.
16.2 The appointment of judicial officers in subordinate judiciaries is the responsibility of the State
Governments and respective High Courts. However, the Department, vide letter dated 03.08.2018, has
conveyed the observation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to High Courts and State Governments.
16.3 Further, the subject matter regarding reservation for women in Law Universities and Legal Education
is within the domain of Department of Legal Affairs. Department of Legal Affairs, vide letter dated 03.08.2018,
has been asked to request State Governments to introduce quota for women in Law Universities and
Subordinate Judiciary recruitment. A statement indicating the strength of women Judges in the High Courts
is placed below.
Further Observation
16.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Department.

CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
Recommendation/Observation
1.0 The Committee notes that the Department proposes to take some steps aimed towards curtailment of
legal cases on behalf of the Union of India and its Organisations, Departments, etc. and requires budgetary
support for the same. The Committee recognizes that the Government and its various agencies are the
predominant litigants in courts and tribunals in the country. It feels that all necessary steps must be taken to
reduce Government litigation in courts so that valuable court time is spent in resolving other pending cases
so as to reduce average pendency time. In view thereof, the Committee recommends that adequate budgetary
support should be provided to the Department to formulate and implement the proposed Legal Research and
Education Promotion Development Scheme (LREPDS). (Para 5.5)
Action Taken
1.1 The Department of Legal Affairs is thankful for the Committee’s recommendations for adequate
budgetary support to the Department for the proposed Legal Research and Education Promotion
Development Scheme (LREPDS) in consultation with the different stakeholders, a new LREPD scheme
has been evolved to facilitate intervention in legal policy framework, through deliberations and formulation
of policy proposals to strengthen the arbitration mechanism, legal professional institutions, enforcement
of contracts and creation of conducive ecosystem for early settlement of court cases and disputes in the
country, especially commercial cases, etc. The scheme also envisage creation of knowledge products
through legal policy research studies, survey, data banks, strengthening of assets and resources in legal
training and education areas, advocacy, etc. and dissemination of knowledge through conduct of seminars
and conferences, imparting training to officials in Department of Legal Affairs etc. to facilitate development
of legal research and education.
1.2 The proposed scheme also aims to promote Legal Information Management and Briefing System
(LIMBS), to ensure effective data sharing, monitoring and curtailment of legal cases on behalf of the Union
of India and its Organisations, Departments, etc. through web based applications including Online Dispute
Resolution (ODR).
The successful implementation of the Legal research and education promotion development scheme
(LREPDS) will
(i) Strengthen quality of research in Law Universities/Institutions particularly in the emerging field
of law and in the global context.
(ii) facilitate efforts to reform administration of justice and law in application to the various aspects
related to the social, economic and other needs of the citizen.
(iii) promote the diffusion of the knowledge of law its administration and principles by suitable
means to all stakeholders.
(iv) promote the efforts of simplification, systematization and elucidation of law by undertaking
necessary study/project on the subject.
12

13
(v) aid the publication of research/project paper/reports at domestic and international level.
(vi) skill up-gradation of Advocates.
(vii) undertake documentation of important legal material.
(viii) aid in efforts to Universities/Research institutions to renovate the legal education system, and
publish research studies in the form of books and reports.
(ix) stablish Chair in legal research Institute/National Law Universities of repute.
(x) encourage by suitable means academic competitiveness amongst the Indian universities to bring
overall improvement in the quality of research and legal education in the country.
The LREPD scheme is being further actively examined for seeking requisite administrative and financial
approval as per extant rules.
Further Observation
1.3 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is optimistic that Legal Research and Education
Promotion Development Scheme (LREPDS) envisaged by the Department will help in curtailment
of litigation, besides promoting legal research and education. The Committee may be apprised of
the implementation, including bottleneck if any, of LREPDS during the deliberations on the Demand
for Grants 2019-20.
INCOME TAX APELLATE TRIBUNAL
Recommendation/Observation
2.0 The Committee notes that between 2004-05 and 2009-10, the disposal rate was much higher than the
number of cases instituted. The trend reversed between 2010-11 and 2014-15. Again from 2015-16 onwards
the rate of disposal has been higher than the institution rate, as a result of which pendency has come down
from more than 1 lakh cases in 2014-15 to around 92,000 cases as on the 31st December , 2017. The
Committee observes that though, with the existing strength of Members, the pendency is not growing but a
huge backlog of cases continues to exist, which is a cause of serious concern. The Committee has been
informed of the series of measures being taken by the Tribunal to reduce pendency of cases and that in this
financial year up to 31st December, 2017, an average of 50 appeals have been disposed of by each Member
of the Tribunal, which though is an improvement but is not commensurate with the disposal is not likely to
make a major dent in the backlog cases and without improving incumbency of Members, the pendency
situation is likely to remain grim. Besides, there could be other factors also contributing to the pendency in
the Tribunal. The Committee recommends that the Department should undertake a comprehensive cause
analysis exercise for this state of affairs and take remedial measures urgently so that the pendency shows
substantial improvement and the Tribunal truly lives up to its motto of ‘Nishpaksh Sulabh Satvar Nyay’,
which means impartial, easy and speedy justice. In the Action Taken Replies to this Report, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the findings of the above exercise and the impact of the measures being taken
by the Tribunal, as stated above, to reduce pendency. (Para 5.28)
Action Taken
2.1 The ITAT has informed that all the Benches of ITAT have been instructed to scrutinize and identify the
cases which are covered by decisions of ITAT, High Courts and the Supreme Court and to post them on

14
priority basis. This includes group and small matters. The Bars are also requested to bring to the notice of
ITAT, all such covered cases for out of turn posting. Besides, Search and Seizure cases and Appeals U/s 263
are also being given priority in their disposal.  Further, vide Finance Act, 2016 an amendment in Income Tax
Act, 1961 have been made that the appeal involving assessed income upto ` 50 lakhs can be heard by Single
Member Bench and accordingly the same has been implemented. In this regard, it is submitted that in August
2018, the Government has authorized eleven (11) more members of the ITAT to sit singly for hearing of
appeals involving assessed income upto ` 50 lakhs under section 255 (3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961. The
ITAT has also implemented the use of information technology for early disposal of appeal by introducing
e-court i.e. hearing through video conferencing. ITAT has also informed that in order to improve the disposal
of appeals and stay granted matters, following decisions have been taken in the Vice-President Conference
held on 8th and 9th September, 2017 at ITAT, New Delhi:
“(a) Improvement in the disposal of appeals:
The President, ITAT had expressed his concern over the low disposal of appeals by the Members. It
has been decided that all the Members should give the required disposal i.e. 50 appeals, per month and
the Vice-President or the Senior Members of the respective zones should ensure that Members in their
zones give requisite disposals of appeals.
(b) To ensure disposal of stay granted matters within a period of 180 days in which stay is granted:
It has been decided that the stay granted appeals should be disposed of within a period of six months
and the adjournments in stay granted matters should not be given for more than a month. All efforts
should be made to dispose of the stay granted matters within the prescribed period. It has also been
decided that constitution of regular Benches should be framed for the whole week i.e. five days and
the stay applications should be heard by the respective Bench on Friday.
(c) Sending of regular touring Benches at non-functional Benches:
It has been decided that the touring Benches should be sent to all non-functional Benches regularly, so
that pendency of appeals in such Benches does not pile up.”
As regard cause analysis for High Pendency in ITAT, ITAT has informed that they are making regular
efforts for reduction in the pendency and also tries to analyze the cause for high pendency. ITAT
found that after the globalization of economy many multinational companies have come to India and
started the business. Therefore, now a substantial portion of litigation before the ITAT is relating to
international tax issues which are complicated in nature, time-consuming and also have high stakes.
Usually, for hearing one such appeal, the time taken is several times more than the time taken in
deciding the other average appeal. However, as suggested by the Committee, the ITAT has informed
that they would further hold a tripartite meeting i.e., the meeting between the ITAT, Income Tax
Department and the ITAT Bar Association so as to find ways and means to speed up the disposal of
appeals. The ITAT assures the Committee that all efforts would be made to ensure that pendency is
reduced as early as possible.
Further Observation
2.2 The Committee notes the reply of ITAT. However, the Committee feels establishing and running
ITAT in various parts of the country requires financial and physical support on the part of Government,
and therefore, is of the view that performance appraisal mechanism must be developed by the

15
Department of Legal Affairs to assess the performance of individual members and each ITAT Benches,
thereby, developing a ranking mechanism for ITATs, at National level to identify and address the
problems of underperforming ITATs.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Recommendations/Observations
3.0 In most cases lawyers without much experience are empanelled who do not understand the complexity
of the crime. Also, in most cases the prisoners are unaware of who is representing them and at what stage
their case is.  The Committee had expressed displeasure over the quality of lawyers empanelled for providing
legal aid in its Ninety-first Report also. NALSA has  informed that various steps are being taken to
appoint competent lawyers, including proposed amendment to the NALSA Free and Competent Legal
Services Regulations, 2010.  The Committee also notes that the fee of the panel lawyers has been recently
enhanced by all SLSAs. It is a welcome step but the Committee feels that it still may not be lucrative
enough to attract talented lawyers.  The Committee feels that a lot more still needs to be done to attract
talented lawyers and, therefore, recommended that NALSA should take proactive measures to ensure that
only competent lawyers are appointed on the panel.  The Committee also suggests that the performance of
the lawyers already on the panel should be reviewed periodically for improved results.
(Para 6.72)
Action Taken
3.1 A Committee was constituted by NALSA for preparation of guidelines for selection of efficient
and committed Panel Lawyers.  The Committee had submitted its report to the Central Authority (NALSA)
chaired by Hon’ble Chief Justice of India and Hon’ble Executive Chairman, NALSA and other Members
of the Central Authority who have accepted the amendments suggested in the report of the Committee.
These amendments relating to NALSA (Free and Competent) Regulations, 2010 will be notified by
NALSA.
The amendments include:-
(i) Evolving criteria keeping in view the competence, integrity and suitability and experience of
lawyers under consideration for empanelment so that competent lawyers are empanelled.
(ii) Periodical training for panel lawyers
(iii) Setting up of Monitoring and Mentoring Committee for close monitoring of the court based legal
services rendered and the progress of the cases in the legal aided matters and to guide and advise
the panel lawyers.
(iv) Enhancement of honorarium payable to the Retainer Lawyers.
3.2 Selection process has been improved, and amendments in the Free and Competent Regulations 2009
have been also made to enable empanelment of Senior and other capable lawyers. NALSA has devised Two
Training Modules for Training of Panel Lawyers. The Third Module is also ready for release. Another
training Module for Probation Officers and Legal Aid Lawyers attached to Juvenile Justice Boards has been
prepared. The purpose of these training Modules is to enhance the skills and competency of the panel
lawyers. Regular trainings are being conducted for Panel Lawyers. NALSA has conducted training of Master
Trainers. These Master Trainers provide training to the Panel Lawyers through-out the country. During the

16
year 2017, 893 training programmes for panel lawyers were conducted by the State Legal Services Authorities
across the country.
Further Observation
3.3 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that NALSA/SLSA should evaluate the
performance of panel lawyers engaged every year and accordingly, eliminate underperforming lawyers
and ensure that only competent lawyers are appointed on the panel.
V ACANCIES AND PENDENCY OF CASES IN SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS
Recommendations/Observations
4.0 The Committee is concerned with the large number of vacancies of Judges in High Courts and also took
note of problem in its Eighty-seventh and Ninety-first Reports. The vacancy of judges is very high in High
Courts of Allahabad (56), Karnataka (38), Calcutta (39), Punjab & Haryana (35), Telangana & Andhra
Pradesh (30) and Bombay (24). The Committee notes that the guidelines laid in the Supreme Court Advocates-
on-Record Association and another vs. Union of India (1993), popularly known as Second Judges Case, for
the appointment of judges are not being adhered to by the High Courts, which is the responsibility of the
Supreme Court in its administrative side to direct the concerned High Courts to initiate the process of filling up
the vacancies in advance. The Committee is of the view that to reduce pendency of cases, the existing vacancy
positions of judges need to be filled up immediately and the vacancies arising in future should be filled strictly
as per the guidelines in the Second Judges Case. The Committee in its Eighty-seventh Report on “Inordinate
Delay in Filling up the V acancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts” recommended for raising the age of
retirement of Supreme Court judges to 67 years and of High Court judges to 65 years. The Committee again
reiterates its recommendation as it feels that it would help in retaining the existing judges, which in turn would
help in reducing both vacancy and pendency of cases in the short run.
           (Para 6.85)
Action Taken
4.1 The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President after consultation with such of the
Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for
the purpose.  In the case of appointment of a judge other than the Chief Justice of India, the Chief Justice of
India is always required to be consulted [ vide Article 124 (2) of the Constitution].The Judges of the High
Courts are appointed by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the
State and in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High
Court [vide Article 217(1) of the Constitution]. The appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court and High
Courts is a continuous and collaborative process of the Judiciary and Executive. While every effort is made
to fill vacancies expeditiously, vacancies keep on arising on account of retirement, resignation or elevation
of Judges and increase in Judge Strength.
4.2 All appointments of Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts are being made as per the existing
procedure framed consequent to Supreme Court judgment in Supreme Court Advocate on Record Vs. UoI
reported vide (1993) 4 SCC 441 and Special Reference No. 1 of 1998, RE (1998) of SCC 739. As per the
MoP, the initiation of proposal for appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court vests with the Chief Justice
of India, while initiation of proposal for appointment of Judges in the High Courts vests with the Chief

17
Justice of the concerned High Court. As per the existing Memorandum of Procedure, the following timelines
has been prescribed:
                             Activities                   Timelines
Proposal to be initiated by Chief Justice of  High Court 6 months before occurrence of vacancy
Chief Minister/Governor to recommend proposal Within six weeks
received from the Chief Justice of High Court
Chief Justice of India/Supreme Court Collegiums to Within four weeks
recommend the proposal to MLJ
Recommendations of CJI to PM for advising the Within three weeks
President for approval
4.3 However, the timeline for initiation of the proposals for filling up of vacancies in High Courts is rarely
adhered to by the High Courts. The Supreme Court in its Judgment dated 23rd February, 2018 in Writ
Petition(C) No. 835 of 2017 in Sunil Samdaria vs. Union of India has inter-alia taken note of undue delay in
filling up of vacant posts of Judges and directed all stakeholders including High Courts for filling up of
vacant post in time bound manner. Hon’ble Supreme Court has further directed to keep hope and aspirations
of litigants alive and to fulfil the commitment of providing speedy justice, the process of appointment of
Judges needs to be done expeditiously.
4.4 The Judge strength of the Supreme Court (including the Chief Justice of India) is 31.  As on 23.3.2018,
24 Judges are in position, leaving 7 vacancies of Judges to be filled. As on 23.03.2018 against the sanctioned
strength of the High Court Judges of 1079, 670 Judges are in position, leaving 409 vacancies of Judges to
be filled. The position on appointments of Judges made in Supreme Court and High Courts during 2016-18
(till 23.02.2018) is as under:
2016 2017 2018
Judges appointed in the Supreme Court 04 05 —
Appointment of Chief Justices 14 08 04
Transfer of Chief Justices 04 — 01
Judges appointed in the High Courts *126 115 11
Additional Judges made Permanent in High Courts *131 31 66
Additional Judges given fresh term 22 05 01
Transfer of Judges 33 05 01
New posts of Judges created in High Courts #173 — —
* Highest ever in a given year
#new posts created in 78 (2014) + 60 (2015)+ 35 (2016)

18
4.5 The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010 which provided for increasing
the retirement age of High Court Judges from 62 years to 65 years was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
25.08.2010. The Bill could not be taken up for consideration and passing in the Parliament and lapsed with
the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha. There is no proposal to extend the retirement age of the High Court
Judges from 62 to 65 years and Supreme Court Judges to 67 years.
Further Observation
4.6 The Committee is of the view that vacancy positions of judges need to be filled up immediately
and the vacancies arising in future should be filled strictly as per the guidelines in the Second
Judges Case and the directions of the Supreme Court of India in the Sunil Samdaria  vs. Union of
India (2018). The Committee feels that timeline of six weeks given to Chief Minister/ Governor as
informed in the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry may be reduced to expedite the process of
appointment of judges. The Committee also feels since there is no proposal to raise the retirement
age of judges in higher judiciary by the Government, unnecessary delay in recruitment of judges
should be avoided at any cost.

CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS
NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation/Observation
1.0 The Committee also recommends the Department to use simple day-to-day vocabulary in Hindi,
wherever possible, and simplify the legal terminology for the understanding of the common people of the
country.  The Department may also explore the possibility of creating a separate webpage where all the
Acts/Ordinances/Rules translated by it in regional languages are available. The Committee further
recommends the Department to recruit more language officers or engage experts or consultants so that
legal texts and documents could be simplified and translated in regional languages for the understanding
of the common people. (Para 3.7)
Action Taken
1.1 As per the recommendation of the Committee, the Official Languages Wing is simplifying the legal
terminology being used for preparing the Hindi texts of Acts/Ordinances/Rule etc.  New words have been
incorporated into the legal glossary which are easily understood by the general public. The Department has
redesigned the webpages of  Official Languages Wing and latest parliamentary enactments are being posted/
hosted  it on a regular basis. Legislative Department is recruiting more and more Regional Language officers
so that legal documents could be simplified and translated into Regional Languages.
Further Observation
1.2 The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee feels that Department should prepare
a blueprint for future work to be undertaken in the area of translation of Acts/Ordinances/Rules
etc. and also expedite the recruitment of Regional Language officers and engagement of experts or
consultants, so that the translation work of the Department doesn’t suffer due to shortage of
manpower. The Committee wishes to be apprised of further action taken in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
2.0 The Committee also notes that Department in its written replies to the questionnaire has submitted that
at present, there is no specific policy in vogue on litigation. A ‘National Litigation Policy’ was drafted in the
year, 2010 but has not been finalized so far. At present, it is under active consideration of the Government.
The Committee recommends that the ‘National Litigation Policy’ should be finalized and implemented by
the Government on a priority basis to reduce delays and arrears in the system in order to achieve the
objectives of the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
2.1 Formulation of fresh National Litigation Policy is under the consideration of the Department of Legal
Affairs and its finalization will take place only when all stakeholders are in a position to implement it.
Further Observation
2.2 The Committee would have appreciated had the department firmed up the plan and action
to formulate the National Litigation Policy (NLP). The Department is therefore again, suggested
19

20
to expedite preparation of a concrete road-map in the implementation of NLP and it should also
apprise the Committee about the development during the deliberations on the Demands for
Grants (2019-20).
Recommendation/Observation
3.0 The Committee observes that there is an overall shortage of manpower of around 25% in the Department
and the situation is even worse in the ILS cadre, where around 37% of the posts are laying vacant. The
Committee notes that this is a perennial problem in the Department and the Committee had recommended
for urgent redressal of the causes responsible for this state of affairs in its Ninety-first Report also.
Further, the Committee infers from the reply of the Department that the remedial actions being taken by
it are not yielding the desired results and there are still huge vacancies existing in the Department.
(Para 5.13)
Action Taken
3.1 The Department of Legal Affairs has vacant posts in the various cadres of Central Secretariat
Services (CSS), Central Secretariat Stenographers Service (CSSS), Central Secretariat Clerical Service
(CSCS), Central Secretariat Official Language Service (CSOLS) and Indian Legal Services (ILS). The
vacancies in CSS, CSSS, CSCS and CSOLS are filled up on the basis of nomination received from the
Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T) in respect of CSS, CSSS, CSCS and Department of
Official Language (DoOL) in respect of CSOLS. The shortage of manpower in the posts belonging to
CSS, CSSS, CSCS and CSOLS cadres is due to non-receipt of nomination from DoP&T and DoOL in
spite of repeated reminders. As regard ILS cadre vacant post, the vacant posts in the whole hierarchy of
Legal Adviser Cadre due to litigation at the level of Deputy Legal Adviser (DLA) since 2012. Now, the
litigation has been resolved as the Supreme Court has delivered its judgement in SLP(C) No. 24215/ 2017
on 18.05.2018. As a result, offers have been issued to 06 officers at DLA level on Direct Recruitment
(DR) basis and two of them have joined; while 12 Departmental Assistant Legal Advisers (ALAs) have
been promoted as DLAs on regular basis. The resultant vacancies on account of promotion of ALAs will
be filled by promotion of Superintendent (Legal) and some of these may be taken up to the UPSC for
direct recruitment, as per quota. As regard direct recruitment in the grade of Deputy Legal Adviser
(DLA), subsequent to the UPSC recommendations offer of appointment have been sent and six candidates
who may also join the Department in next two months.
Further Observation
3.2 The Committee infers from the reply that no progress has so far been made with regard to
filling up of posts to be filled up from CSS, CSSS CSCS and CSOLS cadres. The Committee fails to
understand why nominations could not be made by DoPT. If this continues, posts are not likely to be
filled up at all. The Committee impress upon both DoPT and Department of Legal Affairs to resolve
this issue and then apprise the Committee. As regards, ILS cadre posts some progress appears to
have been made. The Committee however expresses its serious concern over the vacancy positions
and litigations relating to it and of the view that Department of Legal Affairs being Law Department
of the Union of India should have foreseen the legal implications before starting recruitment process.
The Committee, recommends that the Department needs to be cautious in its approach and should
take all necessary steps for filling up the vacancy positions, so that the work of Department is not
hampered.

21
Recommendation/Observation
4.0 The Committee applauds the Indian Law Institute for the quality legal research work being done
by it. However, the Committee fails to appreciate the reluctance of the Institute to become fully self-
sustainable even after six decades of its establishment and more than a decade after being granted
deemed university status. The Committee notes that there has been persistent shortage of Teaching and
Non-teaching staff in the Institute but in the year 2017-18, only the post of Librarian was advertised.
The Committee notes with dismay that the Institute is not making any serious efforts to fill vacant
positions and is content to work with the existing staff strength. It is not inclined to introduce more
academic programmes and has also informed that it has reduced the number of courses offered for
greater emphasis on research activities. The Committee feels that the Institute will not be deviating
from its objective of promoting and conducting legal research by expanding its academic activities. On
the contrary, it will be fulfilling its objective, which is also to promote the improvement of legal
education, and to impart instruction in law and allied fields. The Committee reiterates that the vacant
positions in ILI should be filled-up immediately so that it is able to expand its activities and move in
the direction of becoming a self-sustaining Institute, and avoid being a permanent drag on public
funds. However, Government funds may continue to be provided for a limited period till it becomes
fully self-sustained. As regards the request of the Institute that it may be accorded the status of ‘Institute
of National Importance’, the Committee recommends that the Department of Legal Affairs should
examine the issue and share its opinion with the Committee. (Para 5.34)
Action Taken
4.1 The strengthening of Indian Law Institute (ILI), through accordance of the status of “Institute of
National Importance” require enhancement of its physical, financial, institutional and academic assistance
and resources. This would also facilitate the institute to become fully self-sustainable for working in
the areas of quality legal research and academics. As of now, it is difficult for the institute to introduce
for academic courses due to space constraints and lack of infrastructure without any further scope for
internal resources augmentation. ILI has informed that at present, the Institute manage to generate ` 4 crore
by itself from fee, rent, sale of publications etc. and it seems difficult for the Institute introduce more
academic courses due to space constraints and lack of infrastructure and there is very less scope for
the Institute to earn more revenue for its activities. However, the Institute has assured to take necessary
steps for filling up the faculty positions to improve research activities and to enhance the stature of the
Institute at par with International Law Schools. Further, as suggested by the Committee, the institute
will explore more avenues for expansion of its activities both in terms of academic as well as
infrastructure development. ILI is one of the pioneer in legal research and academic, however, due to
limited resources and assets for the present, the proposal to give INI status to ILI require in depth
analysis of its resources.
Further Observation
4.2 The Committee feels that Indian Law Institute’s (ILI) infrastructural requirements and
shortcomings should be evaluated by a third party to assess its actual requirements. The Committee
recommends the ILI to fill-up vacant positions on priority basis and inform the action taken by it
during the current financial year on the issue. The Department is further requested to examine the
issue of Institute of National Importance (INI) demand of ILI and furnish report to the Committee
during the deliberations of the Demands for Grants (2019-20).

22
Recommendation/Observation
5.0 The Committee is of the view that Notaries are an important link in the judicial system and provide
cost effective services to public for various basic services viz., verification, authentication, certification
of documents, etc. in the country. The Committee is, therefore, despondent to note that nation-wide more
than 5000 vacancies of Notaries exist under the Central Government quota. The data shows that 11
States/UTs do not have a single notary appointed and in most other States/UTs also, there are huge
vacancies. However , the Government is not taking any proactive measures to fill them. The vacancies are
not even advertised and the interested candidates need to apply suo motu for the notariship. Further, the
Committee also observes that the entire process of appointment of Notaries from application stage to
issue of Certificate of Practice takes an inordinate time; from interview to selection alone, this period is
almost 2-3 years. This state of affairs is completely unacceptable and the Department should take immediate
action to remedy the problem, starting by advertising all the vacancies. Further, a reasonable time-frame
should be decided to complete the entire process of selection of notaries and issue of Certificate of
Practice. The renewal of Certificate of Practice should also be done in a time-bound manner . Just because
the Notaries Act, 1952 and Notaries Rules, 1956 do not prescribe specific time-limit for the exercise, it
does not mean that the Department can unduly delay the entire process, thereby causing hardship to the
common people. The Committee recommends that the Department should take immediate measures, including
the ones suggested above, to fill the existing vacancies in the notaries in a timely manner. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard in the Action Taken Replies of the Department
to this Report. (Para 5.46)
Action Taken
5.1 The Notaries Act and Rules do not provide for publishing of advertisement. However, suggestion of
the Committee has been noted. Further, as no application/memorial has been received from the 11 States. In
the past, we have conducted interviews for the States of Punjab, Haryana, Karnataka, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Tripura, Meghalaya and Assam. It is also
submitted that from interview to issue of certificate, it normally takes 2 to 3 months.
5.2 In this regard, it is also submitted that initially Quota of maximum number of notaries to be appointed
by the Central Government as well as State Government/Union Territory Administration was fixed vide
Notification dated 09.05.2001 by  inserting Schedule under Rule 8(4A) of the Notaries Rules. Thereafter, the
Schedule has been amended from time-to-time and number of notaries to be appointed by the Central
Government as well as State Government/ Union Territory Administration has been increased and hence,
these increased vacancies are unfilled.
5.3 Under Section 5(1)(b) of the Notaries Act appointment of notaries is for a period of five years and
under Section 5(2) of the Notaries Act subsequent renewal is for a period of five years at a time which is a
continuing process. This Department is in receipt of applications for appointment as Notary in large number.
This Department also receipts of large number of applications for renewal, extension of area, change of
area, RTI matters, Public Grievances and has to face court cases, etc. Since appointment of notaries is a
continuing process as such it may be impractical for this department to fix a time-frame for completing the
entire process of selection of notaries and issue of Certificate of Practice. However, best efforts are being
taken by this Department to do the best and Committee’s view will be taken on priority in the best possible
manner within legal framework and capacities.

23
Further Observation
5.4 The committee is of the view that Notaries are important link in the judicial system. Their
large vacancy positions, along with delay in appointment and renewal, portray the half-hearted
actions of Department in the appointment of Notaries. The Notaries Act, 1992 and Rules framed
thereunder doesn’t specifically call for issuing of advertisement for appointment of Notaries,
however, it also doesn’t bar the Department to issue advertisement for appointing notaries.
Continuance of such state of affairs is pathetic. The Committee recommends the Department to
streamline its process to fill-up vacancies of Notaries. Further, no dedicated mechanism is available
to deal with the grievance of candidates on the Department’s website. The Committee also
recommends the Department to establish a dedicated cell and publicize the contact details of
officers/staffs dealing with the Cell so as to resolve the grievance of the candidates, Action taken
in this regard may be apprised to the Committee during the deliberations on the Demands for
Grants (2019-20).
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
GRAM NYAYALAYAS
Recommendations/Observations
6.0 The pace of establishment of Gram Nyayalayas has been very slow; only 343 Gram Nyayalayas have
been notified by 11 States so far and out of these only 210 are functional in 9 States. The Committee has
been expressing concern regarding this state of affairs for a long time. The Committee has been of the view
that delegation of responsibility to establish Gram Nyayalayas to High Courts and State Governments in the
Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers of the States since 2013 has not seen any
heartening improvement. Therefore, in its Ninety-fourth Report, the Committee had suggested that the Department
should explore a tri-partite model so that expertise of the Department could also be utilized in establishing
Gram Nya yalayas. The Committee also notes that the Evaluation agency of the Scheme, National
Productivity Council, has recommended for continuation of the Scheme with detailed operational guidelines,
enhanced Central assistance and improved monitoring mechanisms.
 (Para 6.36)
6.1 The Committee feels that though the institution of Gram Nyayalayas have not achieved the objectives
of either speedy disposal or inexpensive justice for the poor so far but can still succeed if concrete,
well planned and continuous efforts are made. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the
recommendations of the National Productivity Council for preparation of detailed operational guidelines,
enhanced Central assistance and improved monitoring mechanisms should be implemented immediately.
The Committee also reiterates its recommendation that the Department should explore a tripartite model
so that expertise of the Department could also be utilized in establishing Gram Nyayalayas.
(Para 6.37)
Action Taken
6.2 In terms of Section 3 (1) of the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008, it is for the State Governments to
establish Gram Nyayalayas in consultation with the respective High Courts. As per information made available
by State Governments/High Courts, 343 Gram Nyayalayas have been notified so far by 11 States, out of
these, 210 are operational in nine States at present.

24
Sl. No. State Gram Nyayalayas Notified Gram Nyayalayas Functional
1. Madhya Pradesh 89 89
2. Rajasthan 45 45
3. Karnataka 2 0
4. Odisha 22 14
5. Maharashtra 39 24
6. Jharkhand 6 1
7. Goa 2 0
8. Punjab 2 1
9. Haryana 2 2
10. Uttar Pradesh 104 4
11. Kerala 30 30
 Total 343 210
6.3 The difficulties faced by States in setting up of Gram Nyayalayas were discussed in the meeting of the
Law/Home Secretaries and Registrar Generals of the High Courts held on 19 - 20 April, 2012. One of the
main reasons for the slow pace has been the request by the States for more financial assistance. Besides,
response of the Bar, reluctance of police officials and other State functionaries to invoke jurisdiction of
Gram Nyayalayas, non-availability of notaries and stamp vendors and more importantly, problem of concurrent
jurisdiction of regular courts, are other issues highlighted by the States which are coming in the way of
speedy operationalization of the scheme.  As per decision taken in the Conference of Chief Justices of High
Courts and Chief Ministers of the States on 7th April, 2013 it is left to State Governments and High Courts
to set up Gram Nyayalayas wherever feasible, taking into account their local problems.
Further Observation
6.4 The Committee does not appreciate the manner in which the establishment of Gram
Nyayalayas has been taken up by the Government. Gram Nyayalayas Act was primarily enacted
to ensure inexpensive and speedies justice to the people at their door steps but  it is unfortunate
that after a decade of the passage of Gram Nyayalayas Act, in 2008, only 343 Gram Nyayalayas
are notified, and out of which only 210 are in functional position. The Committee is not happy
with the current pace of implementation of Gram Nyayalayas and feels that the delegation of
power to establish Gram Nyayalayas to respective State Governments and High Courts taken in
the Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers way back in 2013 have not
yielded the desired result and the continuance of existing state of affairs in every likelihood
defeat the very purpose for which the Gram Nyayalayas Act was enacted. The Committee
accordingly, reiterates its views contained in its Report on the Demand for Grants (2018-19) of
the Ministry and recommends the Department to explore the tripartite model to expedite the
establishment and operationalisation of Gram Nyayalayas and also recommends the Department

25
to apprise the Committee during the deliberations on the Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the
steps taken by it, year-wise since the financial year 2013-14, to establish and operationalize
Gram Nyayalayas in the country.
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY (NALSA)
Recommendations/Observations
7.0 As per the Two Hundred and Sixty Eight Report of the Law Commission, 67 per cent of India’ s
prison inmates are under trial prisoners, who are presumably innocent according to law.  A majority of
them (70.60 per cent) are illiterate or semiliterate and belong to socio-economically marginalized
groups.  This has led to overcrowding of prisons and violation of basic rights of prisoners.  The
Committee has been apprised of the various measure being taken/proposed to taken by NALSA for
under trial prisoners and convicts in jails, which include establishment of Legal Services Clinics in
about 1070 jails to provide effective legal services, appointment of 9563 remand advocates, working
with under trial Review Committee for release of prisoners who are entitled to statutory bails, etc.
Legal Aid is a Constitutional imperative under Articles 14, 21 and 39 (A) of the Constitution of India.
More so, Legal Services Act, 1987 has been enacted with a view to provide legal aid and services to the
indignant and vulnerable sections of the society and promote legal awareness amongst them.  To the
query of the Committee about the non-availability of Legal Services Clinics in certain jails, the
Committee was informed that 1070 Legal Services Clinics have been established various jails across
the country and in 168 jails it is yet to be established. The Committee is pained to note that even after
30 years of the enactment of Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, NALSA has not be able to establish
Legal Services Clinics in all the jails of the country. The conditions of jails in the country are pitiable
with overcrowding, lack of healthcare facility, etc. In many cases prisoner with petty criminal charges
are made to stay with hardened criminals, leading to the making of potential criminals in future.  There
must be segregation of criminals based on the nature of charges against them and under-trial prisoners
who have served fifty-per cent of their term should be releases as per Section 436 A of the Cr.PC.
However, it is constrained to note that the constitutional commitment to provide legal aid services from
the time the accused is produced before the Magistrate for the first time and thereafter each time he/she
is produced for remand, is not being fulfilled. The experience at the ground level is that the accused do
not get representation from the time of first remand as claimed by NALSA.  It is usually at a much later
stage and in many cases at the time of evidence. By that time it is too late to protect the right of the
accused.  Also, there are issues of insufficient briefing and instructions to the panel lawyers, as well as
non-availability of translated material, etc. that comes in the way of cause of justice for these people.
(Para 6.70)
Action Taken
7.1 NALSA is committed to providing of free legal services to prisoners as per the  mandate of Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987. In this regard, various programmes are carried out by the Legal Services
Authorities at National, State, District and Taluk levels. In the jails, Legal Services Authorities are primarily
mandated to give free legal aid to un-represented prisoners. All the prisoners do not avail free legal aid as
many engage private counsel also. For such prisoners also legal advice and information with regard to the
status of their cases and the other related information is provided by the Legal Services Clinics, Jail visiting
advocates in the jail. The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 was notified in the year 1995. Since then the

26
activities and the grass root programmes have increased. In a jail, primarily, legal services are provided
through following modes:-
(i) Jail Legal Services Clinics.
(ii) Legal Services Camps held inside the jail.
(iii) Regular visit of Secretary, District Legal Services Authority to jail on monthly basis.
(iv) Carrying out specific programmes for jail inmates.
(v) Regular visits by the Jail Visiting Lawyer.
(vi) Long stay Prisoners trained as PLVs.
7.2 The process of establishing Legal Services Clinics in jail started after notification of the National Legal
Services Authority (Legal Services Clinics) Regulations, 2011 by the Central Authority of NALSA. At present
1158 Legal Services Clinics have been established in jails. It is pertinent to mention here that NALSA has
started the process of digitisation of legal Services Clinics with an objective to ensure that real time data of
all the prisoners is maintained and no prisoner remains unrepresented before the court of law. It is also to
ensure that the appeals of the convicts are filed timely and the legal aid is provided to them wherever
required. It is further submitted that in all the jails, functionaries of Legal Services Authorities visit on regular
basis and they interact with the prisoners. It is further submitted that various campaigns are organised from
time to time. For instance, recently a campaign for women prisoners and children living with them inside the
jail was carried out across the country. In the said campaign, special focus was put upon  the legal rights of
the women prisoners and the efforts  were made to interact with each and every women prisoner. In the
campaign, apart from the legal rights, their other rights such as nutritional and health rights  were also
looked into.
7.3 It is further submitted that Under Trial Review Committees (UTRCs) have been established in all the
districts. The said committee hold quarterly meetings. The areas which primarily are looked into by the
UTRCs are as follows:-
(i) Under-trial Prisoners (UTPs) covered under Section 436A Cr.PC.
(ii) UTPs released on bail by the court, but have not been able to furnish sureties.
(iii) UTPs accused of compoundable offences.
(iv) UTPs eligible under Section 436 of Cr.PC.
(v) UTPs who may be covered under Section 3 of the Probation of Offenders  Act, namely   accused
of offence under Sections 379, 380, 381, 404, 420 IPC or alleged to be an offence not more
than 2 years imprisonment.
(vi) Convicts who have undergone their sentence or are entitled to release because of remission
granted to them.
(vii) UTPs become eligible to be released on bail u/s 167(2)(a)(i) and (ii) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure read with Section 36A of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985 (where persons accused of Section 19 or Section 24 or Section 27A or for

27
offences involving commercial quantity) and where investigation is not completed in
60/90/180 days.
(viii) UTPs who are imprisoned for offences which carry a maximum punishment of 2 years.
(ix) UTPs who are detained under Chapter VIII of the Cr.PC. i.e. u/s 107, 108, 109 and 151 of
Cr.PC.
(x) UTPs who are sick or infirm and require specialized medical treatment.
(xi) UTPs women offenders.
(xii) UTPs who are first time  offenders between the ages 19 and 21 years and in custody for the
offence punishable with less than 7 years of imprisonment and have suffered at least 1/4th of
the maximum sentence possible.
(xiii) UTPs who are of unsound mind and must be dealt with Chapter XXV of the Code.
(xiv) UTPs eligible for release under Section 437(6) of Cr.PC, wherein in a case triable by a Magistrate,
the trial of a person accused of any non-bailable offence has not been concluded within a period
of 60 days from the first date fixed for taking evidence in the case.
7.4 NALSA has prepared a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the Under Trial Review Committees
(UTRCs) and the same has been submitted to the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in WP (C) 406/2013-In
Re-human Condition in 1382 Prisons.
7.5 As far as overcrowding is concerned, that is primarily due to the lack of adequate number of Jails and
infrastructure facilities in such jails. Importantly, only 1.5 % of the Under Trial Prisoners are in jail. About
98.5%  of the Under Trials  are out on bail (calculated on the basis of criminal cases pending in courts in
India). NALSA does not have the mandate to construct and improve the infrastructure or the physical
conditions of the jails. NALSA does not have the prerogative for segregating the prisoners in the jails in any
manner. It is submitted that the 9600 Remand Advocates have been appointed across the country to ensure
that legal aid is provided to the prisoners who are unrepresented  from the very first stage. Panel Lawyers
personally interact with the inmates and the family members regularly. They also participate in sensitization
programmes organised by DLSAs for them.
Further Observation
7.6 The Committee takes note of the reply and the initiatives of NALSA with regard to digitization
of legal service clinics and campaign to focus on rights of women. The Committee also notes that
NALSA has established Undertrial Review Committees (UTCs) in all the districts in the country and
has prepared a Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for the Undertrial Review Committees (UTCs)
and submitted it to the Supreme Court of India. The Committee however feels that availability of
effective legal aid to the undertrials is far from being satisfactory and impress upon NALSA and
through it to the SLSAs, to proactively collaborate with concerned stakeholders and ensure legal
aid to maximum number of inmates. The Committee further impresses upon NALSA to fully utilize
funds allocated to it each year so that its activities are not hampered and funds are not curtailed by
the Ministry of Finance due to under-utilisation of allocated funds. It also desires that NALSA
should undertake social impact assessment of its schemes/services so as to identify bottlenecks and
improve its functioning.

28
V ACANCIES AND PENDENCY OF CASES IN SUBORDINATE COURTS
Recommendations/Observations
8.0 The Committee is concerned with the large number of vacancy positions of judicial officers in subordinate
judiciary. As per the data available, at present 5,927 positions of judicial officers are vacant in different
States.  The vacancy is highest in the States of Uttar Pradesh (1348), Bihar (835), Madhya Pradesh (728),
Gujarat (375) and Tamil Nadu (341). Since appointment of subordinate judicial officers falls under the
domain of State Government, the Committee recommends the Department of Justice to impress upon the
State Governments to initiate appointment of judicial officers.  The Committee is of the view that recruitment
and training of judicial personnel and supporting staffs at Subordinate Courts may help in reducing the
pendency of cases and the judge-population ratio may be corrected by appointing more judges in the
Subordinate Courts to reduce pendency. The Committee further recommends the Department to explore the
option of creation of All India Judicial Services to fill-up the vacancies.         (Para 6.79)
Action Taken
8.1 As per the Constitutional framework, the selection and appointment of judges in subordinate courts is
the responsibility of the High Courts and State Governments concerned. In so far as recruitment of judicial
officers in the States is concerned, respective High Courts do it in certain States, whereas the High Courts
do it in consultation with the State Public Service Commissions in other States. Department of Justice had
written in March, 2018 to the Registrar General of High courts as well as State Governments to share the
action plan for 2018-19 to fill up vacancies in subordinate judiciary. All High Courts have shared the action
plan they propose to follow to fill up vacancies in subordinate judiciary in 2018-19. Sanctioned strength of
judicial officers in District and Subordinate Courts has increased from 19,518 as on 31.12.2013 to 22,545
as on 31.03.2018. Working strength of judicial officers in District and Subordinate Courts has increased
from 15,115 as on 31.12.2013 to 17,109 as on 31.03.2018.
8.2 A comprehensive proposal was formulated for the constitution of an All India Judicial Service (AIJS)
and the same was approved by the Committee of Secretaries in November, 2012.  The proposal was
included as an agenda item in the Conference of Chief Ministers and Chief Justices of the High Court’s held
in April, 2013 and it was decided that issue needs further deliberation and consideration.  The views of the
State Governments and High Courts were sought on the proposal.  However, there was divergence of
opinion among the State Governments and High Courts on constitution of All India Judicial Service.  The
proposal for constitution of All India Judicial Service with views from the High Courts and State Governments
received thereon was included in the agenda for the Joint Conference of Chief Ministers and Chief Justices
of the High Courts held on 5th April, 2015.
8.3 Keeping in view the divergence of opinion among the stakeholders on constitution of All India Judicial
Service, the Government has undertaken the consultative process to arrive at a common ground.
Further Observation
8.4 The Committee notes the initiates undertaken by the Department as enumerated above for
appointment of judges in Subordinate Judiciary. However, it will serve better to remember that still
large number of vacancies exists in subordinate judiciary. The Committee therefore recommends
the Department to request the concerned stakeholders, i.e., State Governments and High Courts to
expedite the process of recruitment of judicial officers and also to ensure that all the obstacles in
appointment of judges in Subordinate Judiciary are removed in a time bound manner.

CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
National Judicial Academy (NJA)
Recommendations/Observations
1.0 The Committee observes that the Academy has been in existence for more than two decades now and
substantial amount of public fund has already been spent on it. It would, therefore, be useful for the
department to get a third party evaluation made of the quality of training being imparted at the Academy
and the extent to which training at the Academy has resulted in strengthening the Judicial system, so that
shortcomings, if any could be removed. (Para 6.53)
Action Taken
1.1 Pursuant to the Resolution adopted in the Chief Justices’ Conference, 2016 under Agenda Item No. 9,
a National Judicial Academic Council (NJAC) was established by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India comprising
two senior Puisne Judges, Supreme Court of India, Chairmen of State Judicial Academies, Judges In-charge
(Judicial Education) of High Courts, Secretary, Department of Justice and Director, National Judicial Academy
as its Members. The above Council that is chaired by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India performs the
following functions:
z Promoting the cause of judicial education;
z Devising the academic calendar for NJA;
z Prescribe and approve academic calendars for SJAs;
z Promote the growth and availability of resources required for judicial training and education;
z Coordinate and monitor the functioning of NJA & SJAs;
z Suggest methods for improving judicial education facilities and cooperation among NJA and
SJAs. NJA and SJAs also submit annual academic calendars of their respective academies to the
National Judicial Academic Council for finalization.
1.2 Accordingly, the Annual Academic Calendar for National Judicial Academy is finalized every year by
the NJAC and the academic programmes are undertaken by the National Judicial Academy as per the finalized
Annual Calendars.
Further Observation
1.3 The replies of the Department are not in sync with the recommendations of the Committee.
The Committee accordingly, reiterates its recommendations that third party evaluation of National
Judicial Academy should be undertaken to gauge effectiveness of activities undertaken by it.
SCHEDULE LANGUAGES IN HIGHER JUDICIARY
Recommendations/Observations
2.0 The Committee has examined the above issue in its earlier Reports also, viz. Seventy-fifth and
Eighty-fourth Reports on the Demands for Grants (2015-16 & 2016-17), and had observed that Article 348
29

30
provides for the use of Official language of the State, other than English, with the consent of the Governor
of the State in the High Court of that State. The Committee had, accordingly, recommended that official
languages of the State other than English may be permitted to be used in the High Courts, provided it is
demanded by the concerned State Government. The Committee was further of the view that the consultation
process with judiciary is not required as the Constitutional provisions are amply clear on the use of Scheduled
Languages in the High Courts and accordingly, the use of official languages should be decided as per the
mandate of Article 348. The Committee reiterates its above recommendations. (Para 6.89)
Further Observation
2.1 The action taken sought from the Department is still awaited.
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Recommendations/Observations
3. The Committee notes that out of 
` 251 crores in BE (2018-19), which is a decrease of ` 4 crore
against RE (2017-18), ` 40 lakh is proposed under the head ‘Publication’. The Committee also notes that
the Supreme Court has not been able to spend funds allotted to it under the head ‘Publication’ in BE (2016-17),
as only ` 14.94 lakh were spent out of the allocation of ` 20 lakh under the said head. As per the Official
Languages Act, 1963, every Government department is required to publish documents in Hindi version,
along with English. The Committee accordingly adjures the Registrar, Supreme Court of India to publish
report in Hindi. (Para 7.2)
Further Observation
3.1 The action taken sought from the Department is still awaited.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  —  AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.3, 2.2, 3.2, 4.2, 5.2, 6.3, 7.2, 8.2, 9.2, 10.2, 11.2, 12.2,
13.2, 14.2, 15.2 and 16.4).
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is optimistic that Legal Research and Education
Promotion Development Scheme (LREPDS) envisaged by the Department will help in curtailment
of litigation, besides promoting legal research and education. The Committee may be apprised of
the implementation, including bottleneck if any, of LREPDS during the deliberations on the Demand
for Grants 2019-20. (Para 1.3)
The Committee notes the reply of ITAT. However, the Committee feels establishing and running
ITAT in various parts of the country requires financial and physical support on the part of Government,
and therefore, is of the view that performance appraisal mechanism must be developed by the
Department of Legal Affairs to assess the performance of individual members and each ITAT Benches,
thereby, developing a ranking mechanism for ITATs, at National level to identify and address the
problems of underperforming ITATs. (Para 2.2)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that NALSA/SLSA should evaluate
the performance of panel lawyers engaged every year and accordingly, eliminate underperforming
lawyers and ensure that only competent lawyers are appointed on the panel.
(Para 3.3)
The Committee is of the view that vacancy positions of judges need to be filled up immediately
and the vacancies arising in future should be filled strictly as per the guidelines in the Second
Judges Case and the directions of the Supreme Court of India in the Sunil Samdaria vs. Union of
India (2018).  The Committee feels that timeline of six weeks given to Chief Minister/ Governor as
informed in the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry may be reduced to expedite the process of
appointment of judges. The Committee also feels since there is no proposal to raise the retirement
age of judges in higher judiciary by the Government, unnecessary delay in recruitment of judges
should be avoided at any cost. (Para 4.6)
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee feels that Department should prepare
a blueprint for future work to be undertaken in the area of translation of Acts/Ordinances/Rules
etc. and also expedite the recruitment of Regional Language officers and engagement of experts or
consultants, so that the translation work of the Department doesn’t suffer due to shortage of
manpower. The Committee wishes to be apprised of further action taken in this regard.
 (Para 1.2)
31

32
The Committee would have appreciated had the department firmed up the plan and action
to formulate the National Litigation Policy (NLP). The Department is therefore again, suggested
to expedite preparation of a concrete road-map in the implementation of NLP and it should also
apprise the Committee about the development during the deliberations on the Demands for
Grants (2019-20). (Para 2.2)
The Committee infers from the reply that no progress has so far been made with regard to
filling up of posts to be filled up from CSS, CSSS CSCS and CSOLS cadres. The Committee fails
to understand why nominations could not be made by DoPT. If this continues, posts are not likely
to be filled up at all. The Committee impress upon both DoPT and Department of Legal Affairs to
resolve this issue and then apprise the Committee. As regards, ILS cadre posts some progress
appears to have been made. The Committee however expresses its serious concern over the
vacancy positions and litigations relating to it and of the view that Department of Legal Affairs
being Law Department of the Union of India should have foreseen the legal implications before
starting recruitment process. The Committee, recommends that the Department needs to be
cautious in its approach and should take all necessary steps for filling up the vacancy positions,
so that the work of Department is not hampered. (Para 3.2)
The Committee feels that Indian Law Institute’s (ILI) infrastructural requirements and
shortcomings should be evaluated by a third party to assess its actual requirements. The Committee
recommends the ILI to fill-up vacant positions on priority basis and inform the action taken by it
during the current financial year on the issue. The Department is further requested to examine the
issue of Institute of National Importance (INI) demand of ILI and furnish report to the Committee
during the deliberations of the Demands for Grants (2019-20). (Para 4.2)
The committee is of the view that Notaries are important link in the judicial system. Their
large vacancy positions, along with delay in appointment and renewal, portray the half-hearted
actions of Department in the appointment of Notaries. The Notaries Act, 1992 and Rules framed
thereunder doesn’t specifically call for issuing of advertisement for appointment of Notaries, however,
it also doesn’t bar the Department to issue advertisement for appointing notaries. Continuance of
such state of affairs is pathetic. The Committee recommends the Department to streamline its
process to fill-up vacancies of Notaries. Further, no dedicated mechanism is available to deal with
the grievance of candidates on the Department’s website. The Committee also recommends the
Department to establish a dedicated cell and publicize the contact details of officers/staffs dealing
with the Cell so as to resolve the grievance of the candidates, Action taken in this regard may be
apprised to the Committee during the deliberations on the Demands for Grants (2019-20).
(Para 5.4)
The Committee does not appreciate the manner in which the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas
has been taken up by the Government. Gram Nyayalayas Act was primarily enacted to ensure
inexpensive and speediest justice to the people at their door steps but  it is unfortunate that after a
decade of the passage of Gram Nyayalayas Act, in 2008, only 343 Gram Nyayalayas are notified, and
out of which only 210 are in functional position. The Committee is not happy with the current pace
of implementation of Gram Nyayalayas and feels that the delegation of power to establish Gram
Nyayalayas to respective State Governments and High Courts taken in the Conference of Chief
Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers way back in 2013 have not yielded the desired result

33
and the continuance of existing state of affairs in every likelihood defeat the very purpose for
which the Gram Nyayalayas Act was enacted. The Committee accordingly, reiterates its views
contained in the Demand for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry and recommends the Department to
explore the tripartite model to expedite the establishment and operationalisation of Gram Nyayalayas
and also recommends the Department to apprise the Committee during the deliberations on the
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the steps taken by it, year wise since the financial year 2013-14, to
establish and operationalize Gram Nyayalayas in the country. (Para 6.4)
The Committee takes note of the reply and the initiatives of NALSA with regard to digitization
of legal service clinics and campaign to focus on rights of women. The Committee also notes that
NALSA has established Undertrial Review Committees (UTCs) in all the districts in the country and
has prepared a Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for the Undertrial Review Committees (UTCs)
and submitted it to the Supreme Court of India. The Committee however feels that availability of
effective legal aid to the undertrials is far from being satisfactory and impress upon NALSA and
through it to the SLSAs, to proactively collaborate with concerned stakeholders and ensure legal
aid to maximum number of inmates. The Committee further impresses upon NALSA to fully utilize
funds allocated to it each year so that its activities are not hampered and funds are not curtailed by
the Ministry of Finance due to under-utilisation of allocated funds. It also desires that NALSA
should undertake social impact assessment of its schemes/services so as to identify bottlenecks and
improve its functioning. (Para 7.6)
The Committee notes the initiates undertaken by the Department as enumerated above for
appointment of judges in Subordinate Judiciary. However, it will serve better to remember that still
large number of vacancies exists in subordinate judiciary. The Committee therefore recommends
the Department to request the concerned stakeholders, i.e., State Governments and High Courts to
expedite the process of recruitment of judicial officers and also to ensure that all the obstacles in
appointment of judges in Subordinate Judiciary are removed in a time bound manner.
(Para 8.4)
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
The replies of the Department are not in sync with the recommendations of the Committee.
The Committee accordingly, reiterates its recommendations that third party evaluation of National
Judicial Academy should be undertaken to gauge effectiveness of activities undertaken by it.
(Para 1.3)
The action taken sought from the Department is still awaited. (Para 2.1)
The action taken sought from the Department is still awaited. (Para 3.1)

MINUTES

37
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 03.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th December, 2018 in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi-110001
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav   —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri Prabhat Jha
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Sharadkumar Maruti Bansode
7. Shri Vincent H. Pala
8. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
9. Dr. Anirudhan Sampath
10. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah
11. Shri M. Udhayakumar
12. Shri Kaushal Kishore
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting of the Committee. The Committee
then took up the consideration and adoption of the (i) * draft Ninety-eighth Report of the Committee on
Action Taken Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Ninety-
fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions);
and (ii) the draft Ninety-ninth Report on the Action Taken Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Ninety-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice. Members deliberated on the Reports, and thereafter, the Reports were adopted with some
minor alterations. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports to both Houses of Parliament on
3rd January, 2018. The Chairman authorized Shri Vivek K. Tankha and in his absence Shri D. Raja, to
present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy and in his absence Shri Vincent H. Pala, to
lay the Reports in Lok Sabha.
3. The meeting was then adjourned at 03.30 
P.M.
*Related to some other matters.