PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 13
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTEENTH REPORT
ON
THE PREVENTION OF CHILD MARRIAGE BILL, 2004
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2005/AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)NOVEMBER, 2005/AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 NOVEMBER, 2005)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 NOVEMBER, 2005)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 NOVEMBER, 2005)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 NOVEMBER, 2005)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

65
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTEENTH REPORT
ON
THE PREVENTION OF CHILD MARRIAGE BILL, 2004
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH NOVEMBER, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH NOVEMBER, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2005/AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—21
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................................................................... 22—29
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 31—48
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 49—64
(A) The Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004 .......................................................... 51—57
(B) List of persons who tendered oral evidence on the Bill title case ...................... 63—64

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2005-06)
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Dr. P. C. Alexander
9. Vacant
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
12. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
14. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
15. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
16. Shri Shailendra Kumar
17. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
18. Shri A.K. Moorthy
19. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
20. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
21. Shri Brajesh Pathak
22. Shri Shriniwas Patil
23. Shri Harin Pathak
24. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
25. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
26. Shri Vishvendra Singh
27. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, The Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee, present this
Thirteenth Report of the Committee relating to the Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004*
(Annexure A).
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill as introduced in the Rajya
Sabha, on the 24th December, 2004 for examination and report.
3. The Committee decided to issue Press Release in print, audio visual and electronic media
to solicit views/suggestions from interested individuals/organisations/institutions on the various
provisions of the Bill.
4. In response thereto numerous memoranda containing the suggestions were received by the
Committee which were subsequently forwarded to the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and
Justice for their comments thereon.
5. The Committee considered the Bill and heard the presentation of the Secretary, Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice in its meeting held on the 14th July, 2005.
6. The Committee heard oral evidence of witnesses (list at Annexure ‘B’) to have better
appreciation of the subject and also sought response of Department of Women and Child
Development (Ministry of Human Resource Development) in its meetings held on 12th, 27th and
28th September, 2005. The Committee held in-house discussion on the Bill on 17th October, 2005
and took clause-by-clause consideration on 18th October, 2005.
7. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:—
(i) Background note on the Bill;
(ii) The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929;
(iii) The Annual Report of National Commission for Women for 1995-96;
(iv) The Annual Report of National Human Rights Commission for 2001-02; and
(v) Suggestions/views of the witnesses and comments received thereon from the
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice.
8. The Committee held 7 meetings in all to dispose of the Bill.
9. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 27th October, 2005.
10. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 27, 2005 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice
* Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part-II, Section 2, dated the 20th December 2004.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.41885) dated the 27th December, 2004.

1
REPORT
PRACTICE OF CHILD MARRIAGES : A SOCIAL EVIL
“Child marriage is a practice which continues to be a major stumbling block to the
achievement of human rights’’ .
This quotation of Innocent Digest No.7, a publication of UNICEF amply depicts the gravity
of the problem afflicting modern society.
1.1 General meaning of ‘child marriage’ is a marriage of individuals before they attain the age
of adulthood. The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 defines “Child Marriage” as a marriage to
which either of the contracting parties is a child. Child marriage is wide spread in some parts of
India and systematically engraves the exploitation and subjugation in society. There could not be
any better example of showing perilous effects of child marriage than the extract from a letter
written by Shrimati Rukhmabai, a victim of child marriage, to the Times of India on June 26, 1885
which has been reproduced in the book titled “Child Marriages in India” by Jaya Sagade (Oxford
University Press, 2005). The narration of Shrimati Rukhmabai on evil effects of child marriage goes
us under:
“I am one of those unfortunate Hindu women whose hard lot is to suffer the unnameable
miseries entailed by the custom of early marriage. This wicked  practice of child marriage
has destroyed the happiness of my life. It comes between me and the things which I prize
above all others-study and mental cultivation. Without the least fault of mine I am doomed
to seclusion; every aspiration of mine to rise above my ignorant sisters is looked down upon
with suspicion and is interpreted in the most uncharitable manner.’’
1.2 There has not been any sign of curtailment of this feudal practice in certain areas even one
hundred and twenty years later. This is evident from the recent attack on a supervisor of Integrated
Child Development Services Scheme (ICDS), Madhya Pradesh who tried to prevent young girls
from being married off in a mass ceremony. On the Committee’s invitation, Shakuntala Verma,
appeared before it and gave an account of the shocking incident renewing the debate on child
marriage, which, though outlawed, is continuing unabated. The Committee finds it pertinent to
describe what shocked the entire nation and shattered the belief of living in an era of information
and technology.
1.3 Shakuntala Verma went to Bhangarh Village in Dhar District of Madhya Pradesh on
May 11, 2005 after a tip off that local families there were planning to marry off their young
daughters. As instructed by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, she asked for proof of the girls’ ages,
but was forced to leave after members of the family threatened her. Later, that evening a person,
armed with a sword, came to her house and began slashing at her. As she tried to protect herself,
one hand was severed and the other cut besides receiving serious injuries on head she was rushed
to an Indore hospital where she battled for her life. After a sixteen hours operation her severed
hand was reattached by rejoining arteries, bones, veins and nerves. She had spent ten days
explaining to the locals why child marriage being planned could prove harmful to their children but
to no avail.
1.4 The above two examples amply confirm that the practice of child marriage is inextricably
connected with the customs and traditions in a very exploitive form so much so that India’s
waging a campaign against this evil has been a failed attempt in certain areas due to half hearted
efforts of those specific areas/regions. Many communities in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have

2
their deep rooted faith in perpetuation of this practice and there is considerable evidence that they
are not ready to eradicate this practice. V arious researches and studies conducted to assess
devastating effects of child marriage have thrown sufficient light on how child marriages contribute
to virtually every social problem that affects women. Early marriage also has implications for the
well being of families and for society as a whole where girls are uneducated and unprepared for
their roles as mothers and contributors to society, there are costs to be borne at every level from
the individual household to the nation as a whole.
1.5. Unfortunate aspect of child marriage is that some are forced into marriage at a very early
age. Others are simply too young to make an informed decision about their marriage partner or
about the implications of marriage itself. Once married, a girl or boy is expected to meet different
obligations arising out of such marriage, including responsibilities towards the spouse, the family
and society. In a child marriage, the individuals involved are not yet physically, mentally and
emotionally ready to perform the obligations. In child marriage, not only the rights of the
individuals involved get violated but their unpreparedness to protect against any violation makes
them more vulnerable to further exploitation. So, child marriage is a clear violation of human rights.
The right to free and full consent to marriage is recognized in the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR) and in many subsequent Human Rights Instruments which recognize that
consent cannot be free and full when one of the parties involved is not sufficiently mature to make
an informed decision about a life partner.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF PRACTICE OF CHILD MARRIAGE IN INDIA
2. Human Rights Law Network publication 2005 titled “Child Marriages And The Law in India”
(Pages 11 to 13) has given historical overview of how the practice of child marriage in India has
developed as under :—
“The ancient Indian literature indicates no prevalence of child marriage at that time. The
most popular form of marriage was the Swayamvara where grooms assembled at the bride’ s
house and the bride selected her spouse. Swayamvara can be translated as self-selection of
one’ s husband (swayam = self, Vara = husband.) Instances of the Swayamvara ceremony are
found in our national epics, the Ramayana and Mahabharata. Various types of marriages
were then prevalent in ancient India: Gandharva Vivaha (love marriage), Asura Vivaha
(marriage by abduction) etc. but, among these Bal-Vivaha is conspicuous by its absence,
which refutes the argument that the custom of child marriage stemmed from tradition and
religious practices.
2.1 The Vedic Mantras, such as the Rig-veda, mentioned that a girl could be married only
when she was fully developed, both physically and mentally and that she should be fully
developed physically, before leaving her father’s home. Men were advised to marry a girl with a
fully developed body. One hymn mentions that a female should be married only when she is not
a child.
2.2 One of the schools of thought argues, that the practice of child marriage originated and
strengthened its roots during the medieval ages. The invasions, war and expansion of territory
trailed the trends of the times. The established structures and practices were being disturbed by
the new rulers who brought in their own ideas and rules. Law and order was not yet a universal
phenomenon and arbitrary powers were concentrated in the hands of a few. The status of women
deteriorated from bad to worse, as they were being exchanged as gifts, concubines and slaves.
This slowly led to a downfall in the practices like wearing of the veil and isolating women from
the rest of society. During this time, customs like Sati, denigrating the birth of a female baby and
female infanticide, were spawned.

3
2.3 The general insecurity that prevailed, especially with regard to women, made the presence
of young, unmarried girls a potential disaster. The practice of child marriage reached its height, so
that guardians could get rid of this insecurity as soon as possible. Hence parents sought to dispense
with the responsibilities of their daughters by getting them married before they reached
marriageable age.
2.4 The custom of child marriages, with the ‘bride’ and ‘groom’ still in their cradles, was a
culmination of this intention. In addition, it was also felt, that this would reduce the danger to a
growing girl’s virginity.
2.5 Till the 1860s, girls were getting married below the ages of eight or nine years. Social
reforms and religious movements, such as the Brahmo Samaj and the Arya Samaj, pioneered work
against child marriage. The contribution of Raja Ram Mohan Roy in curbing the ill practices of
marriage cannot go unnoticed. He was anxious to put a curb on child marriages and considered
an early marriage to be a curse on society and stigma on women. He emphatically fought for
eradication of this ill practice throughout his life. Late in the 1860s, some success was achieved
when the Indian Penal Code made provision against child marriage.
2.6 The debate on the Age of Consent Bill, during the 1880s, brought this problem into the
public arena. It stirred up the case of an eleven-year-old girl Phulmani, who died when her husband
raped her. More than 500 women doctors sent a memorandum to the Viceroy requesting him to
stop the marriage of girls below 14 years of age. The resulting Bill compromised at 12 years. This
was later revised to 15 years (Section 375 of IPC), before which the consummation of marriage
was considered rape and, therefore, a criminal offence.
MAGNITUDE OF PROBLEM : SOME TRENDS
3. According to Census 1991, the percentage of married females in the total number of
females in the age group 10 to 14 was 13.2 in Rajasthan, the highest in the country. In second
place was Madhya Pradesh at 8.5 per cent; followed by Uttar Pradesh at 7.1 per cent. For the
country, the percentage of married women under the age of 18 stood at 53.3. The situation did
not change substantially in the following decade. Census 2001 has revealed that there are nearly
three lakh girls under 15 who have given birth to at least one child. The census further reports
that 6.4 Indians under the age of 18 are already married and that taking into account the legal
marriageable age 11.8 million (4.9 million females and 6.9 million males) are married underage.
3.1 Figures showing high prevalence of child marriages in Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh are
corroborated further by the two surveys, one, conducted by the Government in Rajasthan in 1993
where a sample of more than 5000 women was taken. It was revealed that 56 per cent had married
before age of  15 and, of  these, 17 per cent were married before they were 10. Second survey
was conducted in 1998 in Madhya Pradesh which found that nearly 14 per cent of  girls were
married between the ages of  10 and 14.
3.2 According to Jaya Sagade who has done extensive research on child marriages in India, the
country has one of the lowest median ages for marriage in the world. The Second National Family
Health Survey (NFHS) which was conducted in 1990-99, confirmed that 50 per cent of women
currently aged 20-24 years were married before the age of eighteen years. The percentage is much
higher in rural (58.6 per cent) than in urban areas (27.9 per cent).
3.3 As revealed by the research of Jaya Sagade on child marriages in India, another significant
fact is that performance of child marriage is not uniform in all the States. There are stark variations
in marriage pattern across the country from State to State. About half of the women aged 25-49
married before the age of  fifteen in Madhya Pradesh (52.6 per cent), Bihar (51.0 per cent), Uttar
Pradesh (49.7 per cent), Andhra Pradesh (48.9 per cent) and Rajasthan (47.8 per cent). And about

4
four-fifths of the women of these States - Madhya Pradesh (78.5 per cent), Bihar (83.9 per cent),
Uttar Pradesh (79.6 per cent), Andhra Pradesh (79.8 per cent) and Rajasthan (81.5 per cent) were
married before reaching the legal minimum age of  eighteen years.
3.4 In four States, where more than 50 per cent of women are married before they turn
eighteen years of  age, religious and cultural hold is very strong. In Northern States like Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, the status of  women generally is much lower in comparison
with the Southern States like, Goa, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. In this connection, contribution of
Periyar E.V . Ramaswamy cannot be forgotten. He championed the cause of  social reforms and
revolutionized the ideas to ban orthodox traditions and customs including early marriage. In the
Southern States women are more educated and are economically more independent. Rajasthan, a
Northern State is one of  the most educationally backward, industrially underdeveloped and
economically poor States of the country. The percentage of  marriages of girls at ages below
thirteen and fifteen years in Rajasthan are the highest in the country. 13 and 21 per cent of girls
are married before age thirteen and fifteen respectively. The percentage of women currently aged
20-24 years and married before the age of eighteen years stands at 70.
3.5 The above figures show that the practice of child marriage is highly prevalent in different
parts of the country. Backed by the traditions and customs, child marriages in many parts of the
country are performed in large number. It is sad to note that being a social evil, such marriages
are neither reported nor recorded due to social pressures, absence of sensitization and commitment
for social cause in officials and absence of a standard data collection system. So, the figure of
such marriages may be in several thousands. The statistics whichever available, are not sufficient
to bring out the magnitude of the problem or factual position correctly. In fact, such marriages
are celebrated with the active as well as passive support of people. The auspicious occasion of
Akha Teej also known as Akshay Tritiya or Akhi Teej, is associated with the custom of child
marriage. This occasion is also known as child marriage day in Rajasthan, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and surrounding areas when little boys and girls are literally carried in their
arms by their parents or guardians to the venue of marriage, usually in utter ignorance of changing
social conditions and disregard of legal norms.
3.6 It is not that India is the only country where practice of marrying at an early age persists.
The practice is also common in sub-Saharan Africa, Middle East, North Africa and other parts of
Asia. There are also specific parts of West and East Africa and of South Asia where marriage much
earlier than puberty is not unusual. According to one research of UNICEF, over 40 per cent of
young women have entered marriage or quasi-married union by the time they reach the age of 18.
Early marriage is generally more prevalent in central and West-Africa affecting 40 per cent and
49 per cent respectively of girls under 19 compared to 27 per cent in East Africa and 70 per cent
in North and Southern Africa. In Afganistan and Bangladesh, 54 per cent and 51 per cent of girls
respectively are married by age 18. In Nepal, where the average age at first marriage is 19 years,
7 per cent of girls are married before they are 10 year old and 40 per cent by the time they are
15. Among women aged 15-24, 29 per cent were married in Latin America and the Caribbean.
CAMPAIGN TO PREVENT EARLY MARRIAGE
4. There has been global concern for prevention of child marriage. Recognizing evils of early
marriage, the right to free and full consent to a marriage has been given due importance in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women mentions the right to protection from child marriage in Article 16
which States:—
“The betrothal and the marriage of a child shall have no legal effect and all necessary
action, including legislation, shall be taken to specify a minimum age for marriage” .

5
4.1 While marriage is not considered directly in the Convention on the Right of the Child, child
marriage is linked to other rights such as the right to express their views freely, the right to
protection from all forms of abuse, and the right to be protected from harmful traditional practices
and is frequently addressed by the Committee on the Rights of the Child. Child marriage was also
identified by the Part African Forum against the sexual exploitation of children as a type of
commercial sexual exploitation of children.
4.2 In Indian context, socio-reform religions movements such as the Brahmo Samaj and the
Arya Samaj pioneered work against child marriage. As stated earlier, it was not until 1880 that child
marriage as a problem became a public issue in India during the debate on the age of Consent Bill.
Towards the end of the debate, a child wife of eleven years old named Phulmani died when her
husband raped her. On August 15, 1884 a Parsee reformist, Behramji Malabari, circulated two notes
which highlighted the evils of child marriage and enforced widow childhood. Shortly, thereafter, in
1886 the first petition against Hindu marriage was proposed to the Government by the natives of
Meerut. It was finally passed in 1927. Indian political class woke up to the reality when Census
1921 reported that there were 600 brides between the ages of one and 12 months. Shocked by
the Report, Mahatma Gandhi reportedly urged a member of the Central Legislative Council, Harbilas
Sarda to introduce a Bill restraining child marriage. Thus, was born the Child Marriage Restraint
Act of 1929.
INADEQUACIES OF THE EXISTING LAW
5. The 1929 Act was a queer piece of legislation rendering all child marriages illegal but not
void as a result of which child marriage remained valid in the eyes of the law. This also explains
the reason why child marriages still remain unabated. The Act popularly known as Sarda Act, was
enacted with a view to restraining solemnisation of child marriages it has undergone various
changes largely in the form of increasing the age of marriage. In 1929, the minimum age of
marriage for a male was eighteen years and that of a female fourteen years. The age limit was
subsequently raised in the case of female from fourteen to fifteen years by the Child Marriage
Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1949 (41 of 1949). Again, by the Child Marriage Restraint
(Amendment) Act 1978 (2 of 1978), the Act was amended so as to redefine the word ‘Child’ to
mean a person who, if a male, has not completed twenty-one years of age, and if a female, has
not completed eighteen years of age. The said amendment Act of 1978 also incorporated a new
section 7 in the Principal Act to make the offences under the Act to be cognizable for certain
purposes. Under the Act, a police officer has no power to arrest without a warrant or an order
of a magistrate. In the absence of stringent penal provisions, the Act has virtually become
redundant. The Act also does not affect the validity of the marriage even though solemnisation of
such marriages may be in contravention of the provisions of the Act. Ineffectiveness of the Act
can be gauged by the fact reported by a study made by UNICEF which found that the number
of prosecutions under the Act did not exceed 89 in any year. How many of these ended in
convictions and what was the sentence imposed is not known.
5.1 Even the Government in its Background Note submitted to the Committee has accepted the
fact that the Act of 1929 has failed in achieving the desired results. Position in this respect is stated
as under:
“There has been a wide range criticism in and out of Parliament that even though nearly
75 years have passed since the enactment of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, yet
it could not eradicate or effectively prevent the evil practice of solemnisation of child
marriages in the country. The Act aims at only restraining solemnisation of child marriages
and not complete prevention. Further, the procedures under the Act to prevent the
solemnisation of child marriages are very cumbersome and time consuming. Illiteracy and

6
orthodoxy of the people have proved to be the other stumbling blocks. There seems to be
no fear of law due to lack of education and deep-rooted social beliefs especially among
the rural folk. Because of social pressures, no one reports cases of child marriages or comes
forward to give evidence. Child marriages considerably affect the health of the girl child
undergoing such marriage and also the children born of such marriages. In view of the
ineffectiveness of the provisions of the Act, considerable number of child marriages are
taking place in the country, especially on the occasion of Akshaya Tritiya, popularly known
as Akha Teej. Only a limited number of such cases are coming to the official notice of the
State Governments and only a very small percentage of them end in prosecution. Hence, the
statistics would not bring out the magnitude of the problem or the factual position
correctly.’’
NEED FOR AN IMPROVED LEGISLATION
GOVERNMENT’S VIEWS
6. Taking into account the glaring shortcomings/inadequacies of the existing Act and the
experience gained in its enforcement, the Government gave a serious thought to the idea of bringing
about an improved legislation. The Government observed that:
“In the above circumstances, there has been a growing demand for making the provisions
of the Act more effective and the punishment thereunder more stringent. The custom of
solemnising child marriage is a deep rooted social  evil in the Indian society and the Central
Government has been consistently of  the view that eradication of this social evil could be
done, by improving the status of women by educating them and also by creating awareness
among them. Since the Act being mainly a penal piece of legislation, there is no separate
administrative machinery envisaged under it. The State Governments have to take action to
create necessary social awareness by educating the people and also by gearing up the
administrative machinery. However, the progress in this direction has been far from
satisfactory’’.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE NA TIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (NCW)
7. Perturbed by the number of reports published in newspapers regarding child marriages, the
NCW took up the issue with the Government at length and gave the following recommendations:
(i) Child Marriage Prevention officers should be appointed immediately by the
Government.
(ii) The punishment provided under section 23 of the Child Marriage Restraint Act should
be amended and made more stringent.
(iii) Marriages performed in contravention of the Act should be made void.
(iv) It should be a penal obligation for every person attending a child marriage, to prevent
it or report it to the concerned authorities.
(v) Awareness should be generated among masses about the evils of child marriage.
(vi) An offence under the Child Marriage Restraint Act should be made cognizable.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (NHRC)
8. The National Human Rights Commission has, inter alia, in its Annual Report 2001-2002,
observed as under:

7
‘‘The widespread persistence of child marriage in certain parts of the country,
especially in Rajasthan, has continued to be of great concern to the Commission. The
efforts of the Commission to deal with the problem have been dealt with in detail in earlier
annual reports.
In order to curb the practice of child marriage in the country, the Commission had
taken the view that the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 should be recast so as to
provide for higher penalty for the violations of the provisions of this Act and also to  make
the offence cognizable and non-bailable. Further, it was of the view that a provision should
be made in the amended Act to take action against organizers/associations who organize
child marriages on a mass-scale’’ .
8.1 The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has, after detailed study, recommended
comprehensive amendments to the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 and, accordingly, made
its recommendation by way of suggesting an amendment Bill called the “Child Marriage Restraint
Bill”, 2002.
8.2 As per the information furnished by the Government, the subject matter of the legislation
is relatable to certain entries in the Concurrent List (Entries 5, 1 and 2) in the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution of India, the Central Government circulated the proposed amendments suggested
by both the National Commission for  Women and the National Human Rights Commission received
by it from time to time to the State Governments and the Union Territory Administrations seeking
their views/comments thereon. The Government of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Gujarat, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab and Jharkhand and the Governments of
the National Capital Territory of Delhi and Pondicherry and the Union Territory administrations of
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands
agreed to the recommendations. No comments/replies have been received from the State
Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka,
Kerala, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal inspite of repeated reminders. The
rest of the State Governments have furnished their detailed comments. Government of Orissa,
while accepting the recommendations has suggested to bring a new legislation by repealing the
Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929.
8.3 The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 contains only 11 sections. While the Act seeks to
restrain solemnisation of child marriages, the proposed legislation aims at preventing solemnisation
of child marriages. The numbers of amendments suggested are considerable and require re-
arrangement of the sections. Having regard to these aspects, it has been proposed to enact a new
legislation titled as “the Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004” by repealing the Child Marriage
Restraint Act, 1929.
8.4 The Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004 introduced in the Rajya Sabha on
20th December, 2004 aims at :—
(i) Making a provision to declare child marriage as voidable at the option of the
contracting party to the marriage, who was a child.
(ii) Providing a provision requiring the husband or, if he is a minor at the material time,
his guardian to pay maintenance to the minor girl until her re-marriage.
(iii) Making a provision for the custody and maintenance of children born of child marriages.
(iv) Providing that notwithstanding a child marriage has been annulled by a decree of
nullity under the proposed section 3, every child born of such marriage, whether
before or after the commencement of the proposed legislation, shall be legitimate for
all purposes.

8
(v) Empowering the District Court to add to, modify or revoke any order relating to
maintenance of the female petitioner and her residence and custody or maintenance of
children, etc.
(vi) Making a provision fo r declaring the child marriage as void in certain circumstances.
(vii) Empow ering the Courts to issue injunctions prohibiting solemnisation of marriages in
contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation.
(viii) Making the offences under the proposed legislation to be congnizable for the purposes
of investigation and for other purposes.
(ix) Providing for appointment of Child Marriage Prevention Officers by the State
Governments.
(x) Empowering the State Governments to make rules for effective administration of the
legislation.
ORAL EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES
8.5 The Committee heard views of several experts/civil society groups for the purpose of
having better and effective appraisal of the proposed legislation. The following representatives of
the various NGOs appeared before it :—
(i) Dr. Ajay Kumar Mishra, Sankalp;
(ii) Dr. (Shrimati) Sarala Gopalan, Sankalp;
(iii) Shrimati Padma Seth, Sankalp;
(iv) Mr. Joseph Gathia, Centre of Concern for Child Labour;
(v) Dr. (Prof.) Pawan Surana, Chairperson, State Commission for Women, Jaipur
(Rajasthan);
(vi) Mr. Colin Gonsalves, Human Rights Law Network;
(vii) Ms. Aparna Bhatt, Human Rights Law Network;
(viii) Ms. Atreyee Sen, Human Rights Law Network;
(ix) Ms. Sehba Hussain, Beti Foundation;
(x) Shrimati Jyotsna Chatterjee, Joint Women’s Programme:
(xi) Shrimati Razia Ismail. Joint Women’s Programme;
(xii) Shrimati Asha Chandra, Hony. Secretary, All India Women’s Education Fund; and
(xiii) Shrimati Bulbul Das, All India Women’s Conference.
8.6 The Committee also received several written suggestions from individuals/organizations
engaged in the field and had benefit of their experience in making proper scrutiny of different
provisions of the Bill. Views expressed by the witnesses and suggestions on the Bill have been
considered by the Committee to be very useful in arriving at a logical conclusion. In the succeeding
paras of the Report, the Committee has incorporated these views/suggestions suitably, wherever
found necessary.
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION
CLAUSE-2
9. The clause defines the various terms used in the Bill.

9
9.1 Sub-clause (a) of the clause defines the term “Child” as under :—
“Child means a person who, if a male, has not completed twenty-one years of age, and if
a female, has not completed eighteen years of age.’’
9.2 The Committee heard views of representatives of some reputed Civil Society Groups/NGOs,
who referred to the 1989 International Convention on the Rights of the Child which has examined
early marriage from the human rights perspective in order to offer guidelines for much needed
analysis and action and defined a child as “every human being below the age of eighteen years,
unless the law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier” (Article 1). It was argued
further that the age prescribed for exercising the right of voting is also eighteen years and even
the National Plan of Action for Children 2005, has also defined a child as a person upto 18 years
of age. Not only this, some labour legislations too define “child” differently from what is being
defined in the Bill. Some witnesses pointed out that the proposed definition of child would create
further complications in proper interpretations of sub-clause (3) which provides that the petition
under this section may be filed at anytime but before the child filing the petition completes two
years of  attaining majority. This means as per this provision, female may file a petition for
annulment of marriage before the age of twenty years and before twenty three by a male. Further
it was also contended that in clause 9 of the Bill, punishment has been provided for a male adult
above eighteen years marrying a child. This provision itself contradicts what has been prescribed
in definition of a child. The witnesses also referred to the Juvenile Justice Act which has amended
the definition of a child as below 18 for both male and female.
9.3 Government’s comments on suggestions for a common definition for both the male child
and female child are as follows:—
“The child has been defined in the Bill for the purposes of marriage. Further, for the
purpose of marriage, two different ages have been accepted socially as well as culturally
in the country.’’
9.4 The Committee feels that intention behind the proposed legislation is to develop and
implement suitable system to prevent the evil of child marriage afflicting Indian society since long.
To achieve this laudable objective, doubtlessly, its foundation is laid on the issue of determination
of age of a child. The sub-clause (a) of the clause under consideration, therefore, assumes
paramount importance and to do justice in dealing with such a provision, the Committee cannot
put aside the views and suggestions of Civil Society Groups, whose contribution in addressing the
issues pertaining to child marriage cannot be regarded less than the efforts of Government. India
is a vast country with diversity of castes, creeds, religions and communities and more than seventy
per cent population belongs to the rural areas nurturing and preserving their deep rooted customs,
beliefs and traditions. The legislation should look at this aspect and for this, it has to be as simple
as possible. Any anomaly, confusion or difficulty in comprehending its provisions would render the
whole exercise futile. As pointed out by the witnesses, definition of ‘Child’ should be such as not
to escalate any sort of confusion and contradiction in the provisions of the Bill itself.
9.5 In this context, the Committee finds it pertinent to mention the sixth description of
Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code which says a man is said to commit “rape” who has
sexual intercourse with a woman with or without her consent when she is under sixteen
years of age. Further, there is an exception to the section which says sexual intercourse by
a man with his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape. Thus,
consent of a girl is the material factor in deciding the cases of rape. Courts have set
presumption of consent of girl in these cases. In other words, a girl is considered mature
enough at the age of sixteen to give consent for the purpose. Similarly as per the exception
to the section, a married girl of 15 years is considered mature enough to give her consent.
This though not related directly to the issue under examination at the moment, yet evokes

10
a contradictory response. The contradiction arises because of the above provision of the
IPC. The Committee is of the view that these conflicting definitions of the IPC and the
present Bill cause confusion, ambiguity and doubt. While the IPC holds a girl of sixteen
years and a married girl of fifteen years quite mature to give her consent, the proposed
legislation considers her yet a child at this stage. It leaves scope for a wide debate as to
what should be considered to be genuine age for the purpose of childhood. Moreover, there
would not be any parity with the two legislations in this respect. As observed already,
definition of child is different in different legislations and particular instance of IPC in this
context makes the whole proposition incongruous. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that to remove anomaly or ambiguity caused by different interpretations in the Indian Penal
Code and the present Bill and also having regard to the International Convention on the
Rights of the Child (CRC) which says “a child means every human being below the age of
eighteen years unless under the law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier”,
Government should consider to amend/delete the said provisions in section 375 of the I.P.C.
to bring it in conformity with this legislation and the International convention.
9.6 Some Members of the Committee were of the view that age of marriage for both the
male and female should be eighteen years instead of the proposed different, ages  i.e.
eighteen years for female and twenty one years for male. Members favouring this
formulation argued that by reaching the age of eighteen both male and female attain social
biological and psychological maturity. Further, the Indian Majority Act, the Indian Penal
Code, Labour Laws, International conventions, the Indian Contract Act and the
Representative of the People Act also consider this age proper for performing legal
obligations enjoined on by these laws. Moreover, in the changed circumstances and with the
kind of advancement the society has undergone, it is imperative to consider lower age for
marriage for both, male and female.
9.7 Other Members, however, opposed the idea of having a common age of marriage for
both the sexes as in their view, age differentiation is a necessity taking into account the
physical, intellectual, psychological and emotional aspects. These considerations have been
genuinely recognized by social thinkers from the time immemorial for maintaining a
reasonable age gap between male and female. Secondly, an age of eighteen years is also
considered insufficient for a boy to attain the desired level of education and economic
independence. Moreover, an early age of eighteen years for both the sexes would make it
difficult to implement family planning programmes and policies effectively as several
studies and surveys have revealed that high fertility rate is attributed to an early marriage.
So, the earlier the marriage, higher the rate of reproduction. Consensus emerged on
retaining the age differentiation as provided in the definition clause. It was, however,
suggested that after the definitions of terms “child”, and “child marriage”, a new definition
of the term “early marriage” be inserted to define solemnisation of marriage by a male
above eighteen years and below twenty one years. This is necessary to make distinction
between definition of “child marriage” as applicable to a male and a marriage which is
performed by a male after attaining majority but before twenty one years and to clear doubt
in this regard. The Committee also suggests that like child marriage, an early marriage
should also be void  ab initio and punishable in the same manner as has been prescribed in
clauses 3, 9, 10 and 12 of the Bill.
9.8 The Committee feels that though it has largely favoured the contention to maintain
age differentiation in the Bill, yet views/ideas expressed by the Members for a common age
of eighteen years for both the male and female should also be considered by the
Government carefully as the issue of determination of marriage age is inextricably related
to other social aspects, which if ignored may entail serious consequences on an individual

11
and society as a whole. The Committee hopes that the Government having regard to the
observations made by the Members would take an appropriate view.
9.9 The Committee also endorses the views expressed by some witnesses that the
definition of the word ‘minor’ provided in sub-clause (f) adds to confusion only as the
legislation provides a specific definition of a child and all the subsequent provisions of the
Bill are in relation to this definition. The definition of ‘minor’ therefore, appears to be of
no relevance in the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definition of
‘minor’ should be deleted and in view of this amendment, the word ‘minor’ be substituted
by the word ‘child’ in all the subsequent provisions of the Bill, wherever it occurs.
9.10 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-3
10. The clause contains a provision to the effect that if at the time of  the marriage, one party
or both the parties to marriage are minors, the marriage should be voidable at the option of the
party who was a minor at the time of the marriage.
10.1 W itnesses in their deposition drew attention of the Committee to a significant departure
from the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 in the form of the provision contained in clause 3 (l)
which renders every child marriage, whether solemnised before or after the commencement of this
Act, voidable at the option of the contracting party. They, however raised apprehension that if the
marriage is annulled what would be its consequences on women since studies indicate that there
are more women abandoned than men after being married as children, Secondly witnesses were
of the view that the term ‘voidable’ is confusing and this needs to be classified. A clear distinction
should be made between ‘voidable’ and void marriages. Witnesses desired that the issue of ‘void
marriage’ should be discussed and examined carefully and it should be seen in the context of
International Conventions, like Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women (CEDAM) which lays down that “the marriage of a child shall have no legal effect”
similarly, Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) requires the child to be protected from all
forms of physical, mental violence and all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse. Doubt was
expressed that though the provision seems laudable yet given the social pressures surrounding such
marriages, it is unlikely that any such case will be filed in court. It was emphatically proposed that
the marriage solemnised in childhood should also be declared invalid besides being illegal.
10.2 The Government has, however, not agreed to the observations of the witnesses. According
to the Government these findings of the witnesses are not correct. Proposed clause 12 specifies
the circumstances in which marriage of minor child will be void. And the said provision does not
require children to file petition for a decree of nullity.
10.3 The Committee appreciates insertion of the provision rendering a child marriage, whether
solemnised before or after the commencement of this Act, voidable at the option of the contracting
party. In view of the Committee, this provision has been an outcome of the ineffectiveness of the
Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, which validates a child marriage despite it being illegal. The
Committee notes that according to one study made by UNICEF there has not been more than 89
cases of prosecutions in any year under the Act which in itself shows deplorable state of
implementation of the Act, besides, its other glaring inadequacies. The entire society had to bear
the brunt of half-hearted follow up of the present Act and gravity of the problem of child marriage
can be measured by the fact presented by the representatives of the Department of Women and
Child Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) according to which, child
marriages constitute nearly sixty per cent of the total marriages performed in the country. As per
one witness, some three thousand child marriages take place every year in States like Jharkhand

12
and Rajasthan. In the face of these alarming facts, the Committee finds that the proposed provision
can be a positive step towards checking this social evil.
10.4 The Committee, however, feels that rendering a child marriage ‘voidable’ before and
after the commencement of the Act at the option of any of the contracting parties would
cause further complication considering the social pressures and mind set of the people
belonging to lower strata of society who may have inhibitions to be subjected to courts’
proceedings. Moreover, a girl child, as shown by some studies or researches, has to suffer
irreparable losses due to biological factors and inability to sustain pressure of marriage at
an early age. The Committee, therefore, recommends to render a child marriage or early
marriage solemnised after commencement of the Act void ab initio and amend the clause
accordingly.
10.5 In view of the above recommendation, the Committee feels that proviso to sub-clause
(1), and sub-clauses (2) to (4) of the clause 3 have no relevance to the context and should,
therefore, be deleted.
10.6 The Committee finds it pertinent to note that Section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 renders any marriage solemnized after the commencement of the Act null and void if
either party has a spouse living at the time of marriage or the parties are within the
degrees of prohibited relationship or the parties are sapindas of each other. Curiously
enough, the section has not included a marriage solemnised in contravention of sub-clause
(iv) of section 5 of the Act making it mandatory for bridegroom and bride to complete
twenty one years and eighteen years respectively as one of the grounds for declaring a
marriage null and void. Similarly, section 12 of the Act, renders a marriage solemnised in
contravention of certain specified conditions, voidable but it also does not include
contravention of sub-clause (iv) of section 5 as one of the grounds for declaring a marriage
voidable, on the other hand, the proposed legislation makes provisions for rendering a child
marriage voidable on void ab initio  as suggested by the Committee. The Committee is of
the view that the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 is a very significant legislation governing
conditions of Hindu marriage system and laying norms for solemnisation of such marriages
in the society. The proposed legislation too has social reform on its agenda by curbing the
practice of child marriages in the country. However, it is contradictory to observe that while
one law of the land of social relevance does not consider a child marriage one of the
grounds for nullity of marriage by declaring it null and void the other law of equal social
significance, wholly based on prevention of child marriage, renders it voidable as provided
by the proposed Bill or void as being proposed by the Committee. The Committee,
therefore, impresses upon the Government to examine this issue and bring necessary
amendment to the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 to bring the provisions of that Act in parity
with the proposed legislation.
10.7 The Committee wishes to observe that child marriages are performed to avoid dowry
as general feeling prevails that daughters if married at an early age would not cause burden
of dowry for their parents. Nevertheless, in some Northern States the customary practice
forces parties or their parents/guardians to exchange money, valuables, ornament and other
gifts including property on the occasion of marriage. While the present legislation is being
seen as a social piece of law intending to bring revolutionary change in the society, practice
of exchanging valuables between the parties sends a wrong message. So, it is necessary to
change attitude or outlook of people towards child marriages and stimulate the desired
prohibitory social response against perpetuation of the practice of child marriage in the
country. The Committee is of the view that Government should initiate measures to
confiscate all the valuables, money, gifts or property exchanged between the parties on the

13
occasion of marriage which, in turn, would act as a deterrent against continuation of this
social evil.
10.8 Subject to the above the clause is adopted.
CLAUSES-4 and 5
11. Clause 4 seeks to provide maintenance to a girl who is a victim of child marriage until her
remarriage. The clause also proposes to make adequate provision for her residence till her
remarriage. These provisions are proposed to safeguard the victim girl from deprivation.
11.1 Clause 5 relates to a provision for custody and maintenance of children born of child
marriages and also for their welfare and best interest to be served.
11.2 All the witnesses who appeared before the Committee vehemently emphasized on initiating
measures to protect interests of a girl child who has been a victim of child marriage and whose
marriage has been annulled by a decree of nullity. Concerns were raised that women might suffer
a lot and she may also be subjected to further exploitation and also that the provisions for children
born of the child marriage are not adequate. It was also apprehended that children born of child
marriage may not be adopted by the contracting parties or their parents and, therefore, the
responsibility of their custody and maintenance should be on State Governments.
11.3 The Committee observes that .the above two provisions for maintenance to a girl, victim
of child marriage and custody for the children born of child marriages have emanated from a
situation where a child marriage is declared void under the provision of clause 3 of the Bill. These
provisions may undoubtedly help pave the way for change and, therefore, these legislative measures
may be seen in the social context. This calls for need to look at this legislation not as a tool merely
to prevent child marriages but also to bring about radical social changes. In fact reality of a child
marriage gives rise to more complex social issues which need to be addressed so as to enable both
women and children to cope up with the extreme stressful and miserable situations that follow and
lead their lives with dignity with the support of social and Governmental Institutions.
11.4 Therefore, the Committee strongly feels that the proposed legislation should be considered
as a strong piece of social security and welfare legislation with more focus on the issues relating
to the evil of child marriage rather than a weak law containing prevention measures prescribing
certain penal provisions. Unless approach is not changed in this direction, this law may also remain
on paper, ineffective and dormant. Child marriage is a major problem before the nation and it
should be tackled by creating a “social will” through effective implementation of the Act. Related
to child marriage are the problems of poverty, dowry, patriarchy, social myths, caste hierarchy,
illiteracy and insecurity which should be dealt side by side. Government should ensure by all means
that this legislation evokes a positive social response to eradicate this evil.
11.5 In view of the above observations, the Committee feels that since separation of a girl
child, particularly those of rural belts, after declaration of her marriage void may push her
at the crossroad to bear the trauma of poverty as shown by many studies, an immediate
rehabilitation package should come forward to take her and the children disowned by their
parents out of the mess. For this, a child marriage rehabilitation fund should be created by
all the State Governments to cater to the emergency requirements of maintenance, home
and food. The fund should generously be utilized for providing children homes, imparting
skills, developing learning programmes and chalking out a massive education programme
through setting up schools and other similar institutions. The Committee would like to
mention Kallar Reformation Schools in Tamil Nadu where children are provided boarding
and leading facilities till they get employment. Researches have revealed that women victim
of child’ marriage and children born out of such marriage are most prone to further

14
exploitation. Government should, therefore, through a sustained campaign inform them the
various social security and welfare programmes or schemes in existence or being formulated
for empowerment of women and weaker child. Other preventive measures should go hand-
in-hand with these social measures. It should be strictly ensured that maximum social
security should be provided to the victims of child marriage, be it a girl or a male by
linking them to the popular schemes like midday meal scheme, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and
various health schemes with particular focus on women and children etc. The Committee is
of the view that the proposed provisions for maintenance and custody should be a part of
social action instead of a judicial pronouncement. To achieve the objects, NGO’s, officers at
the Panchayat, Tehsil, District and State levels may play more constructive role being their
proximity with rural masses and their problems and, therefore, they should be involved
actively in devising policy and programme for building confidence of victims of child
marriage.
11.6 Several Members pointed out that children homes set up for upkeep and custody of
children have generally became centres of physical harassment and sexual exploitation. In
this connection they referred to the cases reported quite often describing the tale of untold
miseries these children have to suffer while staying in these homes. Members raised their
concern that children born out of child marriages may also have to bear the same conditions
if kept under custody of these homes and this would render the purpose of this legislation
redundant. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government to take adequate measures to
ensure that children kept in children homes are not subjected to any kind of harassment.
11.7 For this the Committee suggests that the children homes should be equipped with all
the necessary amenities/facilities such as, improved nutrition, cleanliness, general hygiene
and periodic health check up etc. These centres should not act or be seen as confinement
centres but provide ample opportunities for fuller growth and development of a child in all
respects. Consideration should also be given to constant monitoring of these centres and
conditions of children staying therein. The Committee feels that to achieve these objectives,
Government should consider building hostels or resident schools close to communities with
emphasis on providing quality education and imparting non-formal education programmes to
equip children with life skills. These hostels or schools should have in school child care
facilities and provide free of cost education till a child attains the age of eighteen years.
In “this connection, the Committee draws attention of Government to Jawahar Navodaya
Vidyalas, which have been set up all over the country with a view to imparting quality
education to the meritorious poor children with boarding facilities. The Committee takes the
view that education and learning programmes may have significant impact on attitude
towards Prevention of Child Marriage and, therefore, it would be imperative if these
elements of Navodaya Vidyalayas are also introduced in the proposed hostels/resident
schools.
11.8 The Committee observes that the Bill has not made any specific provision for the
contracting parties to a marriage and thus it leaves a major gap in this regard. Though
clause 5 provides some financial relief in terms of maintenance and residence for a girl
child till her remarriage the same cannot be measured to be adequate in addressing the
after effects of a child marriage faced by the contracting parties. Moreover by experience,
it has been seen that many problems have to be faced by parties to claim maintenance even
after order of court. Child marriage affects both the boy and the girl. After a child marriage
a girl child loses her adolescence, and is deprived of freedom and personal development
besides having profound psychological and emotional consequences; a boy on the other hand
looses opportunities and his choices for betterment are reduced considerably. The
Committee feels that these aspects need to be taken into account so that the contracting

15
parties to a child marriage, may be exposed to such actions as may fulfill or restore their
deprived rights. Further, children married at early age should be linked compulsorily with
free education and learning programmes. Parents or guardians should be made aware of the
various programmes or schemes launched for welfare and overall development of these
children and to secure access of these children to such programmes, participation of NGOs,
social groups, public representatives and bureaucrats both at the national and States level
should be encouraged. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Government to look
into these aspects carefully as these suggestions may go a long way in providing protection
and the desired social and economic support to the children affected by child marriages.
11.9 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-9
12. The clause prescribes punishment for male adult marrying a child.
12.1 The Committee notes that as regards punishment for male adult marrying a child, the
proposed legislation has shown an improvement over the existing Child Marriage Restraint Act,
1929 which provides simple imprisonment which may extend to three months and fine for
committing the offence. The proposed legislation, on the other hand, makes the offence under the
clause punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees or both. Some witnesses expressed their dissatisfaction over
provision for simple imprisonment. They contended that unless offenders are subjected to rigorous
punishment, the situation is unlikely to change substantially.
12.2 The Committee is of the view that the observations made by some of the witnesses
during the course of their deposition, are quite justified. By experience, it has been seen
that if a law is not equipped with adequate penal provisions it fails to create the desired
impact. The proposed legislation is a pioneering step towards eradication of a major social
problem of child marriage crippling social-fabric of the nation and leaving devastating
effects on lakhs of children. Moreover, internationally agreed child welfare standards
particularly relating to child marriages create an obligation on the Government to frame an
effective law. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the punishment prescribed under
the clause should be rigorous enough to ensure efficacious enforcement of preventing
measures of the law.
12.3 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-10
13. The Clause provides punishment for solemnising a child marriage.
13.1 Subject to the observations of the Committee in the foregoing para 12.2, it suggests
that the clause be amended suitably in such manner as may provide rigorous imprisonment
for the offence of solemnizing a child marriage.
13.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
13.3 In para 9.5 of the Report, the Committee dealt with the definition of the term
“child” and found that the different legislations have defined the term differently causing
a lot of confusion and ambiguity. The Committee noted that the Indian Penal Code, has left
a wide scope for conflicting views and contradictions as regards the definition of child. In
this backdrop, the Committee finds it relevant to mention that yet another provision of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 creates the same sort of anomaly though in different context. As
per section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act; 1955, a marriage may be solemnized between any

16
two Hindus, subject to fulfillment of certain specified conditions. One of the conditions as
laid down in clause (iii) of the section makes it mandatory for the bridegroom and the bride
to complete the age of twenty-one years and eighteen years respectively for entering into
marital relations. Then section 18 (a) of the Act renders contravention of the condition
specified in clause (iii) of section 5 punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend
to fifteen days, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. The
Committee feels that it is absurd to provide two different punishments under the two
different laws for by and large the same kind of offence. As in the case of the proposed
legislation, punishment for solemnizing a child marriage is far larger than the Hindu
Marriage Act, laws are made to regulate living conditions of human beings and define their
relations with deterrence to ensure compliance with the norms of civil society. Any sort of
confusion, conflict or contradiction in legislative provisions for dealing with the similar
situations, should, therefore, be avoided. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government
to consider this issue carefully and if need be, bring necessary amendment in the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955.
CLAUSE-11
14. The Clause provides punishment for promoting or permitting solemnisation of child
marriage. It, however, exempts women from the punishment of imprisonment.
14.1 The Committee finds the provision exempting a woman from punishment of imprisonment
also exists in the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929. The proposed legislation has retained this
provision without any change. Several NGOs have favoured insertion of this provision in the Bill,
while on the other hand, some other NGOs and representatives of the Department of Women and
Child Welfare have vehemently opposed the provision exempting women. Some Members of the
Committee put forth their arguments in favour of retention of the provision to sub-clause (1) of
the clause on the ground that in a male dominating society like ours, little scope is left for a
woman to exercise her choice. Generally, decision regarding education, marriage etc. are taken
either by grandparents or by a male in a family set up. There are many tribal communities or
villages where such decisions are taken by the heads or priests of these communities and women
of these families, generally being illiterate, subdued and suppressed do not have any say in these
matters. They were, therefore, of the view that women should not be held liable for punishment
and the provision should be retained in the Bill. On the other hand, arguments were advanced for
deleting the proviso for the reasons that role and status of women has undergone a sea-change in
the changed socio-economic conditions. Women today is more educated, enlightened and aware of
the environment and may, therefore, take independent decision. It was also contended that women
now-a days act as perpetrators of committing offence of child marriages and if they are exempted
from being liable for punishment, they may be exploited as a tool to solemnise child marriages.
14.2 Having regard to the above views expressed by some Members of the Committee,
NGOs and representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource and Development both
against and in favour of the provision regarding exemption for women, the Committee
agrees with the views that if a woman is exempted from being held liable for punishment
there is a greater risk of her being used as on instrument to solemnise child marriage and
this, in turn, would render the whole exercise fructuous. The Committee also endorses the
view that while formulating a law, no differentiation should be made between man and
woman. It would be appropriate if decision in the matter is left on court which may, while
deciding any such issue, take into account, facts and circumstances of each case and based
on those facts, it may reach at logical conclusion whether a women is offender for the
purpose of this legislation or liable to be exempted from being punished. The Committee,
therefore, recommends deletion of the proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 11.

17
14.3 Apprehension has also been expressed that under the provision even invitees, participants or
persons who attend a child marriage without any knowledge of the fact of solemnisation of a child
marriage, are to be held liable alongwith those actively or passively involved in such marriage. The
Committee feels that keeping in view the objectives of the legislation and also the
international obligations arising out of Convention on the Rights of the Child, it becomes
imperative to give effect to this provision as it may act as a deterrent measure for those
having knowledge of the fact that a child marriage is being solemnised, attend such
marriage. However, it should also not be ignored that punishing poor parents may make
their children’s life more vulnerable. Punishing the whole community entails its own
dangers as it would give the police a reason to exploit the community. The Committee
opines that while genuine efforts should be made to ensure that innocent persons should
not be subjected to any harassment, at the same time it should be made mandatory for the
parents or for those who are actively or passively involved in promoting or permitting
solemnisation of child marriage to mention the age of the marrying couple on the invitation
cards so that onus of proof of age of the parties to marriage be shifted to on the parents
or those promoting it. Besides, public representatives, Government servants or those
holding public offices and having knowledge of the fact of solemnisation of a child
marriages should be discouraged to be part of such ceremonies by bringing them within the
ambit of this provision.
14.4 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-12
15. The clause seeks to render marriage of a minor child to be void in certain circumstances.
15.1 The Committee notes that the provision has been inserted in the Bill with a view to tackling
cases where a child may be taken or enticed out of the keeping of the lawful guardian or forcibly
compelled or induced deceitfully to go from any place and is sold for the purpose of marriage or
sold, trafficked or used for immoral purposes. As per this provision, such marriage shall be null
and void. The. Bill intends to address one of the most apparent consequences a girl has to bear
after her marriage, that is child trafficking. As per the information supplied to the Committee, child
marriage is used as a legal instrument for achieving illegal trafficking of children, particularly, girls
are married in a day or two and then trafficked and sold for various purposes, including sexual
exploitation and prostitution. This establishes an inextricable link between child trafficking and child
marriage. Girls from various States are married and then trafficked for marrying with older men
or forcing them into prostitution. Child marriages result in their trafficking and they are sold for
money to act as bonded labour.
15.2 In this backdrop, the Committee feels that undoubtedly the provision is a welcome
step but in the absence of any punishment provided thereunder there is every possibility of
its being impactless having no deterrent effect on any person. The intention of the
legislation can be translated into action effectively, if the provisions are strengthened by a
proportionate penal clause. The Committee notes that to deal with similar or identical
situations, Section 366 of the Indian Penal Code has prescribed punishment with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and also fixed
liability to pay fine for kidnapping abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage etc.
Similarly, Section 372 of the Indian Penal Code has prescribed the same punishment for an
offence of selling minor for purposes of prostitution etc. These offences under the Code are
cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable. In the view of the Committee, the offences
described under this clause are by and large of the same gravity and therefore, attract the
same punishment as has been prescribed in the Indian Penal Code under the above referred

18
sections. Moreover, elimination of trafficking and sexual exploitation of children is one of
the Millennium Development Goals of the United Nations which are to be achieved by 2015.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause be amended suitably to give effect
to the above observations.
15.3 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-13
16. The Clause empowers court to issue injunction for prohibiting child marriages.
16.1 The Committee considered sub-clause (10) and its proviso exempting a woman from
punishment of imprisonment in case she disobeys the injunction issued under sub-clause (1)
of the clause knowing that such injunction has been issued. The Committee dealt with this
issue in detail and made its observations while considering provisions contained in the
proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 11. Subject to the observations of the Committee in
regard to clause 11(1) it recommends that the proviso be deleted.
16.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-16
17. The Clause provides for the appointment of Child Marriage Prevention Officers and
specifies their duties.
17.1 The Committee notes that the responsibility of enforcing preventive measures has largely
been entrusted to the Child Marriage Prevention Officers who are to be appointed by the respective
State Governments. The clause in a way is the spirit of the whole legislation as its effective
implementation will pave the way for achieving the laudable objective set by the legislation, Sensing
this essence, all the witnesses/NGOs laid emphasis on making these provisions more effective. The
example of Shrimati Shakuntala Verma was stated to be an eye opener for the entire nation, who
had to bear brutality of distorted norms of society for want of adequate safeguards. So, the moot
question in this connection arises as to who would come forward to prevent solemnisation of a
child marriage. Fear psychosis in such cases stumbles zeal to take action. The same may be true
in a situation being envisaged by the proposed legislation. Another objection has been about absence
of mention of any accountability of the functionaries. It was pointed out that accountability has
not been specified in the Bill failing which implementation would be a difficult task. The witnesses
have also indicated that the Bill does not clearly mention about the infrastructural facilities which
may be required by the CMPOs while executing their duties.
17.2 The Committee feels that the Child Marriage Prevention officers (CMPOs) and other
functionaries under the Bill should be provided with adequate security measures to ensure their
fearless functioning which is the most important aspect related to prevention of child marriage.
Officials can perform their statutory obligations effectively and in a better way if enough
infrastructural support is extended to them. Glaring gap in the legislation is, however, absence of
mention of any accountability failing which implementation of the Act, in letter and spirit, would
be a daunting task. Besides, the Bill is also silent on certain issues like what would be the rank
and status of CMPOS, in what kind of hierarchy they will have to function etc.
17.3 The Committee is of the view that since early marriage represents a major threat
to a child’s well being, it needs  to be seen in  the context of the social causes leading to child
marriages and effects on both an individual and society. The problem can be addressed
effectively by perfect coordination, massive interaction and wider consultation among
different social as well as Government agencies, civil society experts, NGOs, academicians,

19
researchers, lawyers and jurists, law enforcing functionaries such as women officers of
Indian Police Service, representatives of people, religious leaders, parents and other such
organizations which have enough exposure in the field and attitude towards tackling this
evil. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should provide to evolve
a suitable mechanism on these lines with a view to introducing and promoting concrete
initiatives to curb this social evil. In view of the observation of the Committee in para 20,
it also recommends to change the nomenclature of the functionaries as Child Marriage
Prohibition Officers in place of the existing one.
17.4 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE
18. The Committee notes that the Bill in certain aspects, though a weleome piece of legislation,
yet has left a major gap by not inserting a provision about registration of marriages. There has been
a wide ranging discussion on the issue and almost all the experts/NGOs and the representatives of
the Ministry of Human Resource Development agreed that the Bill should make registration of adult
marriages and recording of child marriages a compulsory mandatory provision. The Committee’s
attention was drawn to the consequences that may follow after an unregistered marriage and to
the concern expressed by Art 3 of the International Human Rights Instrument and Early Marriage
which says that  “all marriages shall be registered------------by the competent authority”. Attention
was also drawn to the UNICEF Digest’s observation according to which one problem in assessing
the prevalence of early marriages is that so many are unregistered and unofficial and are not
therefore, counted as part of any standard data collection system. The Committee has also been
informed that after making registration compulsory, there has been marked improvement in bringing
down the rate of occurrence of child marriages in Sri Lanka. The Committee also notes that
various States such as Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tripura and Goa have already enacted
laws making registration compulsory.
18.1 Having regard to the above observations and considering that there was almost
unanimity that compulsory registration of adult marriages and recording of child marriage
should be provided in the Bill, the Committee recommends that Government should insert
a new provision in the Bill at an appropriate place to give effect to the above observations.
While inserting such a provision, the following issues should inter alia be taken care of :—
Registration process must involve a careful scrutiny of the age of the parties to the
marriage and should not be done casually or mechanically as the prevention of child
marriage can be possible only when there lies an effective system for verification of age of
the marrying parties at an early stage.
(i) A minimum period from the date of solemnisation of marriage should be
specified within which, the parties should be required to get their marriage
registered.
(ii) Responsibility of registration of marriages or recording of child marriages
should be entrusted to the functionaries at the level of Panchayat, Tehsil and
District and clear provision should be made for fixing accountability of such
functionaries in case of failure in their duties.
(iii) T o encourage masses to participate in the process, NGOs should be involved to
coordinate with the State functionaries/officials. This is all the more necessary
to sort out administrative problems which may came on the way of tribal
communities settled in far flung areas.

20
CLAUSE-1
ENACTING FORMULA AND TITLE
19. Clause 1 and Enacting Formula were adopted with some changes which were of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, the figure, 2004 and the words and “Fifty-fifth”
to be substituted by the figure “2005” and the words “fifty-sixth,” respectively.
20. As regards the title of the Bill, the Committee feels that the existing title “The
Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004” gives an impression that the Bill proposes to
prevent long standing practice of child marriage and not to eliminate it from the root. The
proposed law should be seen with this optimism, that this legislative measure aims at
eradicating this social evil forever. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the title of
the Bill should be substituted by “The Prohibition of Child Marriage and Early Marriage
Bill, 2004” and consequential amendments be carried in the provisions of the Bill wherever
the word ‘prevention’ occurs.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
21. The Committee feels that the long title of the Bill does not explain adequately the
objectives which the Bill seeks to enforce. It appears to be grossly lacking so far as it fails
to reflect an appropriate message consistent with (i) the Millennium Development Goals set
for children by the United Nations pledging to provide quality education, protection against
abuse, exploitation and violence, elimination of trafficking and sexual exploitation of
children. (ii) Norms laid down by International Human Rights instruments and (iii) Ideals
set by the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a preamble be inserted in the Bill on the lines of the above observations.
22. The Committee wholeheartedly stands in acclaimation of heroic deed executed by
Shrimati Shakuntala Verma, a Supervisor of the Integrated Child Development Scheme of
Madhya Pradesh, who has set an example for the entire society how this evil can be fought.
Her case is an eye opener to exhibit the sheer zeal, dedication and commitment in the
direction of discouraging evil of child marriage. It is also an occasion to address the issues
she raised while appearing before the Committee on its invitation. While such examples
would remain ideal to follow, the Committee feels a national level survey needs to be
carried out promptly by the Government to collect data, as in the absence of a standard data
collection system, there is too little concrete information on prevalence of child marriage
and its impact. Government may seek involvement of research institutions of repute and
research fellows in coordination with the prominent NGOs to accomplish the task. Use of
information and technology tools may yeild significant results in such research and these
inputs may eventually assist in formulating useful programmes and policy. Secondly, it is
essential to ensure strict enforcement of the legislative measures as Committee is aware
of the fate of the Dowry Prohibition Act, which has been virtually dead so far in achieving
its objects. Though in tackling such kind of issue, it may have only limited impact as by
experience it is observed that harmful traditional practice continue unabated inspite of the
laws that forbid such practice. So, the Committee reiterates that social programmes
concerning child welfare with focus on changing attitude of those responsible for promoting
such practice should go hand in hand with implementation of legislative measures. The
Committee agrees with the views expressed by some witnesses that to assess effectiveness
of enforcement of legislative measures, Government should conduct social audit and based
on the report, initiate corrective measures. In this connection, the Committee impresses
upon the Government to constitute a statutory body for collecting, analysing and
dissemination of information, counselling victims of child marriage and launching persuasive

21
campaign to discourage people to perform child marriage. Such body should consists of
officials at all levels and social activists to converge developmental projects related to child
and channelise them to chronically child marriage prone areas. The Committee is optimistic
that this legislation would set a milestone in bringing social reforms.
23. In view of the observation of the Committee regarding enhancing infrastructural
facilities for the Child Marriage Prevention Officers and creating rehabilitation fund to
promote welfare of children victims of child marriage, the Committee recommends the
Government to  provide adequate financial support and reflect it in the financial
memorandum appended to the Bill.

22
RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
9.5 In this context, the Committee finds it pertinent to mention the sixth description of
Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code which says a man is said to commit “rape” who has
sexual intercourse with a woman with or without her consent when she is under sixteen
years of age. Further, there is an exception to the section which says sexual intercourse by
a man with his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape. Thus,
consent of a girl is the material factor in deciding the cases of rape. Courts have set
presumption of consent of girl in these cases. In other words, a girl is considered mature
enough at the age of sixteen to give consent for the purpose. Similarly as per the exception
to the section, a married girl of 15 years is considered mature enough to give her consent.
This though not related directly to the issue under examination at the moment, yet evokes
a contradictory response. The contradiction arises because of the above provision of the
IPC. The Committee is of the view that these conflicting definitions of the IPC and the
present Bill cause confusion, ambiguity and doubt. While the IPC holds a girl of sixteen
years and a married girl of fifteen years quite mature to give her consent, the proposed
legislation considers her yet a child at this stage. It leaves scope for a wide debate as to
what should be considered to be genuine age for the purpose of childhood. Moreover, there
would not be any parity with the two legislations in this respect. As observed already,
definition of child is different in different legislations and particular instance of IPC in this
context makes the whole proposition incongruous. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that to remove anomaly or ambiguity caused by different interpretations in the Indian Penal
Code and the present Bill and also having regard to the International Convention on the
Rights of the Child (CRC) which says “a child means every human being below the age of
eighteen years unless under the law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier”,
Government should consider to amend/ delete the said provisions in section 375 of the I.P.C.
to bring it in conformity with this legislation and the International convention.
9.6 Some Members of the Committee were of the view that age of marriage for both the
male and female should be eighteen years instead of the proposed different, ages i.e.
eighteen years for female and twenty one years for male. Members favouring this
formulation argued that by reaching the age of eighteen both male and female attain social
biological and psychological maturity. Further, the Indian Majority Act, the Indian Penal
Code, Labor Laws, International conventions, the Indian Contract Act and the
Representative of the People Act also consider this age proper for performing legal
obligations enjoined on by these laws. Moreover, in the changed circumstances and with the
kind of advancement the society has undergone, it is imperative to consider lower age for
marriage for both, male and female.
9.7 Other Members, however, opposed the idea of having a common age of marriage for
both the sexes as in their view, age differentiation is a necessity taking into account the
physical, intellectual, psychological and emotional aspects. These considerations have been
genuinely recognized by social thinkers from the time immemorial for maintaining a
reasonable age gap between male and female. Secondly, an age of eighteen years is also
considered insufficient for a boy to attain the desired level of education and economic
independence. Moreover, an early age of eighteen years for both the sexes would make it
difficult to implement family planning programmes and policies effectively as several
22

23
studies and surveys have revealed that high fertility rate is attributed to an early marriage.
So, the earlier the marriage, higher the rate of reproduction. Consensus emerged on
retaining the age differentiation as provided in the definition clause. It was, however,
suggested that after the definitions of terms “child”, and “child marriage”, a new definition
of the term “early marriage” be inserted to define solemnisation of marriage by a male
above eighteen years and below twenty one years. This is necessary to make distinction
between definition of “child marriage” as applicable to a male and a marriage which is
performed by a male after attaining majority but before twenty one years and to clear doubt
in this regard. The Committee also suggests that like child marriage, an early marriage
should also be void ab initio and punishable in the same manner as has been prescribed in
clauses 3, 9, 10 and 12 of the Bill.
9.8 The Committee feels that though it has largely favoured the contention to maintain
age differentiation in the Bill, yet views/ideas expressed by the Members for a common age
of eighteen years for both the male and female should also be considered by the
Government carefully as the issue of determination of marriage age is inextricably related
to other social aspects, which if ignored may entail serious consequences on an individual
and society as a whole. The Committee hopes that the Government having regard to the
observations made by the Members would take an appropriate view.
9.9 The Committee also endorses the views expressed by some witnesses that the
definition of the word ‘minor’ provided in sub-clause (f) adds to confusion only as the
legislation provides a specific definition of a child and all the subsequent provisions of the
Bill are in relation to this definition. The definition of ‘minor’ therefore, appears to be of
no relevance in the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definition of
‘minor’ should be deleted and in view of this amendment, the word ‘minor’ be substituted
by the word ‘child’ in all the subsequent provisions of the Bill, wherever it occurs.
9.10 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
10.4 The Committee, however, feels that rendering a child marriage ‘voidable’ before and
after the commencement of the Act at the option of any of the contracting parties would
cause further complication considering the social pressures and mind set of the people
belonging to lower strata of society who may have inhibitions to be subjected to courts’
proceedings. Moreover, a girl child, as shown by some studies or researches, has to suffer
irreparable losses due to biological factors and inability to sustain pressure of marriage at
an early age. The Committee, therefore, recommends to render a child marriage or early
marriage solemnized after commencement of the Act void ab initio and amend the clause
accordingly.
10.5 In view of the above recommendation, the Committee feels that proviso to sub-clause
(1), and sub-clauses (2) to (4) of the clause 3 have no relevance to the context and should,
therefore, be deleted.
10.6 The Committee finds it pertinent to note that Section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 renders any marriage solemnized after the commencement of the Act null and void if
either party has a spouse living at the time of marriage or the parties are within the
degrees of prohibited relationship or the parties are sapindas of each other. Curiously
enough, the section has not included a marriage solemnized in contravention of sub-clause
(iv) of section 5 of the Act making it mandatory for bridegroom and bride to complete
twenty one years and eighteen years respectively as one of the grounds for declaring a
marriage null and void. Similarly, section 12 of the Act, renders a marriage solemnized in
contravention of certain specified conditions, voidable but it also does not include

24
contravention of sub-clause (iv) of section 5 as one of the grounds for declaring a marriage
voidable, on the other hand, the proposed legislation makes provisions for rendering a child
marriage voidable on void ab initio  as suggested by the Committee. The Committee is of the
view that the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 is a very significant legislation governing conditions
of Hindu marriage system and laying norms for solemnization of such marriages in the
society. The proposed legislation too has social reform on its agenda by curbing the practice
of child marriages in the country. However, it is contradictory to observe that while one law
of the land of social relevance does not consider a child marriage one of the grounds for
nullity of marriage by declaring it null and void the other law of equal social significance,
wholly based on prevention of child marriage, renders it voidable as provided by the
proposed Bill or void as being proposed by the Committee. The Committee, therefore,
impresses upon the Government to examine this issue and bring necessary amendment to
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 to bring the provisions of that Act in parity with the proposed
legislation.
10.7 The Committee wishes to observe that child marriages are performed to avoid dowry
as general feeling prevails that daughters if married at an early age would not cause burden
of dowry for their parents. Nevertheless, in some northern states the customary practice
forces parties or their parents/guardians to exchange money, valuables, ornament and other
gifts including property on the occasion of marriage. While the present legislation is being
seen as a social piece of law intending to bring revolutionary change in the society, practice
of exchanging valuables between the parties sends a wrong message. So, it is necessary to
change attitude or outlook of people towards child marriages and stimulate the desired
prohibitory social response against perpetuation of the practice of child marriage in the
country. The Committee is of the view that Government should initiate measures to
confiscate all the valuables, money, gifts or property exchanged between the parties on the
occasion of marriage which, in turn, would act as a deterrent against continuation of this
social evil.
10.8 Subject to the above the clause is adopted.
11.5 In view of the above observations, the Committee feels that since separation of a girl
child, particularly those of rural belts, after declaration of her marriage void may push her
at the crossroad to bear the trauma of poverty as shown by many studies, an immediate
rehabilitation package should come forward to take her and the children disowned by their
parents out of the mess. For this, a child marriage rehabilitation fund should be created by
all the State Governments to cater to the emergency requirements of maintenance, home
and food. The fund should generously be utilized for providing children homes, imparting
skills, developing learning programmes and chalking out a massive education programme
through setting up schools and other similar institutions. The Committee would like to
mention Kallar Reformation Schools in Tamil Nadu where children are provided boarding
and leading facilities till they get employment. Researches have revealed that women victim
of child marriage and children born out of such marriage are most prone to further
exploitation. Government should, therefore, through a sustained campaign inform them the
various social security and welfare programmes or schemes in existence or being formulated
for empowerment of women and weaker child. Other preventive measures should go hand-
in-hand with these social measures. It should be strictly ensured that maximum social
security should be provided to the victims of child marriage, be it a girl or a male by
linking them to the popular schemes like midday meal scheme, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and
various health schemes with particular focus on women and children etc. The Committee
is of the view that the proposed provisions for maintenance and custody should be a part
of social action instead of a judicial pronouncement. To achieve the objects, NGO’s, officers

25
at the Panchayat, Tehsil, District and State levels may play more constructive role being
their proximity with rural masses and their problems and, therefore, they should be
involved actively in devising policy and programme for building confidence of victims of
child marriage.
11.6 Several Members pointed out that children homes set up for upkeep and custody of
children have generally became centres of physical harassment and sexual exploitation. In
this connection they referred to the cases reported quite often describing the tale of untold
miseries these children have to suffer while staying in these homes. Members raised their
concern that children born out of child marriages may also have to bear the same conditions
if kept under custody of these homes and this would render the purpose of this legislation
redundant. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government to take adequate measures to
ensure that children kept in children homes are not subjected to any kind of harassment.
11.7 For this the Committee suggests that the children homes should be equipped with all
the necessary amenities/facilities such as, improved nutrition, cleanliness, general hygiene
and periodic health check up etc. These centres should not act or be seen as confinement
centres but provide ample opportunities for fuller growth and development of a child in all
respects. Consideration should also be given to constant monitoring of these centres and
conditions of children staying therein. The Committee feels that to achieve these objectives,
Government should consider building hostels or resident schools close to communities with
emphasis on providing quality education and imparting non-formal education programmes to
equip children with life skills. These hostels or schools should have in school child care
facilities and provide free of cost education till a child attains the age of eighteen years.
In this connection, the Committee draws attention of Government to Jawahar Navodaya
Vidyalayas, which have been set up all over the country with a view to imparting quality
education to the meritorious poor children with boarding facilities. The Committee takes the
view that education and learning programmes may have significant impact on attitude
towards Prevention of Child Marriage and, therefore, it would be imperative if these
elements of Navodaya Vidyalayas are also introduced in the proposed hostels/resident
schools.
11.8 The Committee observes that the Bill has not made any specific provision for the
contracting parties to a marriage and thus it leaves a major gap in this regard. Though
clause 5 provides some financial relief in terms of maintenance and residence for a girl
child till her remarriage the same cannot be measured to be adequate in addressing the
after effects of a child marriage faced by the contracting parties. Moreover by experience,
it has been seen that many problems have to be faced by parties to claim maintenance even
after order of court. Child marriage affects both the boy and the girl. After a child marriage
a girl child loses her adolescence, and is deprived of freedom and personal development
besides having profound psychological and emotional consequences; a boy on the other hand
looses opportunities and his choices for betterment are reduced considerably. The
Committee feels that these aspects need to be taken into account so that the contracting
parties to a child marriage, may be exposed to such actions as may fulfill or restore their
deprived rights. Further, children married at early age should be linked compulsorily with
free education and learning programmes. Parents or guardians should be made aware of the
various programmes or schemes launched for welfare and overall development of these
children and to secure access of these children to such programmes, participation of NGOs,
social groups, public representatives and bureaucrats both at the national and states level
should be encouraged. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Government to look
into these aspects carefully as these suggestions may go a long way in providing protection
and the desired social and economic support to the children affected by child marriages.

26
11.9 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
12.2 The Committee is of the view that the observations made by some of the witnesses
during the course of their deposition, are quite justified. By experience, it has been seen
that if a law is not equipped with adequate penal provisions it fails to create the desired
impact. The proposed legislation is a pioneering step towards eradication of a major social
problem of child marriage crippling social-fabric of the nation and leaving devastating
effects on lakhs of children. Moreover, internationally agreed child welfare standards
particularly relating to child marriages create an obligation on the Government to frame an
effective law. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the punishment prescribed under
the clause should be rigorous enough to ensure efficacious enforcement of preventing
measures of the law.
12.3 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
13.1 Subject to the observations of the Committee in the foregoing para 12.2, it suggests
that the clause be amended suitably in such manner as may provide rigorous imprisonment
for the offence of solemnizing a child marriage.
13.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
13.3 In para 9.5 of the Report, the Committee dealt with the definition of the term
“child” and found that the different legislations have defined the term differently causing
a lot of confusion and ambiguity. The Committee noted that the Indian Penal Code, has left
a wide scope for conflicting views and contradictions as regards the definition of child. In
this backdrop, the Committee finds it relevant to mention that yet another provision of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 creates the same sort of anomaly though in different context. As
per section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act; 1955, a marriage may be solemnized between any
two Hindus, subject to fulfilment of certain specified conditions. One of the conditions as
laid down in clause (iii) of the section makes it mandatory for the bridegroom and the bride
to complete the age of twenty-one years and eighteen years respectively for entering into
marital relations. Then section 18 (a) of the Act renders contravention of the condition
specified in clause (iii) of section 5 punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend
to fifteen days, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. The
Committee feels that it is absurd to provide two different punishments under the two
different laws for by and large the same kind of offence. As in the case of the proposed
legislation, punishment for solemnizing a child marriage is far larger than the Hindu
Marriage Act, laws are made to regulate living conditions of human beings and define their
relations with deterrence to ensure compliance with the norms of civil society. Any sort of
confusion, conflict or contradiction in legislative provisions for dealing with the similar
situations, should, therefore, be avoided. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government
to consider this issue carefully and if need be, bring necessary amendment in the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955.
14.2 Having regard to the above views expressed by some Members of the Committee,
NGOs and representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource and Development both
against and in favour of the provision regarding exemption for women, the Committee
agrees with the views that if a woman is exempted from being held liable for punishment
there is a greater risk of her being used as on instrument to solemnise child marriage and
this, in turn, would render the whole exercise fructuous. The Committee also endorses the
view that while formulating a law, no differentiation should be made between man and
woman. It would be appropriate if decision in the matter is left on court which may, while
deciding any such issue, take into account, facts and circumstances of each case and based

27
on those facts, it may reach at logical conclusion whether a women is offender for the
purpose of this legislation or liable to be exempted from being punished. The Committee,
therefore, recommends deletion of the proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 11.
14.3 The Committee feels that keeping in view the objectives of the  legislation and also
the international obligations arising out of Convention on the Rights of the Child, it
becomes imperative to give effect to this provision as it may act as a deterrent measure
for those having knowledge of the fact that a child marriage is being solemnised, attend
such marriage. However, it should also not be ignored that punishing poor parents may
make their children’s life more vulnerable. Punishing the whole community entails its own
dangers as it would give the police a reason to exploit the community. The Committee
opines that while genuine efforts should be made to ensure that innocent persons should
not be subjected to any harassment, at the same time it should be made mandatory for the
parents or for those who are actively or passively involved in promoting or permitting
solemnisation of child marriage to mention the age of the marrying couple on the invitation
cards so that onus of proof of age of the parties to marriage be shifted to on the parents
or those promoting it. Besides, public representatives, government servants or those holding
public offices and having knowledge of the fact of solemnisation of a child marriages should
be discouraged to be part of such ceremonies by bringing them within the ambit of this
provision.
14.4 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
15.2 In this backdrop, the Committee feels that undoubtedly the provision is a welcome
step but in the absence of any punishment provided thereunder there is every possibility of
its being impactless having no deterrent effect on any person. The intention of the
legislation can be translated into action effectively, if the provisions are strengthened by a
proportionate penal clause. The Committee notes that to deal with similar or identical
situations, Section 366 of the Indian Penal Code has prescribed punishment with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and also fixed
liability to pay fine for kidnapping abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage etc.
Similarly, Section 372 of the Indian Penal Code has prescribed the same punishment for an
offence of selling minor for purposes of prostitution etc. These offences under the Code are
cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable. In the view of the Committee, the offences
described under this clause are by and large of the same gravity and therefore, attract the
same punishment as has been prescribed in the Indian Penal Code under the above referred
sections. Moreover, elimination of trafficking and sexual exploitation of children is one of
the Millennium Development Goals of the United Nations which are to be achieved by 2015.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause be amended suitably to give effect
to the above observations.
15.3 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
16.1 The Committee considered sub-clause (10) and its proviso exempting a woman from
punishment of imprisonment in case she disobeys the injunction issued under sub-clause (1)
of the clause knowing that such injunction has been issued. The Committee dealt with this
issue in detail and made its observations while considering provisions contained in the
proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 11. Subject to the observations of the Committee in
regard to clause 11(1) it recommends that the proviso be deleted.
16.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
17.3 The Committee is of the view that since early marriage represents a major threat
to a child’s well being, it needs to be seen in the context of the social causes leading to

28
child marriages and effects on both an individual and society. The problem can be addressed
effectively by perfect coordination, massive interaction and wider consultation among
different social as well as government agencies, civil society experts, NGOs, academicians,
researchers, lawyers and jurists, law enforcing functionaries such as women officers of
Indian Police Service, representatives of people, religious leaders, parents and other such
organizations which have enough exposure in the field and attitude towards tackling this
evil. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should provide to evolve
a suitable mechanism on these lines with a view to introducing and promoting concrete
initiatives to curb this social evil. In view of the observation of the Committee in para 20,
it also recommends to change the nomenclature of the functionaries as Child Marriage
Prohibition Officers in place of the existing one.
17.4 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
18.1 Having regard to the above observations and considering that there was almost
unanimity that compulsory registration of adult marriages and recording of child marriage
should be provided in the Bill, the Committee recommends that Government should insert
a new provision in the Bill at an appropriate place to give effect to the above observations.
While inserting such a provision, the following issues should inter-alia be taken care of :—
Registration process must involve a careful scrutiny of the age of the parties to the
marriage and should not be done casually or mechanically as the prevention of child
marriage can be possible only when there lies an effective system for verification of age of
the marrying parties at an early stage.
(i) A minimum period from the date of solemnisation of marriage should be
specified within which, the parties should be required to get their marriage
registered.
(ii) Responsibility of registration of marriages or recording of child marriages
should be entrusted to the functionaries at the level of Panchayat, Tehsil and
District and clear provision should be made for fixing accountability of such
functionaries in case of failure in their duties.
(iii) T o encourage masses to participate in the process, NGOs should be involved to
coordinate with the state functionaries/officials. This is all the more necessary
to sort out administrative problems which may came on the way of tribal
communities settled in far flung areas.
19. Clause 1 and Enacting Formula were adopted with some changes which were of
consequential or drafting nature, namely, the figure, 2004 and the words and “Fifty-fifth”
to be substituted by the figure “2005” and the words “fifty-sixth,” respectively.
20. As regards the title of the Bill, the Committee feels that the existing title “The
Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004” gives an impression that the Bill proposes to
prevent long standing practice of child marriage and not to eliminate it from the root. The
proposed law should be seen with this optimism, that this legislative measure aims at
eradicating this social evil forever. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the title of
the Bill should be substituted by “The Prohibition of Child Marriage and Early Marriage
Bill, 2004” and consequential amendments be carried in the provisions of the Bill wherever
the word ‘prevention’ occurs.
21. The Committee feels that the long title of the Bill does not explain adequately the
objectives which the Bill seeks to enforce. It appears to be grossly lacking so far as it fails
to reflect an appropriate message consistent with (i) the Millennium Development Goals set

29
for children by the United Nations pledging to provide quality education, protection against
abuse, exploitation and violence, elimination of trafficking and sexual exploitation of
children. (ii) Norms laid down by International Human Rights instruments and (iii) Ideals
set by the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a preamble be inserted in the Bill on the lines of the above observations.
22. The Committee wholeheartedly stands in acclaimation of heroic deed executed by
Shrimati Shakuntala Verma, a Supervisor of the Integrated Child Development Scheme of
Madhya Pradesh, who has set an example for the entire society how this evil can be fought.
Her case is an eye opener to exhibit the sheer zeal, dedication and commitment in the
direction of discouraging evil of child marriage. It is also an occasion to address the issues
she raised while appearing before the Committee on its invitation. While such examples
would remain ideal to follow, the Committee feels a national level survey needs to be
carried out promptly by the Government to collect data, as in the absence of a standard data
collection system, there is too little concrete information on prevalence of child marriage
and its impact. Government may seek involvement of research institutions of repute and
research fellows’ in coordination with the prominent NGOs to accomplish the task. Use of
information and technology tools may yeild significant results in such research and these
inputs may eventually assist in formulating useful programmes and policy. Secondly, it is
essential to ensure strict enforcement of the legislative measures as Committee is aware
of the fate of the Dowry Prohibition Act, which has been virtually dead so far in achieving
its objects. Though in tackling such kind of issue, it may have only limited impact as by
experience it is observed that harmful traditional practice continue unabated in spite of the
laws that forbid such practice. So, the Committee reiterates that social programmes
concerning child welfare with focus on changing attitude of those responsible for promoting
such practice should go hand in hand with implementation of legislative measures. The
Committee agrees with the views expressed by some witnesses that to assess effectiveness
of enforcement of legislative measures, Government should conduct social audit and based
on the report, initiate corrective measures. In this connection, the Committee impresses
upon the Government to constitute a statutory body for collecting, analysing and
dissemination of information, counselling victims of child marriage and launching persuasive
campaign to discourage people to perform child marriage. Such body should consists of
officials at all levels and social activists to converge developmental projects related to child
and channelise them to chronically child marriage prone areas. The Committee is optimistic
that this legislation would set a milestone in bringing social reforms.
23. In view of the observation of the Committee regarding enhancing infrastructural
facilities for the Child Marriage Prevention Officers and creating rehabilitation fund to
promote welfare of children victims of child marriage, the Committee recommends the
Government to provide adequate financial support and reflect it in the financial
memorandum appended to the Bill.

MINUTES

33
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC
GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XLI
FORTY-FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 14th July, 2005 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
6. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
11. Shri A.K. Moorthy
12. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. * * *
*** Relate to some other matters.

34
V. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee also heard a presentation by the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry
of Law and Justice on the Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004, as introduced in the Rajya
Sabha and referred to the Committee for examination and report. The Secretary gave an outline of
the circumstances necessitating this legislation and briefly explained its provisions. He also replied
to the queries raised by some Members and gave clarifications on the various issues pertaining to
the Bill.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee, adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
28 July, 2005.
*** Relate to some other matters.

35
II
SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 12th September, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
10. Shri A.K. Moorthy
11. Shri Shriniwas Patil
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Department of Women and Child Development (Ministry of HRD)
1. Shrimati Reva Nayyar, Secretary; and
2. Shrimati Loveleen Kacker, Joint Secretary.
II. Representative of Centre of Concern for Child Labour
Mr. Joseph Gathia.
III. Representatives of Human Rights Law Network
1. Ms. Aparna Bhatt;
2. Ms. Atreyee Sen; and
3. Mr. Colin Gonsalves.
35

36
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Committee brief1y of the work initiated, so far,
on the subjects, ‘‘Judicial Reforms’’, ‘‘Electoral Reforms’’ and ‘‘Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism’’ and proposed that the Committee may first proceed with the study of "Electoral
Reforms". He also informed members that a schedule had been chalked out according to which the
Committee may meet on 27th September and 28th September, 2005 to hear further oral evidence
on the Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004 and a presentation by the Secretary, Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice, alongwith Principal Secrctary, Election Commission, on
‘‘Electoral Reforms’’, respectivcly. The Chairman was of the view that the Committee should
conclude consideration of the Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004 soon after hearing witnesses
and then focus on ‘‘Electoral Reforms’’ in the meetings proposed to be held on 17th, 18th, 27th
and 28th October, 2005. He requested Members to highlight the specific areas for examination, as
it may not be possible for the Committee to go into the whole gamut of the subject. A member
suggested that the Committee should enrich itself with the valuable views of some prominent
persons and experts like Shri Subhash Kashyap, etc. having proficiency in the subject. The
proposals placed before the Committee by its Chairman were approved. The schedule of meetings
proposed was also agreed to by the Committee.
3. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed the representatives of the Department of Women and
Child Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development and informed them that the purpose
of inviting them was to elicit their views/suggestions as to whether the Prevention of Child
Marriage Bill, 2004 has addressed all the major issues or it would need further amendments to
effectively deal with the evil of child marriage. He, then, requested the Secretary to make her
observations on the Bill.
4. Applauding the efforts of Government in bringing forth the legislation intended to curb the
practice of child marriage in the country, the Secretary stated that child marriages are prevalent
in many parts of the country and the society has to face the evil effects of such marriages, which
are held due to age old traditions, social beliefs, backwardness, illiteracy, poverty and orthodox
tendencies. The Secretary outlined the provisions of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 and
indicated certain lacunae and shortcomings in the Act. Referring to the Annual Reports of the
National Commission for Women (1995-96) and of the National Human Rights Commission (2001-
2002), the Secretary stated that though the Department of Women and Child Development had
conveyed its agreement with the proposed Bill which was based on the recommendations of the
NCW and NHRC at the stage of the Cabinet consideration, yet they felt certain areas needed further
modifications to make the proposed legislation more effective.
5. The Secretary suggested that suitable amendments should be carried out in clauses 2, 3, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13 and 16 of the Bill so that the provisions regarding definition of child, voidable child
marriage at the option of contracting party, maintenance to female contracting party, punishment,
powers of courts to issue injunction and child marriage prevention officers may be made more
effective and stringent.
6. Some Members expressed concern that even after enactment of this progressive legislation,
there is every probability of its being not acceptable to the rural people which constitute nearly
70% of the total population of the country. Further, child marriages often take place in festival
seasons and go unnoticed for the fear of being punished. The Committee, however, felt that to
precisely assess the magnitude of the problem all over the country, State-wise information, depicting
prevalence of child marriages, should be procured or called for Committee's consideration.
7. The representatives of Centre of Concern for Child Labour and the Human Rights Law
Network emphasized the need for such a legislation and opined that in this high-tech era the evil
of child marriage needs to be discouraged by all means and the possibility of using modern

37
technology for this purpose should also be explored. The incidence of child marriage is generally
reported from the Hindu community, while the fact is that this tradition is practiced in other
communities also. The witnesses were of the view that the Bill, in its present form suffers from
certain infirmities and, therefore, some amendments therein for making registration of all adult
marriages compulsory, recording of child marriages and making officers of Centre and State
Governments responsible, assigning role to some prominent NGOs, making punishment more
stricter and stringent, etc., should be seriously considered by the Committee.
8. In this context, while some Members of the Committee were in favour of the existing
provision exempting women from punishment for promoting or permitting solemnisation of child
marriage, some others, however, felt that the provision should be amended to make a woman also
liable for such punishment, under the facts and circumstances of a case where the courts find a
woman guilty.
9. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 5.10 
P.M. to meet again on the 27th September, 2005.

38
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27th September, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Shriniwas Patil
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Shri M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
15. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Shrimati Shakuntala V erma, Supervisor, Integrated Child Development Scheme,
Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal.
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Verma, Social Activist, Bhopal.
II. Representatives of Sankalp, New Delhi
1. Dr. Ajaya Kumar Mishra, Chairman;
2. Dr. (Shrimati) Sarala Gopalan, Programme Advisor;
3. Shrimati Neetu Srivastav, Research Officer;
38

39
4. Shrimati Kasturi Pattanaik, Programme Director;
5. Miss Amrita Joardar, Programme Officer;
6. Miss Priya Shah, Programme Co-ordinator;
7. Shrimati Padma Seth, Programme Advisor.
III. Representa tive of State Commission for Women, Jaipur (Rajasthan)
Dr. (Prof.) Pawan Surana, Chairperson.
IV. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr. P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
2. Shrimati Mukulita Vijayawarjiya, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. The Chairman welcomed the above witnesses and informed them that the purpose of inviting
them was to elicit their views/suggestions on various provisions of the Prevention of Child Marriage
Bill, 2004 which intended to address the evils of child marriage and to prevent the same. He then,
requested them to offer their views/suggestions on various provisions of the Bill.
3. Welcoming the Government's initiative in bringing forth the legislation, the representatives
stated that child marriages are prevalent in many parts of the country, mostly in the Northern
States like Bihar, Rajasthan, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh etc. The society had to face the evil effects
of such marriages. They outlined the provisions of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 and
highlighted some lacunae in the present Bill. They were of the view that the provision of the earlier
Act on the subject were not implemented in its letter and spirit. Some of them were of the view
that it should be termed as The Child Marriage Prevention and Prohibition Bill, rather than the
Prevention of Child Marriage Bill. They suggested that suitable amendments should be made in the
Bill so that provisions regarding the definition of a child, role of ‘contracting party’, ‘void’ and
‘voidable’ marriages, punishment, role of Child Marriage Prevention Officers and powers of courts
to issue injunctions may be made more stringent.
4. The representatives were of the view that the child marriages often took place on the
occasion of festivals and went unnoticed, since they were not registered. They stressed that
registration of marriages should be made mandatory and efforts should be made to educate people
about the ill effects of child marriages. The data presented by the representatives showed that the
practice of child marriages in States was mostly found in Northern States particularly in Bihar,
Rajasthan, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh etc.
5. The representatives of Sankalp and the Rajasthan Commission for Women emphasized the
need for such a legislation. They were of the view that the Bill, in its present form, suffered from
certain shortcomings. They suggested recording of child marriages for defining the role and powers
of Child Marriage Prevention Officers, assigning role to some prominent NGOs, making punishment
more stringent, etc.
6. Some of them were in favour of making woman also liable for punishment of imprisonment.
7. The focus should be on eradication of this social evil. Separate homes for the custody and
maintenance of the children born out of child marriages, should be created. The Chairman asked
the representatives to submit data available with them relating to the child marriages prevalent in
various parts of the country.
8. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 5.05 
P.M. to meet again on the 28th September, 2005.

40
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 28th September, 2005, in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar.
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri A.K. Moorthy
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. Representative of Beti Foundation, Lucknow
Ms. Sehba Hussain.
IV. Representatives of Joint Women's Programme, New Delhi
1. Shrimati Jyotsna Chatterjee; and
2. Shrimati Razia Ismail.
40
*** Relate to some other matters.

41
V. Representative of All India Women’s Education Fund Association, New Delhi
Shrimati Asha Chandra, Hony. Secretary
VI. Representative of All India Women's Conference, New Delhi
Shrimati Bulbul Das.
VII. Representative of Mahila Dakshata Samiti, New Delhi
Shrimati Vinay Bhardwaj, Vice President.
VIII. Representative of Committee for Legal Aid to Poor,  Cuttack, Orissa
Shri Bikash Das, Advocate.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee took up for consideration the Prevention of Child Marriage Bill, 2004 and
heard the views of witnesses on various provisions. The witnesses were unanimous about the ill
effects of child marriage. They opined that the provisions of the Bill were expected to help in
preventing child marriages. They emphasized the need to empower Child Marriage Prevention
Officers suitably. They also expressed concern over the unholy nexus between the child marriages
and trafficking and sale of children. They were of the view that women should not be exempted
from punishment of imprisonment as has been proposed in the present Bill. They also favoured
eighteen years as age for marriage, uniformally for males and females.
7. One of the witnesses suggested that constituting Child Welfare Committees might be more
effective than appointing Child Marriage Prevention Officers, and that the cases relating to child
marriages may be referred to the Juvenile Justice Board, a creation of Government.
8. The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought some clarifications and the witnesses
responded to the questions raised.
9. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

42
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 17th October, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil
11. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF  LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
DEPARTMENT)
1. Dr. P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
2. Shrimati Mukulita Vijayawarjiya, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 4.16 
P.M.
42
*** Relate to some other matters.

43
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 18th October, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
7. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
8. Shri Brajesh Pathak
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
11. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF  LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
DEPARTMENT)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary, Legislative Department,
2. Dr. P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
3. Shrimati Mukulita Vijayawarjiya, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Prevention of Child Marriage
Bill, 2004.
CLAUSE-2
The Committee considered sub-clause (a) defining ‘child’ and observed that in view of the
different definitions of the term in different enactments, and different interpretations arising out of
these, it would be difficult to ascertain as to which definition of ‘child’ would be most appropriate.
Rather, this situation may cause anomaly and confusion. For example, Indian Penal Code, renders
a married girl child of 15 years mature enough to give her consent for sexual intercourse. It looks
absurd and contradictory that an unmarried girl child, as per the Indian Penal Code, is quite mature,
while on the other hand, a girl married at the same age, will still be a child as per the proposed
43

44
legislation. The Government should, therefore, consider bringing necessary amendment to Indian
Penal Code to remove any ambiguity in this regard.
There were divergent views regarding the eighteen years age of marriage for both the males
and females. However, consensus emerged on retaining the age differentiation as per the provisions
of the Bill.
Further, after the definitions of the terms ‘‘child’’ and ‘‘child marriage’’, a new definition
of the term ‘‘early marriage’’ be inserted, to cover solemnization of marriage by a male above
eighteen years and below twenty-one years. It was necessary to make distinction between definition
of ‘‘child marriage’’ as applicable to a male, and a marriage which is performed by a male after
attaining majority, but before twenty one years and to clear doubt in this regard.
Regarding sub-clause (f), the Committee felt that the definition of ‘minor’ was of no
relevance in the Bill, as the legislation provides a specific definition of a child and all the subsequent
provisions of the Bill are in relation to this definition. Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
CLAUSE-3
The Committee endorsed insertion of the provision rendering a child marriage voidable,
before and after commencement of the Act, at the option of any of the contracting parties. It,
however, observed that the evil of child marriage can be curbed effectively, if such a marriage is
held void ab initio , irrespective of its solemnization before or after commencement of the Act.
Hence, the Committee recommended that the clause be amended suitably.
The Committee noted that sections 11 and 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 do not
provide for rendering a child marriage void or voidable, whereas Section 5 of the Act ibid makes
it mandatory to complete 21 years for bridegroom and 18 years for the bride, for solemnization
of a valid marriage. Thus, these provisions of the Act stand in contradiction of the proposed
legislation and, therefore, need to be amended suitably.
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
CLAUSES-4 and 5
The Committee took up clauses 4 and 5 together, with a view to focus on the common
issues contained in them. Taking into account the suggestions of cross-sections of people and the
witnesses before it, the Committee felt that preventive measures alone, as proposed by the
legislation, cannot eradicate the practice of child marriage, unless, they are supported by social
measures, which may go a long way in providing protection and the desired social and economic
support to the children affected by child marriages. For this, the Committee favoured creation of
a rehabilitation fund, for providing shelter, food, education, health, security, etc. for the victims of
child marriages, so as to bring them in the mainstream of Government's welfare programmes and
policies, in coordination with the functionaries of all levels, NGOs, social groups, public
representatives and bureaucrats.
Subject to the above, the clause 4 and 5 were adopted.
CLAUSES-6 to 8
These clauses were adopted without any change.
CLAUSES-9 and 10
The Committee observed that penal provisions, as contemplated in the Bill, are inadequate
and in the absence of effective penalties, the law may fail to achieve the desired results. The
Committee favoured amendment of the clause, so as to make penal provisions more rigorous. The

45
Committee observed that punishment for the same kind of offence is starkingly less in the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 and, therefore, the Act needs to be amended suitably.
Subject to the above, the clauses 9 and 10 were adopted.
CLAUSE-11
The Committee observed that various experts, prominent NGOs, strongly expressed against
the provision exempting a woman from punishment for permitting and promoting solemnization of
child marriage. Exempting a woman from punishment would entail a risk of using her as an
instrument to solemnize child marriage. The Committee found these contentions noteworthy. It was
of the view that it would be appropriate if such matters are left to be decided by courts. Against
this backdrop, it favoured deletion of the proviso to sub-clause 1 of clause 11.
The Committee felt that it would be unwise to punish the whole community or all the
persons attending a child marriage, particularly when they have no knowledge of the fact of
solemnization of such marriage. On the other hand, such a provision may cause devastating effect
on the children, whose parents are imprisoned. While genuine efforts should be made to ensure that
innocent persons are not subjected to any harassment, at the same time a provision should be made
for mentioning the age of the contracting parties on invitation cards, and it should also be ensured
that the parents, public representatives or Government functionaries, who are actively or passively
involved in promoting child marriage, do not escape responsibility.
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
CLAUSE-12
The Committee noted that no punishment has been proposed for the persons who indulge in
enticing or taking a child out of the keeping of the lawful guardian or forcibly compelling or inducing
him/her deceitfully to go from any place or for selling, trafficking or using a child for immoral
purposes. In view of the Committee, such a gap might render the legislation impactless, having no
deterrent effect on the offenders. So, the Committee favoured punishment of a term of ten years,
the same as has been provided in the Indian Penal Code, for the offences of similar gravity.
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
CLAUSE-13
On account of its observation in respect of Clause 11, the Committee favoured the proviso
exempting a woman from punishment of imprisonment in case she disobeys the injunction issued
under sub-clause (1), knowing that such an injunction has been issued.
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
CLAUSES-14 and 15
Clauses 14 and 15 were adopted without any change.
CLAUSE-16
This clause deals with appointment of Child Marriage Prevention Officers. The Committee
observed that CMPO is the backbone of the whole legislation, as the responsibility to execute
preventive measures rests with him. To make his role more effective and to enable him to
discharge his functions towards the desired direction, they should be provided adequate security
measures and there should be a mechanism for perfect coordination, massive interaction and wider

46
consultation among different social as well as Government agencies, civil society groups, NGOs,
academicians, researchers, lawyers, jurists and of1icers, such as women IPS officers, religious
leaders and public representatives.
The Committee also favoured insertion of a new clause for making a provision for
compulsory registration of adult marriages and recording of child marriages, as the same can keep
an eye on preventive measures and their effect on curbing child marriages in the country. A
minimum period should be specified, within which marriages should be registered and responsibility
of registration of marriage should be entrusted to the functionaries at the level of Panchayat, Tehsil
and District, in active coordination with NGOs, to sort out administrative problems, which may
came in the way of tribal communities. The nomenclature of CPMOs also needs to the changed.
Subject to the above, the clause was adopted.
CLAUSE-17 to 20
These clause were adopted without any change.
ENACTING FORMULA AND TITLE
The committee adopted clause 1 and enacting formula with some changes which were of
consequential or drafting nature.
TITLE OF THE BILL
The Committee discussed the title of the Bill and felt that the existing title ‘‘The Prevention
of Child Marriage Bill, 2004’’, does not reflect the ideals of the legislation in true sense. It appears
to be innocuous and less effective as if the Bill proposes to prevent the long standing practice of
child marriage and not to eliminate it from the root. The proposed legislation should be seen with
this optimism that the Bill aims at eradicating this evil forever. Hence, the Committee recommended
substituting the existing title with ‘‘The Prohibition of Child Marriage Bill, 2004’’ and bringing
consequential amendments in the provisions of the Bill, wherever the word ‘prevention‘ occurs,
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS
The Committee felt that this long title of the Bill has not reflected an appropriate message,
consistent with (i) the Millennium Development Goals, (ii) norms laid down by International Human
Rights Instruments and (iii) the ideals set by the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). The
Committee, therefore, recommended to amend.
The Committee also felt in the absence of concrete information on prevalence of Child
marriage, the Government may seek involvement of not only research institutions but also use of
information and technology tools may yield significant results and these may eventually assist in
formulating useful programmes and policy. Secondly, it is essential to ensure strict enforcement of
the legislative measures so that social programmes concerning child welfare with focus on
changing attitude of those responsible for promoting such practice should go hand in hand with
it. The Committee agrees with the views expressed by some witnesses that to assess effectiveness
of enforcement of legislative measures Government should conduct social audit by creating a
statutory body and based on the report, initiate corrective measures.
The Committee observed that a rehabilitation fund should be created to promote welfare of
children victims of child marriage to provide adequate financial support and reflect it in the financial
memorandum.
The Committee adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.

47
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 27th October, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
7. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
10. Shri A.K. Moorthy
11. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
12. Shri Shriniwas Patil
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report on the Prevention of
Child Marriage Bill, 2004. The Chairman requested Members to express their views on the Draft
Report.
3. Some Members suggested that the age of marriage for both the males and females should
be uniform at 18 years. However, a majority of the Members were against it as in their view the
implications arising out of this would result in increase in population and would be against the
family planning norms, adopted by Government. The Committee felt that the Report should
incorporate the definition of Child Marriage and Early Marriage also, so as to differentiate in
defining the males below 18 years as child, and above 18 years but below 21 years, as not eligible
for marriage.
47

48
*** Relate to some other matters.
4. The Committee then adopted the Draft Report with certain modifications. The Chairman
informed Members that it is proposed to present the report to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on
14th November, 2005, the Children’s Day.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.

49
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-A
Bill No. L VI of 2004
THE PREVENTION OF CHILD MARRIAGE BILL, 2004
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of solemnisation of child marriages and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Child Marriage
Act, 2004.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir; and it applies also to all citizens of India without and
beyond India:
Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the
Renoncants of the Union Territory of Pondicherry.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and
different dates may be appointed for different States and any reference
in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
in relation to any State as reference to the coming into force of that
provision in that State.
51
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

52
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires
(a) ‘‘child’’ means a person who, if a male, has not
completed twenty-one years of age, and if a female, has not
completed eighteen years of age;
(b) ‘‘child marriage’’ means a marriage to which either of
the contracting parties is a child;
(c) ‘‘contracting party’’, in relation to a marriage, means
either of the parties whose marriage is or is about to be thereby
solemnised;
(d) ‘‘Child Marriage Prevention Officer’’ includes the
Child Marriage Prevention Officer appointed under sub-
section ( 1) of section 16;
(e) ‘‘district court’’ means, in any area for which a
Family Court established under section 3 of the Family Courts
Act, 1984 exists. such Family Court, and in any area for which
there is no Family Court but a city civil court exists that court
and in any other area the principal civil court of original
jurisdiction and includes and other civil court which may be
specified by the State Government by notification in the Official
Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respoct of the matters dealth
with in this Act;
(f) ‘‘minor’’ means a person who under the provisions of
the Majority Act, 1875 is to be deemed not to have attained
his majority.
3. ( 1) Every child marriage, whether solemnised before or after
the commencement of this Act, shall be voidable at the option of the
contracting party who was a child at the time of the marriage:
Provided that a petition for annulling a child marriage by a
decree of nullity may be filed in the district court only by a contracting
party to the marriage who was a child at the time of the marriage.
(2) If at the time of filing a petition, the petitioner is a minor,
the petition may be filed through his or her guardian or next friend
alongwith the Child Marriage Prevention Officer.
(3) The petition under this section may be filed at any time but
before the child filing the petition completes two years of attaining
majority.
(4) While granting a decree of nullity under this section, the
district court shall make an order directing both the parties to the
marriage and their parents or their guardians to return to the other
party, his or her parents or guardian, as the case may be, the money,
valuables, ornaments and other gifts received on the occasion of the
marriage by them from the other side, or an amount equal to the value
of such valuables, ornaments, other gifts and money:
66 of 1984.
Definitions.
9 of 1875.
Child
marriages to
be voidable at
the option of
contracting
party being a
child.

53
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless
the concerned parties have been given notices to appear before the
district court and show cause why such order should not be passed.
4. ( 1) While granting a decree under section 3, the district court
may also make an interim or final order directing the male contracting
party to the child marriage, and in case the male contracting party to
such marriage is a minor, his parent or guardian to pay maintenance
to the female contracting party to the marriage until her remarriage.
(2) The quantum of maintenance payable shall be determined by
the district court having regard to the needs of the child, the lifestyle
enjoyed by such child during her marriage and the means of income
of the paying party.
(3) The amount of maintenance may be directed to be paid
monthly or in lump sum.
(4) In case the party making the petition under section 3 is the
female contracting party, the district court may also make a suitable
order as to her residence until her remarriage.
5. ( 1) Where there are children born of the child marriage, the
district court shall make an appropriate order for the custody of such
children.
(2) While making an order for the custody of a child under this
section, the welfare and best interests of the child shall be the
paramount consideration to be given by the district court.
(3) An order for custody of a child may also include appropriate
directions for giving to the other party access to the child in such a
manner as may best serve the interests of the child, and such other
orders as the district court may, in the interest of the child, deem
proper.
(4) The district court may also make an appropriate order for
providing maintenance to the child by a party to the marriage or their
parents or guardians.
6. Notwithstanding that a child marriage has been annulled by
a decree of nullity under section 3, every child begotten or conceived
of such marriage before the decree is made, whether born before or
after the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be a legitimate
child for all purposes.
7. The district court shall have the power to add to, modify or
revoke any order made under section 4 or section 5 and if there is
any change in the circumstances at any time during the pendency of
the petition and even after the final disposal of the petition.
Provision for
maintenance
and residence
to female
contracting
party to child
marriage.
Custody and
maintenance of
children of child
marriages.
Legitimacy of
children born of
child marriages.
Power of
district court to
modify orders
issued under
section 4 or
section 5.

54
8. For the purpose of grant of reliefs under sections 3, 4 and
5, the district court having jurisdiction shall include the district court
having jurisdiction over the place where the defendant or the child
resides, or where the marriage was solemnised or where the parties
last resided together or the petitioner is residing on the date of
presentation of the petition.
9. Whoever, being a male adult above eighteen years of age,
contract a child marriage shall be punishable with simple imprisonment
which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees or with both.
10. Whoever performs, conduct or directs or abets any child
marriage shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may
extend to two years and shall be liable to fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees unless he proves that he had reasons to believe that
the marriage was not a child marriage.
11. ( 1) Where a child contracts a child marriage, any person
having charge of the child, whether as parent or guardian or any other
person or in any other capacity, lawful or unlawful, including any
member of an organization or association of persons who does any
act to promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, or
negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnised, including attending
or participating in a child marriage, shall be punishable with simple
imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable
to fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees:
Provided that no women shall be punishable with imprisonment.
(2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed,
unless and until the contrary is proved, that where a minor child has
contracted a marriage, the person having charge of such minor child
has negligently failed to prevent the marriage from being solemnised.
12. Where a child, being a minor—
(a) is taken or enticed out of the keeping of the lawful
guardian; or
(b) by force compelled, or by any deceitful means induced
to go from any place;
or
(c) is sold for the purpose of marriage; and made to go
through a from of marriage or if the minor is married after
which the minor is sold or trafficked or used for immoral
purposes,
such marriage shall be null and void.
Court to
which
petition
should be
made.
Punishment
for male
adult marying
a child.
Marriage of a
minor child
to be void in
certain
circumstances.
Punishment for
solemnising a
child marriage.
Punishment for
promoting or
permitting
solemnisation
of child
marriages.

55
13. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
this Act, if, on an application of the Child Marriage Prevention Officer
or on receipt of information through a complaint or otherwise from
any person, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan
Magistrate is satisfied that a child marriage in contravention of this Act
has been arranged or is about to be solemnised, such Magistrate shall
issue an injunction against any person including a member of an
organization or an association of persons prohibiting such marriage.
(2) A complaint under sub-section ( 1) may be made by any
person having personal knowledge or reason to believe, and a non-
governmental organization having reasonable information, relating to
the likelihood of taking place of solemnisation of a child marriage or
child marriages.
(3) The Court of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the
Metropolitan Magistrate may also take suo motu cognizance on the
basis of any reliable report or information.
(4) For the purposes of preventing solemnisation of mass child
marriages on certain days such as Akshaya Trutiya , the District
Magistrate shall be deemed to be the Child Marriage Prevention Officer
with all powers as are conferred on a Child Marriage Prevention
Officer by or under this Act.
(5) The District Magistrate shall also have additional powers to
stop or prevent solemnisation of child marriages and for this purpose,
he may take all appropriate measures and use the minimum force
required.
(6) No injunction under sub-section ( 1) shall be issued against
any person or member of any organization or association of persons
unless the Court has previously given notice to such person, members
of the organization or association of persons, as the case may be, and
has offered him or them an opportunity to show cause against the
issue of the injunction:
Provided that in the case of any urgency, the Court shall have
the power to issue an interim injunction without giving any notice
Under this section.
(7) An injunction issued under sub-section ( 1) may be confirmed
or vacated after giving notice and hearing the party against whom the
injunction was issued.
(8) The Court may either on its own motion or on the application
of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter an injunction issued under
sub-section ( 1).
(9) Where an application is received under sub-section ( 1), the
Court shall afford the applicant an early opportunity of appearing
before it either in person or by an advocate and if the Court, after
hearing the applicant rejects the application wholly or in part, it shall
record in writing its reasons for so doing.
Power of court
to issue
injunction
prohibiting child
marriages.

56
(10) Whoever knowing that an injunction has been issued under
sub-section (1) against him disobeys such injunction shall be punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or
with both:
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment.
14. Any child marriage solemnised in contravention of an
injunction order issued under section 13, whether interim or final, shall
be void ab initio .
15. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, an offence punishable under this Act shall be
cognizable and non-bailable.
16. (1)  The State Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint for the whole State, or such part thereof
as may be specified in that notification, an officer or officers to
be known as the Child Marriage Prevention Officer having
jurisdiction over the area or areas specified in the notification.
(2) The State Government may also requests respectable
member of the locality with a record of social service or an
officer of the Gram Panchayat or Municipality or an officer of
the Government or any public sector undertaking or an office
bearer of any non-governmental organization to assist the Child
Marriage Prevention Officer and such member, officer or office
bearer, as the case may be, shall be bound to act accordingly.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Child Marriage Prevention Officer—
(a) to prevent solemnisation of child marriages by taking
such action as he may deem fit;
(b) to collect evidence for the effective prosecution of
persons contravening the provisions of this Act;
(c) to advise either individual cases or counsel the residents
of the locality generally not to indulge in promoting, helping,
aiding or allowing the solemnisation of child marriages;
(d) to create awareness of the evil which results from
child marriages;
(e) to sensitize the community on the issue of child
marriages;
(f) to furnish such periodical returns and statistics as the
State Government may direct; and
(g) to discharge such other functions and duties as may
be assigned to him by the State Government.
Child
marriages in
contravention
of injunction
orders to be
void.
Offences to
be cognizable
and non-
bailable.
2 of 1974.
Child
Marriage
Prevention
Officers.

57
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, subject to such conditions and limitations, invest the Child
Marriage Prevention Officer with such powers of a police officer as
may be specified in the notification and the Child Marriage Prevention
Officer shall exercise such powers subject to such conditions and
limitations, as may be specified in the notification.
(4) The Child Marriage Prevention Officer shall have the power
to move the Court for an order under sections 4, 5 and 13 and along
with the child under section 3.
17. The Child Marriage Prevention Officers shall be deemed to
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
18. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against the Child Marriage Prevention Officer in respect of anything in
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or
any rule or order made thereunder.
19. ( 1) The State Government may , by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall, as soon as may be
after it is made, be laid before the State Legislature.
20. (1) The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all cases and other proceedings
pending or continued under the said Act at the commencement of this
Act shall be continued arid disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of the repealed Act, as if this Act had not been passed.
Child Marriage
Prevention
Officers to be
public servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power of State
Government to
make rules.
Repeal and
savings.
45 of 1860.
19 of 1929.

58
58
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 was enacted with a view to
restraining solemnisation of child marriages. The Act was subsequently amended
in 1949 and 1978 in order, inter alia  to raise the age limit of the male and
female persons for the purpose of marriage. The Act, though restrains
solemnisation of child marriages yet it does not declare them to be void or
invalid. The solemnisation of child marriages is punishable under the Act.
2. There has been a growing demand for making the provisions of Act
more effective and the punishment thereunder more stringent so as to eradicate
or effectively prevent the evil practice of solemnisation of child marriages in the
country. This will enhance the health of children and the status of women. The
National Commission for Women in its Annnual Report for the year
1995-96 recommended that the Government should appoint Child Marriage
Prevention Officers immediately. It further recommended that— (i) the
punishment provided under the Act should be made more stringent; (ii) marriages
performed in contravention of the Act should be made void; and (iii) the
offences under the Act should be made cognizable.
3. The National Human Rights Commission undertook a comprehensive
review of the existing Act and made recommendations for comprehensive
amendments therein vide its Annual Report 2001-2002. The Central Government,
after consulting the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations on
the recommendations of the National Commission for Women and the National
Human Rights Commission, has decided to accept almost all the
recommendations and give effect to them by repealing and re-enacting the Child
Marriage Restraint Act, 1929.
4. The salient features of the Bill are as follows:—
(i) To make a provision to declare child marriage as voidable at
the option of the contracting party to the marriage, who was a child.
(ii) To provide a provision requiring the husband or, if he is a
minor at the material time, his guardian to pay maintenance to the minor
girl until her remarriage.
(iii) To make a provision for the custody and maintenance of
children born of child marriages.
(iv) To provide that notwithstanding a child marriage has been
annulled by a decree of nullity under the proposed section 3, every child
born of such marriage, whether before or after the commencement of the
proposed legislation, shall be legitimate for all purposes.
(v) To empower the district court to add to, modify or revoke any
order relating to maintenance of the female petitioner and her residence
and custody or maintenance of children, etc.
(vi) To make a provision for declaring the child marriage as void
in certain circumstances.

59
(vii) To empower the courts to issue injunctions prohibiting
solemnisation of marriages in contravention of the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
(viii) To make the offences under the proposed legislation to be
congnizable for the purposes of investigation and for other purposes.
(ix) To provide for appointment of Child Marriage Prevention
Officers by the State Governments.
(x) To empower the State Governments to make rules for
effectively administration of the legislation.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI;
The 16th December, 2004 H.R. BHARDWAJ

60
60
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to empower the State Government to appoint
one of more Child Marriage Prevention Officers for the purpose of prevention
of solemnisation of child marriages and the Child Marriage Prevention Officers
shall have jurisdiction over such area or areas as may be specified by the State
Government, by notification. Serving officers can also be designated as Child
Marriage Prevention Officers under the Act. The expenditure in this regard is to
be borne by the respective State Government.
2. The State Government in respect of a Union Territory is the Central
Government. If an officer other than a serving officer is appointed as the Child
Marriage Prevention Officer, some recurring expenditure will be involved in
regard to payment of salary and allowances to such officer. Some office
expenditure of a negligible nature may also be involved. The exact amount of
such expenditure would depend upon the number of Child Marriage Prevention
Officers as may be appointed.
3. There shall be no other expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring
nature.

61
61
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers State Governments to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. The rules are required to
be laid before the State Legislature. The matters in respect of which the rules
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

62
62
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of solemnisation of child marriages and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice)

63
63
ANNEXURE-B
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
Sl. No. Name of Witnesses Date of Hearing
1. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 14.7.2005
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
2. I. Representatives of Department of Women and Child Development 12.09.2005
(Ministry of HRD)
1. Shrimati Reva Nayyar, Secretary; and
2. Shrimati Loveleen Kacker, Joint Secretary.
II. Representative of Centre of Concern for Child Labour
Mr. Joseph Gathia.
III. Representatives of Human Rights Law Network
1. Ms. Aparna Bhatt;
2. Ms. Atreyee Sen; and
3. Mr. Colin Gonsalves.
3. I. 1. Shrimati Shakuntala V erma, Supervisor, Integrated Child 27.09.2005
Development Scheme, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal.
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Verma, Social Activist, Bhopal.
II. Representatives of Sankalp, New Delhi
1. Dr. Ajaya Kumar Mishra, Chairman;
2. Dr. (Shrimati) Sarala Gopalan, Programme Advisor;
3. Shrimati Neetu Srivastav, Research Officer;
4. Shrimati Kasturi Pattanaik, Programme Director;
5. Miss Amrita Joardar, Programme Officer;
6. Miss Priya Shah, Programme Co-ordinator;
7. Shrimati Padma Seth, Programme Advisor.
III. Representative of State Commission for Women, Jaipur (Rajasthan)
Dr. (Prof.) Pawan Surana, Chairperson.
IV. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr. P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and

64
2. Shrimati Mukulita Vijayawarjiya, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
I. Representative of Beti Foundation, Lucknow 28.09.2005
Ms. Sehba Hussain.
II. Representatives of Joint W omen’s Programme, New Delhi
1. Shrimati Jyotsna Chatterjee; and
2. Shrimati Razia Ismail.
III. Representative of All India Women’s Education Fund Association, New Delhi
Shrimati Asha Chandra, Hony. Secretary.
IV. Representative of All India Women’s Conference, New Delhi
Shrimati Bulbul Das.
V. Representative of Mahila Dakshata Samiti, New Delhi
Shrimati Vinay Bhardwaj, Vice President.
VI. Representative of Committee for Legal Aid to Poor, Cuttack, Orissa
Shri Bikash Das, Advocate.
5. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 18.09.2005
(Legislative Department)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary, Legislative Department,
2. Dr. P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
3. Shrimati Mukulita Vijayawarjiya, Deputy Legislative Counsel.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.