PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 29
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N P E R S O N N E L , PU B L IC G R IE V A N C E S , 
L A W  A N D J U S T IC E
TWENTY  NINTH REPOR T
ON
PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES R EDR ESSAL MECHANISM
RD 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 23 OCT OBER, 2008)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 23 OCT OBER, 2008)
RD 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 23 OCT OBER, 2008)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 23 OCT OBER, 2008)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
O C TO B E R , 2008/K A R T IK A , 1930 (SA K A )O C TO B E R , 2008/K A R T IK A , 1930 (SA K A )

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

65
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY NINTH REPORT
ON
PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES REDERESSAL MECHANISM
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-57

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(vi)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (vii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—41
Chapter – I
Grievance Redressal — Conceptual Frame Work ................................................. 4—6
Chapter – II
Structure of Grievance Redress Machinery at Apex Level ................................ 7—14
Chapter – III
PGRM in Committee’s Earlier Reports ................................................................... 15—39
Chapter – IV
Right to Information Act, 2005 and Public Grievance
Redressal Mechanism ................................................................................................. 40—41
4. R
ELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 43—64

(i)
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
(Constituted on 5th August, 2005 — 4th August, 2006)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Dr. P.C. Alexander
*5. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
*6. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
*7. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
**8. Shri Ram Jethmalani
***9. Shri Rashid Alvi
****10. S hri Ram Nath Kovind
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
12. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
14. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
15. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
16. Shri Shailendra Kumar
17. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
18. Shri A.K. Moorthy
19. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
20. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
21. Shri Brajesh Pathak
22. Shri Shriniwas Patil
23. Shri Harin Pathak
24. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
25. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
26. Shri Vishvendra Singh
27. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
*Nominated w.e.f.  2nd June, 2006.
**Nominated w.e.f.  29th June, 2006.
***Nominated w.e.f.  12th May, 2006 and ceased to be Member w.e.f.  2nd June, 2006.
****Nominated w.e.f. 29th June, 2006.

(ii)
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
(Constituted on 5th August, 2006 to 4th August, 2007)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Dr. P.C. Alexander
*9. Shri Tarlochan Singh
**10. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
12. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
13. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Dr. C. Krishnan
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
18. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
19. Prof. M. Ramadass
20. Shri Vishvendra Singh
21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
22. Shri Raj Babbar
@23. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
@24. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
@25. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahto
@26. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
27. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
* Nominated w.e.f.  26th October, 2006.
** Nominated w.e.f.  14th December, 2006.
@ Nominated w.e.f.  8th December, 2006.

(iii)
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
(Constituted on 5th August, 2007 to 4th August, 2008)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
**3. Dr . Prabha Thakur
***4. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
5. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
6. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
7. Shri Virendra Bhatia
@8. Shrimati Brinda Karat
9. Shri Tariq Anwar
10. Shri Ram Jethmalani
11. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
@@12. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
+13. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
++14. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
15. Shri Raj Babbar
16. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
17. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
18. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
#19. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh Gowda
20. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
21. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
22. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
23. Dr. C. Krishnan
24. Shri Shailendra Kumar
#25. S hrimati Kiran Maheshwari
26. Shri Harin Pathak
27. Shrimati Krishna Tirath#
28. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
29. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  14th May, 2008.
** Nominated w.e.f. 14th May, 2008 and ceased to be Member  w.e.f. 24th May, 2008.
*** Nominated w.e.f. 24th May, 2008.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 24th May, 2008.
@@ Nominated w.e.f.  14th May, 2008.
+ Resigned from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th January, 2008.
++ Resigned from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 3rd April, 2008.
# Nominated w.e.f. 30th May, 2008.

30. Prof. M. Ramadass
#31. Adv. P . Sa tteedevi
32. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
#33. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
34. Shri Vishvendra Singh
##35. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
36. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
# Nominated w.e.f.  30th May, 2008.
## Ceased to be Member w.e.f.  8th May, 2008.
(iv)

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2008)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Shri Ram Jethmalani
10. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
14. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
15. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
23. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
24. Prof. M. Ramadass
25. Adv. P. Sathedevi
26. Shri Vishvendra Singh
27. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
28. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
29. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
30. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
31. Vacant

(vi)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee to present its
Report, do hereby present this Twenty Ninth Report on Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism.
2. The subject Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism was identified by the Committee as a
part of consideration of the subject “Administrative Reforms”.
3. In view of the importance of the subject, the Committee visited Goa, Mumbai, Bangalore,
Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Hyderabad, Kochi, Port Blair, Kolkata, Jaipur, Ahmedabad and Bhopal and
held discussions with various authorities, organisations, individuals on “Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism” in Public Sector Enterprises/Undertakings/Trusts and leading Banks.
4. The Committee held discussions on the subject with the Heads of 24 banks and 40 PSUs
to collect information related to the subject and to acquaint latter with the mechanisms available
for redressal of grievances.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions made a detailed
presentation on the subject on 14th December 2005. The Committee also heard the Secretaries and
senior officers of the Six Ministries of the Government of India viz. Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Ministry of Mines, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting and Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
6. While considering the subject, the Committee took note of the following documents/
information placed before it:—
(i) Background notes on the subject furnished by the Government;
(ii) Guidelines for Grievance Redressal Mechanism in Government of India;
(iii) Replies received from the Government to the questionnaire prepared by the Secretariat;
(iv) Submissions by the banks/PSUs on the subject; and
(v) Replies received from banks/PSUs to the questionnaire prepared by the Secretariat.
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report on 21st October, 2008.
8. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
21st October, 2008. Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
In 2004 the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, after its bifurcation from Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs, continued to examine the subject ‘Administrative Reforms’. The
Committee then chose to examine and report on the ‘Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism’ as
a part of Administrative Reforms.
CITIZEN’S CHARTER AND PGRM
The Committee feels that Citizen’s Charter of the Ministries/Departments/Organizations/
PSUs/Banks/Institutions etc. invariably provide for a strong inbuilt mechanism to redress the
grievances being faced by its stakeholders. In that backdrop, it was felt necessary to examine
Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism’ (PGRM) vis a vis the Citizen’s Charter.
2. The future of an organisation depends on how successfully it can usher the culture of
customer orientation in all aspects of its functioning. Well-defined and formatted consumer policy
statements need to be developed. The United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection adopted
by the UN General Assembly on April 9, 1985 gives a fairly well-defined and formatted consumer
policy statement at the international level. The Guidelines call upon Member Governments to
develop, maintain and strengthen a strong consumer policy, and provide for enhanced protection
of consumers by enunciating various steps and measures. In 1995, the Guidelines were reviewed,
and some issues, which needed further elaboration and expansion, were espoused by consumer
organisations. Among the issues are: access to basic needs, appropriate regulatory policies,
sustainable consumption, etc. Some countries such as Japan and Sweden have adopted Consumer
Policy Statements, and the concept of Citizen’s Charter has gained wide acceptance in many
countries, particularly in the UK.
3. The Government of India also firmly believes in the need for a total change of it’s image
and orientation as the citizens have become increasingly aware of their rights and civic
responsibilities. The challenge, therefore, for the administration is not merely to respond to
increased demands of the citizens but also to anticipate the same. The task becomes further
challenging due to the rapidly escalating expectations of the citizens. It was against this backdrop
that from 1996 onwards a consensus emerged in the Government on effective and responsive
administration culminating in the Chief Ministers’ Conference convened by the Prime Minister of
India on May 24, 1997. One of the major decisions of the Conference was to formulate and
operationalise Citizen’s Charters at the Centre and in the States in sectors which dealt with a large
public interface such as Railways, Telecom, Post, Public Distribution Systems, Hospitals, Revenue,
Electricity, Petroleum, Banks, etc.
4. A good Citizen’s Charter should have the following components:
• Vision and Mission Statement of the Organisation.
• Details of Business Transacted by the Organisation.
• Details or Citizens’ or ‘Clients’.
• Statement of Services Including Standards, Quality, Time-Frame, etc., Provided to
each Citizen/Client Group separately and how/where to get the services.
• Details of Grievance Redress Mechanism and how to access it.

2
• Expectations from the ‘Citizens’ or ‘Clients’.
• Additional Commitments such as Compensation in the Event of failure of Service
Delivery.
• A Road Map to Formulate the Citizen’s Charter in an Organisation Formulation of
Citizen’s Charter is a crucial step and needs to be done very meticulously. A broad
framework for formulation would include the following:
• Identification of all stakeholders in the Organisation.
• Setting up of a Core Group in the Organisation — consisting of representatives
from all Stakeholders which inter alia  may include Top Management, Middle
Management, cutting edge level staff representatives, strategic partners,
customers/clients, etc.
• Overseeing by the Core Group the formulation of the Citizen’s Charter,
approving it and monitoring its implementation thereafter.
• Setting up of a Task Force in the Organisation to formulate the Citizen’s Charter.
• Consultation with all the stakeholders.
• Formulation of the Draft Citizen’s Charter.
• Pilot run of the Citizen’s Charter.
• Approval of the Charter with necessary modifications by the Core Group and
the head of the Organisation and implementation.
• Review and evaluation.
5. Prompt and Effective Redress of Grievances: This calls for the following:
(a) All grievances should be necessarily acknowledged, with an interim reply within 3 days
of receipt and redressed within 3 months of receipt in the Organisation. The same time
limit should apply even if co-ordination with subsidiary offices or another Department/
Organisation is involved. In such instances special efforts, to be suo moto disclosed
when reports are called, should be made.
(b) No grievance is to be rejected without having been independently examined. At a
minimum, this means that an officer superior, to the one who delayed taking the original
decision or took the original decision that is cause for grievance, should actually examine
the case as well as the reply, intended to be sent to the grievance holder.
(c) Make the ‘Director of Grievances’ effective through the following inter-related steps:—
(i) Secretaries/Organisational Heads ensuring that Director of Grievances are fully
‘empowered’ in accordance with instructions to perform their role.
(ii) All grievance representations received in the Department/Organisation, either by
mail, fax, e-mail to be invariably routed through Director of Grievances before
they go to concerned sections/divisions. At this stage, Office of the Director of
Grievances shall go through the representations and come to a prima-facie view
regarding the gravity of the matter involved and decide whether it shall monitor
the case or allow down-the-line functionaries to independently deal with it.
Directors of Grievances should monitor and follow up at least 3 to 5
per cent of grievances received to enable them to assess the efficacy of
grievance redress mechanism.

3
(iii) Fix responsibility in each case of delay, default and dereliction of duty, identified
by Director of Grievances, and take appropriate action against concerned
personnel. In addition, consider feasibility of prescribing specific penalty clauses
for such failures.
6. The Committee is of the firm opinion that citizens charters specify standards of
services and time limits that the public can reasonably expect from the organization. It also
contains the details of grievances redressal mechanism and how it can be accessed. It,
therefore, provides for an independent mechanism with the involvement of citizens and
consumer groups. The Committee notes that in most of the Government organizations, the
Charters are in the initial or middle stage of formulation and implementation. These need
to be expedited and put in place on priority. Further, in most cases, Citizens Charters are
not formulated through a consultative process. The Committee therefore, recommends that
there is a need for citizens and staff to be consulted at every stage of formulation of the
Charter and there is a need for orientation of staff about the salient features and goals of
the Charter.
7. The Committee also recommends that the Charters so formulated by each of the
Ministries/Department/State Governments/UTs should be widely publicized through print/
electronic media and displayed at conspicuous places in the organization or establishment.
8. The Committee is of the view that charter should be precise and as far as possible
simple and spoken language should be used.

4
CHAPTER-I
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL — CONCEPTUAL FRAME WORK
1. The word ‘grievance’ can be defined as ‘a complaint or resentment, against an unjust or
unfair act’ and the system to settle that grievance can be termed as ‘public grievance redressal
mechanism’ (PGRM).
1.1 Grievance Redress Mechanism is part and parcel of the machinery of any administration.
No administration can claim to be accountable, responsive and user-friendly unless it establishes an
efficient and effective grievance redressal mechanism. In fact, the grievance redress mechanism of
an organization is the gauge meter to measure its efficiency and effectiveness as it provides
important feedback on the working of the administration.
1.2. Nowadays, the empowered and enlightened citizenry is far more demanding services in
convenient and comfortable channels. And the Government, therefore, has to develop, evolve and
enable itself to meet the evolving demands of the society. A citizen-friendly Government should give
high priority to redressal of public grievances since the Government being a service provider, it is
bound to meet people’s needs and aspirations. Effective and timely redressal of public grievances
is a hall mark of responsive and responsible governance. This has become more important after
enactment of Right to Information law. The society today is impatient with the old system of
governance that is not coming up to its expectations. To them, a Government employee is
perceived as insensitive, aloof, corrupt and overall the administrative system as autocratic, opaque
and with no work culture. This requires a paradigm shift in governance to a system where the
citizen is in the centre and he is consulted at various stages of formulatim and implementation of
public policy. To achieve this objective, our country needs a public service, which is capable,
innovative and forward looking. The traditional role of civil service which was of administrator,
service provider and controller of development activities has to make way for the new roles of
facilitator and regulator so as to create best environment and conditions in the country for building
a nation of excellence.
1.3 Nation adopted consumer protection legislation — the Consumer Protection Act, in 1986.
Its National Consumer Policy statement takes into account inter alia two rights of consumers i.e.,
‘basic needs and a healthy environment. The right to basic goods facilities and services guarantees
dignified living. It includes adequate food, clothing, health care, drinking water and sanitation,
shelter, education, energy and transportation. Healthy environment entails the right to a physical
environment that enhances the quality of life. It includes protection against environmental damage
and acknowledges the need to protect and improve the environment for future generations as well.
One of the significant objectives of the National Consumer Policy is to make it mandatory that
consumer impact assessment is required in every area of governance where consumer interests are
affected.
1.4 From 1996 onwards a consensus emerged in the Government on effective and responsive
administration culminating in the Chief Ministers’ Conference in May, 1997. One of the major
decisions of the Conference was to formulate and operationalise Citizens’ Charters at the Centre
and in the States in sectors which dealt with a large public interface such as railways, telecom,
post, public distribution systems, hospitals, revenue, electricity and petroleum among others.
4

5
1.5 The efforts at the Centre were coordinated under the direction of the Cabinet Secretariat
by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievance (DAR&PG), in consultation
with the Department of Consumer Affairs. The DAR&PG also simultaneously formulated guidelines
for structuring a model charter as also lists of do’s and don’ts to guide Government organisations.
1.6 Every Ministry/Department was asked to form a Task Force which would, apart from
senior officers, have representatives from among its employees and users and, if desired, from the
Department of AR&PG, for identifying areas of public interface and formulating a Users’ Charter
on it. The Charter would carry the objective, the specific commitments for improved services and
grievances redressal machinery of the Organisation. It would be open to public scrutiny and would
also clarify the obligations on the part of the user, if any. The Charter would of necessity and
operationalised after due orientation of staff and given due publicity.
1.7 All Ministries/Departments were asked to make information pertaining to their organisation
available to their users, so far as it was not classified. Separately all classified information were
reviewed to see whether its classification was justified or not. Applications and grievances are also
received at these counters which are being progressively computerised with connectivity to officers
handling the cases so as to obtain regular update on static information as well as status reports
on individual applications.
1.8 A sound complaint handling system should ideally be accessible, simple, quick, fair, and
respect confidentiality. Also, it should be responsive, effective, accountable and be able to provide
feedback to management for systematic reform. It is clear that implementation of these directives
by the service providers on a sustained basis would go a long way in creating confidence in the
users.
1.9 In most of the offices, there is an established method/system to give information to the
general public but something somewhere is lacking. This causes difficulty to the people who cannot
easily gather information regarding the fate of their representations. To reduce this difficulty the
Government had issued detailed instructions for organizing facilitation centre in most of the offices
having direct interaction with the public. But by efflux of time, most of these centres have become
ineffective.
1.10 Model offices on the lines of the above concept are being set up in States/Union territories.
It is proposed that six model offices (five at District Headquarters and one at State Headquarters)
will be set up with the assistance of Central Government primarily through provision of hardware,
software and training from the National Informatics Centre. The States and UTs that have started
moving in this direction are Goa, Assam, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Lakshdweep, Madhya
Pradesh, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Chandigarh, Kerala,
Orissa, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh.
1.11 In August 1998, a Standing Committee of Secretaries for Public Grievances Redressal was
constituted. The Committee was to consider proposals for systematic reforms and grievances
redressal brought out by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances. Besides,
the Committee was also to consider the proposals in respect of all Departments of the Central
Government with Public interface. In addition, the Committee was to communicate with those
Ministries/Departments which have substantial interface with the public and whose grievances
redressal machinery needed to be strengthened.
1.12 To begin with, the Committee has identified 28 Ministries/Departments with a large public
interface for a detailed review. Since September 1999, the Committee has been meeting on a
monthly basis to conduct the review. It has so far reviewed 23 Ministries/Departments, prominent
among them being Ministries of Railways, External Affairs, Home Affairs, Finance, Defence,
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Surface Transport, Tourism, Information and Broadcasting,

6
Environment and Forests, Urban Development, Civil Aviation and the Departments of
Telecommunications, Posts and Company Affairs.
1.13 After reviewing the Grievances Mechanism of 26 Ministries/Departments the Committee has
in its directives called for promptness and courtesy in dealing with the cases. Also names of the
Grievance Officers of the Ministries/Departments be published in the Newspapers by the DAVP
every month. Publicity through the print media and Doordarshan about the grievance redress
mechanism was also called for.

7
CHAPTER-II
STRUCTURE OF GRIEVANCE REDRESS MACHINERY AT APEX LEVEL
2. The grievances of public are received on, various issues in the Government of India. There
are primarily three designated nodal agencies in the Central Government handling these grievances.
These agencies are:—
• PMO
• Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
• Directorate of Public Grievances, Cabinet Secretariat
The Public Grievances Wing of the PMO
2.1 A large number of petitions received are given the name of public grievances though their
nature varies from case to case which are duly segregated and forwarded to the concerned
Ministries/Departments for further necessary action. A few cases, which deserve closer attention,
are pursued by the PMO, once again with the concerned Ministry/Department. The Public Wing
is placed in the charge of an Officer on Special Duty and the handling of grievances is
computerised.
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
2.2 Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances is the nodal agency in respect
of policy initiatives on public grievances redress mechanism and citizen-centric initiatives. The role
of Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances consists primarily to undertake
such citizen-centric initiatives in the fields of administration reforms and public grievances in the
Government so as to enable the Government machinery to deliver quality public services to the
citizen in a hassle-free manner and eliminate the causes of grievance.
2.3 The Department is the driving engine of reforms in administration and governance. The
Department proposes to introduce and lead Change to establish a public service of quality,
efficiency, integrity and effectiveness and modernize the public service. It is the nodal agency in
Government for facilitating administrative improvements and reengineering of processes across the
Government. Citizen’s Charter initiative, Public Grievance Policy, Quality Management in
Government, e-Governance, Review of Administrative Laws etc. Documentation and Dissemination
of Best Practices, Organisation and Methods, Information and Facilitation Counters, Civil Services
Reforms are some of the areas under the ambit of Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances.
2.4 The grievances received by the Department are forwarded to the concerned Ministries/
Departments/State Governments/UTs, who are dealing with the substantive function linked with the
grievance for redress under intimation to the complainant. The Department ‘takes up’ about 1000
grievances every year depending upon the seriousness of the grievance and follows them regularly
till their final disposal. This enables the Department to evaluate the effectiveness of the grievance
redress machinery of the concerned Government agency. On the basis of the grievances received,
7

8
the Department identifies the problem areas in Government which are complaint-prone. These
problem areas are then subjected to studies and remedial measures are suggested to the
Department/Organisation concerned.
Directorate of Public Grievances (DPG), Cabinet Secretariat
2.5 Based on the review of the public grievances redress machinery in Government of India
carried out in 1987, the Directorate of Public Grievances was set up in the Cabinet Secretariat with
effect from 1st April, 1988. This Directorate was set up initially to look into individual complaints
pertaining to four Central Government Departments, which were more prone to public complaints.
Subsequently, more Departments having larger public interface were added to its purview and
presently this Directorate is handling grievances pertaining to 16 Central Government Organisations.
2.6 The Directorate was envisaged as an appellate body investigating grievances selectively and
particularly those where the complainant had failed to get redress at the hands of internal
machinery and the hierarchical authorities. Unlike the Department of AR&PG, Directorate of Public
Grievances has been empowered to call for the files and officers for discussion to see that
grievance handling has been done in a fair, objective and just manner. Wherever the Directorate is
satisfied that the grievance has not been dealt in such a manner, it makes suitable recommendations
for consideration and adoption by the concerned Ministry/Department, which are required to be
implemented within a period of one month.
Guidelines to All Central Government Ministries/Departments/Organisations on Public
Grievance Redress Mechanism
2.7 The Public Grievance Redress Mechanism functions in Government of India on a
decentralized basis. The Central Government Ministries/Departments, their attached and subordinate
offices and the autonomous bodies dealing with substantive functions as per Allocations of Business
Rules, 1961 have their respective grievance redress machinery. An officer of the level of Joint
Secretary is required to be designated as Director of Grievances of the Ministry/Department/
Organisation. The role and functions of Directors of Grievances are given in Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances O.M.no.l/PLCY/PG-88(7) dated 01.03.1988. This
inter alia empowers the Directors of Grievances to call for files/reports and take decisions or
review decisions already taken, in consultation with Secretary/HOD even in those areas, which do
not fall within his/her domain/charge.
2.8 The functioning of Public Grievances Redress Machineries in various Ministries/
Departments/Organisations is regularly reviewed by a Standing Committee of Secretaries under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary with Additional Secretary Department of Administrative Reforms
and Public Grievances as member-secretary.
2.9 With a view to ensure prompt and effective redress to the grievances, a number of
instructions have been issued by Department of AR&PG from time to time which, inter alia
include:—
(1) Observe every Wednesday as a meeting less day in the Central Secretariat Offices
when all the officers above a specified level should be available at their desks from
1000 hrs. to 1300 hrs. to attend to public grievances. Field level offices having contact
with the public have also to declare one day in the week as a meetingless day.
(2) Designate a Joint Secretary level officer as Director of Grievances including in
autonomous bodies and public sector undertakings.
(3) Deal with every grievance in a fair, objective and just manner and issue self speaking
reply for every grievance rejected.

9
(4) Analyse public grievances received to help identification of the problem areas in which
modifications of policies and procedures could be undertaken with a view to making
the delivery of services easier and more expeditious.
(5) Issue booklets/pamphlets about the schemes/services available to the public indicating
the procedure and manner in which these can be availed and the right authority to be
contacted for service as also the grievance redress authority.
(6) Pick up grievances appearing in newspaper columns, which relate to them and take
remedial action on them in a time bound manner. Issue rejoinders to newspapers after
investigation in cases, which are found to be baseless and/or damaging to the image
of the Organisation.
(7) Strengthen the machinery for redress of public grievance through strictly observing
meetingless day, displaying name designation, room number, telephone number etc. of
Director of Grievances at the reception and other convenient places, placing locked
complaint box at reception.
(8) Set up Staff Grievance Redress Machinery and designate a Staff Grievance Officer.
(9) Include the public grievances work and receipt/disposal statistics relating to redress of
public grievances in the Annual Action Plan and Annual Administrative Report of the
Ministries/Departments.
(10) Fix time limits for disposal of work relating to public grievances and staff grievances
and strictly adhere to them.
(11) Acknowledge each grievance petition within three days of receipt, indicating the name,
designation and telephone number of the official who is processing the case. The time
frame in which a reply will be sent should also be indicated.
(12) Constitute Lok Adalats/Staff Adalats, if not already constituted, and hold them every
quarter for quicker disposal of public as well as staff grievances and pensioners’
grievances.
(13) Constitute a Social Audit Panel or such other machinery, if not already constituted, for
examining areas of public interface with a view to recommending essential changes in
procedures to make the organization more people-friendly.
(14) Establish a single window system at points of public contact, wherever possible to
facilitate disposal of applications.
(15) Indicating telephone/fax number of the officer whose signature over a communication
regarding the decision/reply is to issue to the petitioner.
(16) Monitoring of grievances in organisations under Ministries/Departments on a monthly
basis.
(17) Publicising the grievances redress mechanism through the print and electronic media.
(18) Review of receipt and disposal of grievances by Secretaries of Ministries/Departments
in the weekly meetings taken by them.
(19) Quarterly Progress Reports regarding the receipt and disposal of grievances in the
Ministry/Department and Organisation under it.
(20) Grievances received and disposed of in the Ministry/Department and Organisations
under it should be monitored by the Joint Secretary/Director (PG) every month.

10
(21) Each Ministry/Department should prepare a consolidated directory of officers holding
public/staff grievances responsibility in the Ministry/Department and Organizations
under it.
(22) Should give wide publicity of Director (PG) through Citizens’ Charters, Broadcast of
audio-visual capsules, sports, websites; etc.
(23) Focus attention on analysis of public grievances to identify grievance prone areas and
implement systemic changes to reduce grievances.
(24) Brochures/Pamphlets prepared by various Ministries/Departments and their subordinate/
attached/autonomous agencies may be kept at accessible contact points including the
railway stations, bus stands etc.
(25) Citizens’ level of satisfaction should be measured on a regular basis.
(26) In order to make the grievance redress mechanism more effective, the following steps
need to be taken:
• Careful analysis of grievances.
• Decision on grievances to be taken at a fairly senior level.
• Forwarding the grievances to the Departments concerned for prompt redress.
• Reply to complainant reforming details of authorities setting grievances.
• Obtaining reply/report from the Departments concerned.
• A reasoned reply to the complainant, if a grievance cannot be settled.
(27) Place Citizen’s Charters of Ministry/Department and Organisations under them on the
website.
Types of Public Grievances
2.10 Majority of grievances received in Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances and Directorate of Public Grievances related to inordinate delay in taking decisions,
extending from several months to several years and refusal/inability to make speaking replies/
disclose basic information to the petitioners to enable them to examine whether their cases have
been correctly decided. Had the concerned organizations expeditiously and appropriately dealt with
the grievances in the first instance, the complainants would not have approached Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances/Directorate of Public Grievances.
Systemic Problem Areas
2.11 There are rules, regulations, instructions which are archaic and aimed at shifting the work
towards citizens. Slackness in administration, low morale of the services, inherent inertia, absence
of incentives, lack of proper authority and accountability are the delay-breeders and the delay is
the major factor that generates the grievances. These factors need to be tackled properly through
systematic changes. Prevention is better than cure. On these lines, the best method to redress a
grievance is not to allow the grievance to arise at the first instance. Even the redress of a
grievance, that arose on account of delay, is also delayed in many instances.
2.12 Many a times Departments/Organisations are found to avoid taking appropriate decisions by
resorting to rejection without application of mind, not taking appropriate interest in functioning of
subsidiary offices/linked autonomous organizations, and emphasize on disposal and not on the

11
quality disposal. Decisions taken earlier are reiterated without subjecting the cases of independent
examination. There is inertia to review decisions taken by down-the-line functionaries. In many
cases Departments/Organisations justify the delay and continue with their inability to take decisions
by putting the onus on another agency or on the petitioner. Many a times, the actual cause of
grievance lay in internal inefficiency of the system and failure to identify simple systemic solutions.
It is also observed that the time norms set by Departments for providing services were not being
adhered to in many cases.
2.13 There is no doubt that grievances continue to arise because of a high systemic tolerance
for delay, poor work quality and non-accountability in every day performance of functions. Failure
to review archaic, redundant and incongruous rules, policies and procedures and to initiate simple,
workable systemic changes is another cause for grievance generation. However, Departments and
Organisations, which work with policies and procedures on a day-to-day basis, do not appear to
have developed the ability to continually look ‘within’ and identify deficiencies. All these factors
have ensured that grievances, once arisen, many a time do not get resolved in ‘normal’ course and
need intervention at the highest administrative level.
2.14 Slackness in efficient functioning of ‘Directors of Grievances’ is identified as one of the
prime cause for continuing delay in redress of grievances. Poor work quality, non-accountability
in everyday performance of functions and failure to systemically review policies/procedures and
suggest systemic changes are other important causes. In most Ministries, Departments and
Organisations, the mechanism of Director of Grievances is not functioning as per the mandate
prescribed.
Focus Areas
2.15 In this context, it is the need of the time that the Government should review its pledge of
providing hassle-free public services to the citizens by focusing on systemic changes to minimize
the grievances in Government domain. In order to achieve this objective in a focused manner, it
is necessary to evolve a multi-pronged strategy to be implemented in a time-bound and effective
manner. Keeping in view the various factors involved in grievance redress issue, following areas
need focused attention:
2.16 Performance Review — Foreseeing areas of dissatisfaction:
(a) To review processes, functions etc. in the organization and to cast them pro-actively in a
manner that would foresee areas of dissatisfaction, identify activities where transparency, equity,
prudence and propriety are compromised, interventions that can help achieve better outcomes,
improve satisfaction of internal and external stakeholders.
(b) An annual review of laws, rules, regulations, instructions and procedures be carried out
with a view to simplify the procedure making the administration more transparent, accountable and
citizen-friendly. Information Technology should be employed in re-engineering of governmental
processes in order to improve efficiency and effectiveness and ensuring transparency and accountability.
Identification of grievance prone areas and analysis
(a) Identify areas susceptible to corruption and/or grievance generation and conduct work audit
of such areas. In addition, consider external/social audit in areas of very high public interface, with
the aim of identifying wrong doers and improving processes and systems. Involve NGOs in the
exercise.
(b) Analyse the nature and causes of grievances with the aim of identifying systemic
deficiencies in laws, rules, regulations, policies, instructions, work practices and procedures, and

12
effecting systemic changes to remove/correct these deficiencies. The Directors of Grievances be
the nodal officers for such purpose. The analysis should be conducted in the month of April every
year and studies of identified grievance prone areas be undertaken. Recommendations made in the
studies should be implemented by December of that year so as to bring systemic changes and
remove the causes of grievances.
(c) Fix responsibility in each and every case of delay, default or dereliction in performance of
every day duties on failure to deliver services, and take disciplinary action to avoid recurrence. This
will send a clear signal that in the event of failure to perform duties or deal appropriately with
grievances within the time frame norms prescribed, a real possibility of having responsibility fixed on
one’s shoulder exists. Consider the feasibility of prescribing specific penalty clauses in such cases.
2.17 Citizen’s Charter Formulation and effective implementation of Citizen’s Charters, which
should, inter-alia, include disclosure of time norms for providing various services to the citizens/
clients and details of all levels of grievance redress machinery that may be approached.
Information and Facilitation Counters (lFC)
2.18 To ensure effective and responsive administration and speedy and easy access of
information to the public of the services and activities of the Government, the Government of India
has set up Information and Facilitation Counters (IFCs) in 36 Ministries and 2 Departments of the
Central Government to administer and serious to the citizens.
2.19 Functions of the Facilitation Centre:
1. The most important function of the Centre is to respond to enquiries. If the enquiring
person physically visits the Centre, the details shall be obtained in a prescribed format.
2. The enquiry shall be serially numbered in the computer and a slip containing the number
and subject will be supplied to the visitor. On his subsequent visits to enquire regarding the same
matter the visitor shall bring this slip for reference.
3. Once enquiry is numbered in the computer it shall be closed only when the issue is finally
decided and closed by the concerned Administrative Department.
4. Wherever a matter is not to be processed in that office, the visitor shall be politely told so
and the appropriate officer to be contacted has to be intimated to him.
5. Till the fully computerized information system is introduced the Officer in charge of the
Centre shall gather information from the respective sections either over phone or through the
officers posted in the Centre and pursuing the concerned file. The entire office shall be liable to
show their files to the designated officer except where it relates to a vigilance case, purchases or
any other classified information.
6. The Facilitation Centre need not render itself a file processing section parallel to the one
that is having the subject as their allotted work. What really is intended is to inform the visitor
regarding the stage of action on an issue and to follow it up till disposal.
7. The Nodal Officer of the concerned Department shall be responsible to function as the
Contact Point  for this purpose.
2.20 Handling of Enquiries
1. When a serial number is allotted to a paper the officer in charge of the Counter shall gather
the information from the nodal officer of the respective section at the earliest and pass it on to
the visitor.

13
2. In case the matter enquired into has to be located and verified, the enquiries received till
a cut off time on every working day shall be replied to across the counter in the afternoon. In
any case, every visitor should be told as to when he could come back to the counter to get the
required information or contact over phone.
3. All the departments/sections are bound to supply information to the officer in charge of the
Centre. In complicated matters the file also may be made available to the Officer in charge for
perusal. Nodal officer of the respective departments will be personally responsible to furnish
information to the Centre.
4. When the issue enquired about is kept pending for want of additional information from the
petitioner, the fact may be intimated to the visitor.
5. The enquiry shall be limited to issues affecting the person, group of people etc. general
matters like the financial position of the State, Law and Order, Taxation etc. shall not be entertained
as enquiries.
6. When the enquiry is made by MLA/MP the instructions relating to the interaction with them
have to be kept in mind and observed.
7. The Facilitation Centre shall not add any paper or document to the file, which is given to
them for perusal. In the same way, they shall not hand over the file to any other officer and only
return it to the giver.
8. Non supply of relevant information by any section or officer shall be brought to the
immediate notice of the Secretary or the Additional Secretary by the incharge of the Department
of Administrative Reforms. Such lapses that affect the credibility of the machinery of Government
would be viewed seriously.
9. The Facilitation Centre is only to facilitate the providing of information in response to
enquiries to the visitors. The Sections and officers charged with the processing of papers should
ensure that instructions relating to processing of papers are observed properly and any assurance
given through the counters are also accomplished.
2.21 Miscellaneous
1. Enquiries recorded at one window shall be followed up till the staff of the same window
finally disposes of the matter.
2. The list of enquiries shall also be drawn up department wise and supplied to the Secretary
in charge of the subject. While holding the monthly staff conference of the department, the
Secretary shall review the pendency with reference to the list also.
3. Whenever possible the persons who make an enquiry during the office hours may be
provided with information over phone also.
4. The communication and gathering of information by the Centre Staff from the office need
not be in writing. It may be either conversation over phone or in person.
5. The establishment of the Facilitation Centre does not take away the responsibility of the
higher officers to entertain visitors on important issues.
Publications of different departments i.e. functioning, projects, information etc. should be
made available in this Centre for wide circulation.

14
Review and Monitoring of Grievance Redress Mechanism
2.22 Ensure meaningful review of the performance of grievance redress machinery of the
Ministry/Organisation as well as that of attached/subordinate organization by Secretary/Head of the
Department on a monthly basis. Review should also cover action against defaulters.
Role of Regulators, Ombudsman and Like Bodies
2.23 An explosive issue today in context of public grievance redress is the pace and phasing of
the movement towards open markets after the gradual abandonment of centralized planning model.
The Government is today withdrawing from various service sectors traditionally monopolized by it
and private enterprise is moving in. This may lead to a scenario where the Government monopolies
are replaced by even more vicious private monopolies or cartels in the absence of adequate
regulation, enforcement and recourse to grievance redress.
2.24 This has significant implications for the role of Government. The Government can not just
abandon the interests of citizens to be taken care of by the market forces in areas of service
delivery covered by the private sector. In the open market scenario, it is often the major
stakeholders and players, which define the cost, quality and mechanism etc. of service delivery.
2.25 The Government therefore needs to put in place appropriate mechanisms in the regulatory
authorities, ombudsmen and like bodies in such sectors so that the concerns of individual citizens
are also accorded equal importance and weightage and are appropriately and effectively addressed.
They should safeguard the interests of the common citizens and ensure that the grievances of the
citizens are attended to promptly and effectively.
Steps Taken by the Department to make the common people aware about the PGR
Mechanism
2.26 The Department has taken the following steps to make the common people aware about the
PGR Mechanism existing in the Government to take advantage of the existing fora:
(a) Advertisement on PGR mechanism existing in the Central Government Ministries/
Departments is issued every year in various newspapers throughout the Country indicating the
names of Directors of Grievances in the Ministries/Departments of Government of India and their
addresses, telephone numbers, e-mail etc. Similar advertisement is also issued every year indicating
the names and address, telephone number etc. of Nodal Officers of Citizens’ Charters of various
Central Ministries/Departments/Organisations;
(b) Director General, Doordarshan (Prasar Bharti) had been requested to give wide publicity to
make the people aware about the existence of PGR mechanism in Government of India.
Doordarshan has accordingly issued instructions to all the Doordarshan Kendras to give wide
publicity. Similar request had also been made to Director General, All India Radio (Prasar Bharti);
and
(c) The Department undertakes studies of Public Grievances Redress Mechanism available in
States/UT Administrations and initiatives taken towards implementation of Citizens’ Charters. The
studies involve examination of the mechanism upto Taluka level. The Department makes
recommendations/observations for proactive and citizen-friendly administration.

15
CHAPTER-III
PGRM IN COMMITTEE’S EARLIER REPORTS
As stated in above, consequent upon expansion of the Department Related Parliamentary
Standing Committees, the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice came into
existence on 20th July, 2004 following bifurcation of the Department Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs. It is also pertinent to mention that the all important issue
of public grievances redressal mechanism had engaged the attention of the earlier Committee i.e.
Committee on Home Affairs and it had recommended time and again about strengthening the
grievances redressal mechanism. The Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
also in its 1st, 5th, 14th and 19th Report on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions recommended for improving and strengthening the mechanism. The
recommendations of the Committee are reproduced below:—
1st Report The Ministry should keep close vigil over monitoring of grievance redressal in
every Ministry/Department as the essence of good governance is defeated in the
absence of efficient and timely redressal of grievance.
5th Report The Committee recommends that every Ministry/Department in the Union
Government should have a dynamic PGR mechanism in place with special focus
on the information delivery system. People friendly interface of the Government
is the need of the day. The Committee is of the opinion that in this direction
local languages should be used extensively to disseminate information amongst
public.
14th Report The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure to install PGRAMS
software in all Ministries/Departments/Organisations so that the grievances of the
public are redressed quickly and efficiently and public grievance redress officers
should be appointed and notified in all the Departments and Ministries. The
Committee further desires that the Ministry should ensure that follow-up action
is taken by the officers promptly and effectively.
The Committee recommends that the review of the Public Grievances Redress
in the Grievances Mechanism remaining Ministries/Departments should be
completed expeditiously and that Ministry should ensure that the other Ministries/
Departments submit their compliance reports well in time.
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the local languages
should be used extensively to disseminate information regarding Public
Grievances Redressal Mechanism amongst the public in line with the various
recommendations of the Commission on Linguistic Minorities of Government of
India.
19th Report The Committee recommends that the Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism
should be envisaged in a statutory form on the line of the Right to Information
Act, 2005 which would make it mandatory on all Departments/Ministries/
Organisations to pursue the grievances till their logical end.
15

16
25th Report The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should make a
study as to the nature of cases pending in Courts simple because of non-
application of in built Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism and make the
erring office accountable and punished. This will reduce the cases in Courts due
to non-application of mind and soul into the dispute.
The Committee is of the view that public service delivery system is inefficient
unless it caters to the needs and issues of the common man. In order to assuage
the concerns of the people regarding the efficiency of the public services, it is
pertinent that their grievances are redressed promptly.
The Committee strongly feels that enacting a statute for PGRM will go a long
way in ensuring participatory governance and the Ministry should seriously
examine this issue and the Committee be apprised of the outcome therefrom.
3.1 The Committee has very often been termed as the ‘Public Grievance’ Committee and it is
in this regard that the Committee receives a large number of public grievance cases. It has, also,
in genuine cases having policy ramifications, forwarded the grievances to the DAR&PG for
redress. It has been the experience of the Committee that, through proper monitoring, grievances
can be addressed and disposed of within a reasonable time.
3.2 The Committee has, therefore, taken up for examination and study, the existing mechanism
of public grievances redress in the organizational set-ups having a large public interface to assess
the effectiveness and impact of the mechanism in the working of the organization vis-a-vis its
relations with the public.
Committee’s Deliberations
3.3 As the Committee receives number of representations from the citizens as well as the
employees of different organizations, banks, PSUs, individuals and Government Departments on the
issue of Grievance Redressal System giving an impression to the Committee that the guidelines
issued from time to time by the Ministry were not being addressed to by the Government
Departments and PSUs/Banks etc. due to which individuals suffer and very often curse the
Government. The Committee, in this background, decided to examine mechanism’s compliance in
the public sector banks, public sector undertakings, statutory bodies, Government Departments and
also make on the spot study of the Banks/PSUs etc.
3.4 In order to have a proper background on the subject, a letter in this regard was written
to the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions on 28th November, 2005 to furnish the
background note on the rules and guidelines followed in the grievance handling system, procedure
and mechanism of monitoring the implementation thereof in Ministries/Departments/Offices/Public
Sector Enterprises etc. wherever these are applicable.
3.5 The Committee then decided to hear the representatives of Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances (DAR&PG) along with the representatives of Department of
Consumer Affairs and Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards on the subject on
14th December, 2005. In their presentation, the representatives had apprised the Committee that
Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism exists in all Central Government Offices and Public Sector
Undertakings. They had further stated that the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances was the nodal agency, under the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
which receives public grievance cases and that they make every effort to redress each and every
grievance meticulously. They also stated that the DAR&PG has its own website, where a
grievance could be lodged online and the status could be seen by simply putting the specific

17
number allotted to a particular grievance. The Secretary had also apprised the Committee about the
Citizen Charter and Benchmark Excellence Scheme of UK and USA.
3.6 While considering the Subject, the Committee also decided to invite views/suggestions from
various individuals/organisations/stakeholders on the subject. A press communique was accordingly
issued on 30th December, 2006 which was published in the major English and Hindi dailies and
vernacular newspapers all over the country. In response, thereto, a number of representations/
memoranda were received. The representations while pleading for individual cases/grievances
also highlighted the drawbacks in the system and came out with suggestions for improvement in
PGRM.
3.7 The major points raised in various representations/memoranda are summarized as follows:—
1 A Committee should be constituted at Central/State/District/Block level for Redressal of
grievances of general public.
2. Weekly meeting of the said Committee should be held.
3. After Redressal of grievance, it should be published in the newspaper.
4. Provision of punishment for non redressal of grievances should be prescribed.
5. Holding of pensionary benefits of officials who misrepresent facts or cause delay.
6. Thrust should be accountability in receiving the documents and replying to those
documents in a time bound manner.
7. Track of movement of the documents should be ensured.
8. There should be a public grievance office to handle officials complaints/grievances of
citizen.
9. The officials should be vigilant, acknowledge the letter and dispose the grievance
promptly.
10. There should be advertisement in leading newspaper/radio about the establishment of
such office so that citizen can lodge the complaints and the facility for lodging
complaints on telephone and internet should be provided. In case the complaint is
found to be genuine the concerned public servant should be penalized.
11. The ombudsman concept in banks, Insurance etc. should be extended to Central
excise, Customs, P&T, Sales Tax, Railway and Education etc.
12. The Consumer Protection Act should be reviewed so that grievances can be handled
by a single judge with a firm deadline of maximum three months for disposal of cases,
the verdict should be binding to stop further litigation as the verdicts are either not
implemented or delayed in implementing the orders of Ombudsman. In exceptional
cases, the consumer or the department should be allowed to submit review petition
against the orders of the Ombudsman.
13. The Central/State Government Departments should be asked to maintain registers of
public complaints, the complaint should be acknowledged.
14. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions should call for quarterly
report for the number of complaints and action taken by the Department.
15. It should be the accountability of the Ministry to keep vigilance that the complainant
is kept in good humour and not neglected.

18
16. In case of refusal to receive the grievance/complaint the official must be punished.
17. Grievance should be redressed in a time bound manner.
18. Official should be accountable and punished for delay or lapses and the victims should
be duly compensated and interest should be paid on any claims/dues.
19. In case the grievance is against any higher officer, no prior permission should be
required.
20. There should be a time bound policy in cases of promotion and transfers.
21. There should be a judicial body on the lines of consumer court for handling
grievances.
22. A customer focused approach to resolve complaints should be created.
23. Staff skills for working with customers should be improved.
24. The DARPG and DPG should remain under the control of PMO.
25. The Central Government may consider separate enactment of public grievances
Redressal mechanism.
Replies/views received from the Government
3.8 The representations received by the Committee which highlighted the system’s drawbacks
and contained suggestions were forwarded to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions (Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances) for their comments. In
response to the various points raised in the memoranda, a summary of the comments received trom
the Ministry is given below:
1. Grievance Redress and Monitoring system headed by a senior officer of the level of
Joint Secretary is available in every Ministry. The DAR&PG is monitoring the redressal
of public grievances through meetings chaired by Additional Secretary (AR & PG) and
Secretary (AR & PG) for prompt redress of gnevances.
2. A citizen can lodge his/her grievance to the designated nodal officers/Directors of
Public Grievances in each Ministry/Department or to DAR&PG from any geographical
location for redress. The names, address and telephone/Fax Nos. and e-mail addresses
of the nodal officers are published by DAR&PG in all the leading newspapers in the
country for the information of citizens and also on website darpg-arpg@nic.in
3. The Department of AR & PG is the nodal department for formulation of policy and
coordination of issues relating to redress of public grievances in general and grievances
pertaining to central Ministries/Departments/Organisations in particular. To fulfill this
mandate, this department has issued policy guidelines and a number of instructions
from time to time to institutionalize the public grievance redress mechanism.
5. As per the guidelines/instructions on receipt of the grievance an acknowledgement has
to be issued and the grievance to be redressed within a period of three months; in case
of delay an interim reply has to be sent to the petitioner.
6. The DAR&PG has developed a Public Grievance Portal available at website http://
pgportal.gov.in which has been introduced in May, 2007. It has two interfaces one for
the citizens to lodge/monitor the status of grievance online and the other one is
Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRM), a grievance

19
redress monitoring tool for the exclusive use by the Ministries/Departments/
Government organisations. The portal is aimed at facilitating the receipt and handling
of grievances from aggrieved citizens online and thus to help scrutinized, forward and
monitor the action taken by the departments concerned as well as the nodal agencies
viz. DAR&PG and DPG.
7. In response to one of the queries regarding setting up the PG office in the Collector’s
office to handle complaints/grievances of citizens, the Ministry has replied that the
Government of Uttar Pradesh has installed a computerized system ‘LOKV ANI’ to
monitor grievances at the Collector’s office level which was initiated at Sitapur Distt.
Details of the grievances are available at the site www. lokvani-sitapur.nic.in. The
Government of Uttar Pradesh has also initiated a system for replicating ‘LOKV ANI’ in
all Collector’s offices. Similar initiatives can be recommended to all the State
Governments. Lokvani has been advertised in all the local Newspapers and private
Kiosks have been identified on payment of small amount for receipt of grievances
which are directly transferred electronically to the collector’s office.
8. In response to another query regarding there should be a judicial body on the lines
of consumer court for handling grievances, the Ministry has replied that the
concept of Ombudsman can be extended. Many Ministries/Departments having large
consumer interface have specialized bodies Insurance Regulatory Authority of India
(IRAI) etc.
9. When the Ministry was asked to give their comments on separate enactment on public
grievances redressal mechanism, the Ministry has replied that the public grievances are
being handled at the level of Chief Secretaries/Secretaries of State Governments/
Ministries/Department perhaps there is no need for enactment of other Public
Grievance Mechanism. The existing Mechanism can be more effective.
Committee’s on the Spot Study Visits
3.9 In order to have a better understanding of the working of public grievance redressal
mechanism available in various public sector undertakings/banks/Statutory Bodies who enjoy
maximum interface with the public, the Committee decided to visit different parts of the country
to have on the spot interaction with the heads of these bodies.
3.10 Accordingly, the Committee visited Goa, Mumbai, Bangalore, Bhuhneshwar from 2nd to
8th February, 2006; Mumbai, Chennai and Hyderabad from 25th June to 1st July, 2006; Chennai,
Port Blair, Kolkata from 4th January to 10th January; and Jaipur, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Bhopal
from 30th June to 7th July, 2007 and held discussions with the managements of these Public
Sector Banks/Public Sector Undertakings, Government authorities, other organization and
individuals.
3.11 As regards the Banks, the Committee examined in detail the policy followed on the subject
and held deliberations with the heads of nearly 24 Public Sector Banks and 40 Public Sector
Undertakings banks.
Public Sector Banks
The Committee found that all the Public Sector Banks are following a fairly similar pattern
and have also introduced innovative systems in order to compete in today’s competitive
environment. The Banks examined by the Committee are mentioned below:

20
Sl. No. Name of the Bank
1. State Bank of Mysore
2. Vijaya Bank
3. Canara Bank
4. Bank of Baroda
5. Bank of India
6. Central Bank of India
7. NABARD
8. Dena Bank
9. Union Bank of India
10. Reserve Bank of India
11. Indian Overseas Bank
12. Indian Bank
13. Andhra Bank
14. State Bank of Hyderabad
15. State Bank of Travancore
16. State Bank of India
17. UCO Bank
18. United Bank of India
19. Allahabad Bank
20. State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur
21. State Bank of Saurashtra
22. SIDBI
23. IDBI
24. State Bank of Indore
Steps Taken By The Banks To Redress The Grievances Of The Customers
3.12 The Committee held the detailed discussions with the managements of these Banks. Issue,
emerged in the course of deliberations with there Banks are summarized below:
1. The Customer is the King
(i) The banks believe that Customer is the ‘King’. Every satisfied Customer gets at least
one more Customer whereas every dissatisfied customer informs 11 others about the
inadequate service. Hence, it is imperative and also their core objective to ensure that
every customer goes out of the Bank happily each time and every time. Many
customers who desert a particular bank may not even tell it the reason for their leaving
the Bank and hence receiving a complaint is better than losing a customer.

21
(ii) Marketing experts say that it takes 4 times more effort and energy to acquire a new
customer than retaining them. So, Customer Care for existing customers assumes
tremendous importance in the emerging highly competitive scenario. Thus the battle of
Marketing happens in the minds of the Customer and nowhere else. To win a
Customer from competition would not only be a challenge, but also the order of future
Retail Banking Business in the country.
(iii) Customer handling is a passion and it is more an attitude-related parameter than the
knowledge possessed by the employees. It is important to approach every customer
with passion at all times. Different Customers come to Bank for varied reasons.
Identifying their need would be the key to success in the front office.
2. Discipline and Attitude
(i) Staff members at the counters must treat the customers politely and with courtesy and
make them feel welcome. The attitude should be positive and pro-active.
(ii) Apart from this, being on time at the work place, dedicated to work during working
hours, completing the day’s work without keeping any pending work and seeking
permission in advance for late-coming or early leaving as also planning for leave would
help in our customer-centric approach. The staff members must prominently display
their identity during working hours.
3. Complaint Book/Complaint Box
Complaint Book provided to all branches should be made available to the customers.
Branches should ensure that Complaints/Suggestions Box is available in the Banking Hall. It is the
responsibility of Branch Managers to make the best use of the feedback received and improve the
quality of their branch functioning commensurate with the expectations of customers.
4. Complaint Handling:
(i) Complaints are a ticklish business. Nobody likes complaints, but every one complains
about something or the other, atleast sometimes.
(ii) The first step in handling complaints is to understand the underlying causes which
give rise to them and to develop an attitude to handle complaints in a business like/
objective manner without leaving any bitter after-taste. Leaving aside the small number
of people who complain about every thing to give vent to their own frustrations, it
may safely be assumed that most people who complain have a genuine problem.
(iii) When a complaint is laid on the desk, take it calmly, get the facts into the open and
look at them judiciously. No customer must ever be brushed off or made to feel
ridiculous.
(iv) Flippancy is quite out of place. The customer is not going to be satisfied if you tell
him ‘to err is human’ and attempt to pass of his criticism with a shrug.
(v) When a customer sees that you are making efforts to discover and rectify conditions
that annoy him, he will come over to your side. Most of us run into an internal block
when shown an error. We tend to buck and twist in an effort to avoid admitting it.
(vi) If you slipped out or the Bank had made a mistake, a straight forward apology is in
order. Don’t hesitate to express regret. Then make correction adjustment quickly,
tactfully and in a friendly way.

22
(vii) In handling complaints, the vital thing is to listen. Show respect for customer’s
point of view, even if you do not agree with it. Quite often, all that people want is
to have their opinions respected. It does not mean that you should always concede
that the customer is right, but only that you should make him feel that you can
understand how he came to take his position. Your listening assures him that you are
entirely fair and take a similar attitude.
(viii) Avoid being drawn into an argument. An argument is a contest in which some one
is to lose. If you win, you forfeit his goodwill and probably antagonise the customer.
5. Observance of Customer Day :
Branches/Administrative offices are observing 15th of each month as Customer Day
between 3 p.m. and 5 p.m. If, however, 15th happens to be a Saturday/Holiday, the succeeding
working day is being observed as Customer Day. On this day the bank functionaries at various
levels should make themselves available for meeting the customers without prior appointment. If
the Branch Manager is preoccupied due to some reasons on the Customer Day, the next person
officiating in his place should be present in the branch to receive the customers’ suggestions/
grievances and should redress the same.
6. Staff Meeting Joint Customer Service Committee Meeting :
To review the level of customer satisfaction at the branch and to have a frank and free
exchange of views on the working of the branch, each branch should hold a staff meeting at least
once a month. Joint Customer Service Committee Meetings should be held at the branch level and
suitable steps taken for improving the customer service at the branch. The staff meeting should
be held preferably one or two weeks after the Joint Customer Service Committee Meeting of the
branch so that any suggestions made in the Joint Customer Service Committee Meeting may be
discussed in the staff meeting.
7. Display of Information Posters on Customer Service
Information to General Public List of Items to be Available
• Display of information poster on nomination facility.
• Notice about soiled notes exchange facility.
• Customer Notice Board.
• Display of Time Norms.
• Grievance Notice Board (Name of Circle Head, Address and Phone).
• Availability of complaints/suggestion box and Complaints Register.
• Availability of brochures/pamphlets of Deposit and loan schemes/Citizens’ Charter.
• Enquiry or ‘May I help You’ counter.
• Details of select service charges/prior notice about change in service charges.
• Immediate Credit of Outstation/Cheques of value up to Rs. 15000/-.
• Payment of interest on delayed collection of cheques/instruments.
• Information regarding Banking Ombudsman situated in State Capitals under RBI
Ombudsmen Scheme 2002 – and the details.
• Observance of customer’s day.
• Availability of Bankers’ Fair Practice Code.

23
8. Goiporia Committee Recommendations
The following 25 core recommendations made by the committee are of very great
importance to us:
• Commencement of employees working hours 15 minutes before commencement of
business hours can be made operative by banks at branches in metropolitan and urban
centres.
• All the customers who enter the banking hall before the close of business hours should
be attended to.
• Staff at the counters should undertake the following transactions during the extended
business hours (branches to indicate the timings).
• a. Non-V oucher generating transactions.
• Issue of passbook/statement of accounts.
• Issue of cheque book.
• Delivery of term deposit receipt/draft.
• Acceptance of share application form.
• Acceptance of clearing cheques/bills for collection.
• b. V oucher generating transactions.
• Issue of term deposit receipts (TDR).
• Acceptance of cheques of locker rent due.
• Issue of travelers cheques.
• Issue of gift cheques
• Acceptance of individual cheques for transfer credit.
• To ensure that no counter remains unattended during the business hours and
uninterrupted service is rendered to the customers.
• All branches, except very small branches, should have ‘Enquiry’ or ‘May I help you?’
counter, either exclusively or combined with other duties, located near the entry point
of the banking hall.
• Difficulties, in the way of acceptance of small denomination notes from customers as
well as from non-customers for issuance of drafts, should engage the attention of
branch officials, controlling offices and the RBI; Customers may be taken into
confidence about such difficulties.
• Service relating to exchange of mutilated and soiled notes may be made more
customer-friendly by proper training of employees on one hand and liberalization of
Note Refund Rules on the other.
• In addition to obtaining nomination form, banks may provide for mentioning name and
address of the nominee in the account opening form. Publicity about nomination
facility is needed, including printing, compatible message on cheque book, pass book
and any other literature reaching the customer as well as launching periodical drives
to popularise the facility.
• Unless the customer prefers not to nominate (this may be recorded, without giving
scope for conjecture of non-compliance), nomination should be a rule, to over all other
existing and new accounts.

24
• Issuance of statements of accounts and updating of pass books with correct and
legible particulars should attract bank’s constant attention.
• Stationery with pre-demarcated folds/flaps may be used for statements of accounts.
• Trilingual brochures and pamphlets should be actively promoted, containing myriad
customer-useful information.
• Single-window concept may be introduced for issuance of drafts, authorising employee
at the counter to sign drafts upto Rs. 5,0001- which are pre-countersigned by another
authorised signatory.
• Bank orders, like the postal orders, introduced in denominations of Rs.5, Rs.20,
Rs.100, Rs.500, Rs.l,000 etc. providing for payees name to be filled in by the
branch. (As for recommendation No. 3.31 of Goiporia Committee relating to
introduction of “Bank Orders” in various denominations so as to offer better service
to customers, Reserve Bank of India vide  their letter DBOD (Che)/C&M/726/
05.12.02/2001-02 dt.3.11.2001 has advised that on account of lack of demand and
poor response prevailing in most of the branches for availing the facility of Bank
Orders, Reserve Bank of India has no objection in discontinuing the implementation of
recommendation No. 3.31 i.e. recommendation pertaining to Bank orders).
• Facility of instant credit of outstation cheques upto Rs. 15,000/-. A separate type of
pay-in-slip available for this facility.
• Delay in collection of outstation cheques may be compensated by paying interest at 2%
p.a. above savings bank rate, if such interest payable is Rs.5/- or more. However, if
the proceeds are to be credited to the borrowal accounts like cash credit/overdraft/
loan etc. banks have to pay at Prime Lending Rate in force from time to time.
• Where delay in crediting bill proceeds can be attributed to the bank, it should pay
interest to the lodger for the delayed period at the rate of 2% above savings bank
interest rate.
• Dishonored instruments may be returned/dispatched to the customer within 24 hours.
• Telegraphic-Transfers (TTs) issued and payable at Area 1 centres including state
capitals may be value-dated on third day; other remittances may be credited on receipt
of telegram or confirmation thereof whichever is received earlier.
• Delay beyond eighth day in crediting Mail Transfers (MTs) may be compensated by
paying interest at 2% p.a. above savings bank rate and paying such interest if it is
Rs. 5/- or more.
• Complaint book with perforated copies in each set introduced, so designed as to
instantly provide an acknowledgement to the customer and an intimation to the
controlling office.
• Branch level Customer Service Committees should be rejuvenated.
• Periodical meetings should be held with customers and their representative bodies.
• Infrastructure facilities at branches should be upgraded by bestowing particular
attention to provide adequate space, proper furniture, drinking water facilities etc.
• Time norms for specialised business transactions should be displayed predominantly in
the banking hall.

25
Public Sector Undertakings
3.13 The Committee also held discussions with the representatives of Public Sector Undertakings/
Trusts etc. on the issues. The Committee noted that every organisation is having a separate scheme
for the benefit of their employees. The Public Sector Undertakings etc. examined by the Committee
to whom the Secretariat has sent the questionnaire are mentioned below:
Sl. No. Name of the Organisation
12
1. Murmagao Port Trust
2. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
3. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited
4. Indian Oil Corporation
5. National Aluminium Company Limited
6. ONGC
7. Chennai Port Trust
8. National Mineral Development Corporation
9. Bharat Dynamics Limited
10. Hindustan Latex Limited
11. Hindustan Newsprint Limited
12. Cochin Refineries Limited
13. Cochin Port Trust
14. Chennai Petroleum Corporation
15. Madras Fertilizers Limited
16. Nevyeli Lignite Corporation
17. Coal India Limited
18. IBP Company Limited
19. MSTC Limited
20. Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Limited
21. Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceutical Limited
22. National Seeds Corporation Limited
23. Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited
24. Hindustan Salts Limited
25. National Fertilizers Limited
26. Sambhar Salts Limited

26
12
27. GAIL (India) Limited
28. MMTC Limited
29. PEC Limited
30. STC Limited
31. Container Corporation Limited
32. Nuclear Power Corporation Limited
33. Cotton Corporation Limited
34. Air India Limited
35. Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation
36. LIC Limited
37. New India Assurance Company Limited
38. BHEL
39. National Handloom Development Corporation
40. Central Warehousing Corporation Limited
3.14 Model For Grievances Redressal Procedure For Staff And Officers In Central Public
Sector Undertakings:
1. Objectives
The objective of the grievance redressal procedure is to provide an easily accessible
machinery for settlement of grievances and to adopt measures in Central Public Sector
Undertakings as would ensure expeditious settlement of grievances of staff and officers leading to
increased satisfaction on the job and resulting in improved productivity and efficiency of the
organization.
2. Applicability
The scheme will cover all staff and officers of the organisation except employees who are
deemed to be workers/workmen under the Factories Act, 1948/Industriai Disputes Act, 1947 or any
other legislation applicable to such categories of employees.
3. Grievance
‘Grievance’ for the purpose of this scheme would only mean a grievance relating to any
staff member/officer arising out of the implementation of the policies/rules or decisions of the
organization. It can include matters relating to leave, increment, acting arrangements, non-extension
of benefits under rules, interpretation of Service Rules, etc., of an individual nature.
4. Procedure
Subject to the above provisions, individual grievances of staff members and officers shall
henceforth be processed and dealt within the following manner:

27
(a) An aggrieved staff member or officer shall take up his grievance(s) orally with his
immediate superior who will give a personal hearing and try to resolve the grievance(s)
at his level within a week.
(b) If the grievance is not satisfactorily redressed, the aggrieved staff member/officer may
submit his grievance in writing to the Departmental Head concerned or to the
Personnel/Officer/Manager as may be determined by the Chief Executive of the
organization. Such Nominated Authority will record his comments on the representation
within seven days, and if need be refer it to the Grievance Redressal Committee in
case the grievance is not resolved or settled amicably. The recommendation of the
Grievance Redressal Committee will be conveyed within one month to the Deciding
Authority to be nominated by the Chief Executive and the decision of the Deciding
Authority will be final, subject to the provisions contained in succeeding para.
(c) In exceptional cases, with the concurrence of the Grievance Redressal Committee, the
aggrieved staff member/officer whose grievance has been considered and is not
satisfied with the decision of the Deciding Authority, will have an option to appeal
either to the Director concerned or to the Chief Executive. A decision on such appeals
will be taken within one month of the receipt of the appeal. The decision of the
Director concerned or the Chief Executive, as the case may be, will be final and
binding on the aggrieved staff member/officer and the management.
(d) Grievances in respect of the following two categories of officers will not fall within
the purview of the Grievance Redressal Committee. In their case, the procedure will
be as under:
(i) In the case of officers who are one step below the Board level, the individual
grievance may be taken up with the concerned Director.
(ii) Officers reporting directly to the Chief Executive may approach him for resolving
their grievances.
5. Composition
The C.M.D. of the organization may determine the composition and tenure of the Grievance
Committee.
• In the case of multi-unit organizations the C.M.D. may constitute Grievance
Committees at the Regional level and also nominate the Deciding Authorities. However,
if the supervisors/officers in such Regional units are not satisfied with the decision of
the Deciding Authority, then they may prefer an appeal to the Grievance. Redressal
Committee at the Headquarters. The committee should consider and take a decision on
the grievances within a period of one month failing which it should be brought to the
notice of the C.M.D. of the organization. The Grievance Committee should meet at
least once a month.
6. Management
(a) The Staff member/officer shall bring up his grievance immediately and in any case
within a period of 3 months of its occurrence.
(b) If the grievance arises out of an order given by the management the said order shall
be complied with before the staff member/officer concerned invokes the procedure laid
down herein for redressal of his grievance.

28
(c) Grievance pertaining to or arising out of the following shall not come under the
purview of the grievance procedure:
(i) Confidential Reports;
(ii) Promotions including DPC’s minutes and decisions;
(iii) Where the grievance does not relate to an individual employee or officer; and
(iv) In the case of any grievance arising out of discharge or dismissal of a staff
member or officer.
(d) Grievances pertaining to or arising out of disciplinary action or appeal against such
action shall be channeled to the competent authority as laid down under the Conduct,
Discipline and Appeal Rules of the organization and in such cases the grievance
redressal procedure will not apply.
(e) All grievances referred to the Grievance Committee shall be entered in a Register to
be maintained for the purpose by the designated officer(s). The number of grievances,
settled or pending, will be reported to the C.M.D. every month.
Findings of the Committee on Its Study Visits
3.15 After having the detailed and intensive discussions with the managements of the above
mentioned Public Sector Banks, Companies and the statutory bodies, the Committee observes the
following:
1. People are not aware that a system of grievance redressal exists in many of the
Government departments and its subordinate offices where they are required to visit.
2. Wide publicity to create awareness regarding the redressal mechanism among people
is the need of the hour.
3. Every office should display its organizational structure at a prominent place,
indicating names of officers and their functions, particularly in respect of the
grievance redressal officers.
4. Grievance handling system should be made simple and responsive.
5. As far as possible spoken language (State-wise) should be used in the banks, and the
Government bodies.
6. Application/complaint forms should be users friendly.
7. Time limits should be fixed for approval or rejection of applications.
8. There is a need to bring about a total change in the behaviour of public servants
towards redressal of public grievances.
9. Citizen’s Charters are not properly drafted and followed in Banks, PSUs, Trusts etc.
10. Redressal mechanism should be encouraged to provide feedback periodically for the
management of systemic reform.
11. The State Governments could consider setting up independent watchdog committees
at the district/block/village levels by involving civil society organisations, which are
acknowledged to be closer to the populace.
12. At all levels of the Government, time-bound redressal of public grievances must be
made mandatory.

29
13. Receipt of the grievances should be promptly acknowledged, and reply to the
complainant should follow the redressal without any delay.
14. This receipt-redressal-reply cycle should be kept going on at all levels in a
continuous quality improvement (CQI) mode.
15. The DPG should be authorized to ensure this across the board in the Government
offices.
16. All departments and Government offices must be made accountable for timely
redressal of public grievances under their jurisdiction.
17. The public grievances database should be analyzed at regular intervals to
understand the nature, volume, causes, etc., of the complaints and to give
meaningful feedback to the departments/authorities concerned. This exercise will
also help in keeping a finger on the pulse of the state of affairs in the State, which
could prove to be a valuable input in ensuring good governance.
The Committee impress upon the Government to take note of the Committee’s
abovementioned findings and desires Government to suitably incorporate them in redressal
mechanism of the Government sector Companies, Trusts and the Banks.
Central Ministries and Departments
3.16 In order to understand the efficacy of PGRM in Ministries and Departments of Government
of India, the Committee heard the Secretary and senior officers of six Ministries/Departments
in its meetings held on 4th October, 2007, 1st November, 2007, 12th December, 2007,
19th December, 2007, 31st January, 2008.
Ministry of Health and Familv Welfare
3.17 In its meeting held on 4th October, 2007 with the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, the Chairman of the Committee had made the following observation:—
“...today, the Committee has to consider two issues. One of them is the ‘Public Grievance
Redressal Mechanism’, which is available in all the Departments and therefore, we are
calling all the Secretaries to know their opinion on this aspect. You know their opinion on
this aspect. You know that if the various programmes that the Government runs from time
to time are no implemented properly, then there will be some grievances that would come
up. If people are well informed about these programmes of the Government, then naturally
some grievances would be there. Therefore, if the delivery system is perfect, then whatever
programmes that the Government implements for the welfare of the people, it would benefit
them. But if the delivery system is not that efficient, then whatever the Government plans
or anything which it does would not reach the people and the people would say that this
Government is not doing anything for them. Therefore, the main thing is the delivery
system. Now, from the public redressal mechanism, we can find out how this delivery system
works. When a person is denied certain things to which he is eligible under some
programme run by the Government, he immediately complains to the concerned organisation
or the designated officers as per the direction of the Ministry of Personnel. They have to
look into the grievances and see that the problem is solved. If they are simply keeping the
petition in their record and sending a reply regretting that they can’t do anything, or, if they
are not replying at all, then it tells upon the Government. An officer in the Health
Department can simply spoil the entire system of the Government by no answering a
question. Therefore, we directly want to get the opinion of the Secretaries of the various

30
Ministries/Departments as to whether we can have a statute for this purpose like the Right
to Information Act. As you know the Right to Information Act has come into force very
recently. So, some people have used it for their benefit and some people have misused it.
But it is only giving the desired information to the people it is not giving redressal to the
people. However, many people feel that the Right to Information Act is helping them in
seeking the redressal also. I think, it is a wrong notion which has spread through the media
and also through the people. Therefore, the Committee prima facie feels that there should
be some statutory support for the Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism whereby we can
have a system perfectly made for this purpose. At the lowest level, the concerned officers
can immediately attend to the grievance. If they cannot do anything, they can, at least, give
a reply specifying the reasons why they could not redress the grievance. In that case, the
aggrieved person can resort to the inbuilt mechanism of First Appeal, and there also, if it
is not properly redressed, then he can go in for filing the writ petition. A lot of writ
petitions are pending throughout India because of non-reply at certain official levels. That
is the main issue. They are hearing the writ petitions and the Judges are sying that within
six weeks they should file a detailed reply or that they would hear them. Due to this,
umpteen cases are pending throughout India. Therefore, we want to reduce the number of
cases against Government also...”
3.18 The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare while deposing before the Committee
informed that the Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism was functioning in the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare as well as in the attached offices of the Directorate General of Health Services
and other Subordinate Offices of CGHS (both in Delhi and other Regions), Central Government
Hospitals and PSUs falling under the Ministry for implementation of various Guidelines issued from
time to time by the Government of India through the Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions.
3.19 Joint Secretary in the Department of Health has been designated as Nodal Officer for Public
Grievances relating to the Department and Director in the Department of Health has been working
as Public Grievance Officer. Similarly other organisations under the Ministry have also senior level
officials functioning as Public Grievance Officers.
3.20 Grievances are received either directly from the Public or through the Cabinet Secretariat
(Directorate of Public Grievances), Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances,
Department of Pension and Pensioners Welfare, Prime Minister’s Officer, President’s Secretariat etc.
3.21 The following types of Grievances are received in this Ministry:
• Service Matter.
• Appointments on compassionate grounds.
• Reimbursement of Medical Claims.
• CGHS facilities.
• Non-availability of sufficient medicines in Government Hospitals and CGHS Dispensaries
• Deficient services in CGHS dispensaries and Hospitals.
• Misbehavior by Medical Officers, Para Medical Official and other staff in CGHS
dispensaries and Government Hospitals.
• Delay in Payment of Pension and other retirement benefits after retirement.
3.22 Most of the grievances received are related to the CGHS cases and Medical treatment in
hospitals. They include non-payment of full reimbursement of the expenditure incurred for
treatment in Private Hospital etc.

31
Ministry of Mines
3.23 The Ministry of Mines has under its administrative control, 2 subordinate offices and 3
public sector undertakings. The Chief Executives of the PSUs have been entrusted with the
responsibility of strengthening the grievances redressal machinery by designating senior level
officers to look after the job and to report directly to the respective Chief Executive/head.
• PSUs and Subordinate Offices submit quarterly progress report of grievance cases to
the Ministry.
• Secretary (Mines) reviews pending cases of public grievance during quarterly
performance review meetings.
• Joint Secretary reviews pending cases of public grievance on quarterly basis with
Grievance Officers of PSUs and Subordinate Offices.
• The Ministry has displayed the cases of public grievances on the website of the
Ministry and these cases are updated every fortnight. The website has been made more
user-friendly and can be accessed by any person to get the up date of grievance.
3.24 In order to obviate the tendency of Government employees to seek outside help for
redressal of grievances relating to normal service matters, the Government issued instructions in
December, 1988 for designating Staff Grievance Officers in the Central Ministries/Departments and
their attached and subordinate offices to deal effectively and equitably with the grievances relating
to service matters, like fair promotion, proper medical facilities, granting timely pensionary benefits
etc. The Ministry and the proper subordinate offices including the PSUs under its administrative
control have accordingly designated such Staff Grievance Officers also.
3.25 The Ministry has introduced CPGRAMS system which enables the PGOs to register the
grievances received by Post/hand and also to monitor the grievances received from the nodal
agency/higher authority online. CPGRAMS enables the PG officers to forward the grievances to
multiple organisations, if the grievances pertains to more than one organization. CPGRAMS helps
generate monitoring and query reports as per the requirement of the concerned Ministry/
Department/Government organisation for effective monitoring of pending grievances. It facilitates
the organisation for effective monitoring of pending grievances. It facilitates the generation of
automated letters like acknowledgment, final reply etc., for communication to the concerned.
Finally the system is flexible enough to be extended to multiple levels below as per the requirement
of the concerned Ministry/Department/Government organisation for speedy redress of grievances.
3.26 PSUs and subordinate organisations have been given ‘username’ and ‘password’ and these
organisations have introduced the same and have started working on the CPGRAMS. Secretary
(Mines) has reviewed the PG cases shown in the name of Ministry and directions have been issued
to these organisations to finalise the pending cases on priority.
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
3.27. The Committee called upon the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs to depose before
the Committee on 12th December, 2007 on the issue of working of Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism. The Secretary, in his deposition before the Committee informed the Committee that the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs generally receives Grievances on following subjects:
• Registry functions—time taken for service delivery.
• Obtaining Director Identification Number—Mismatch of names/addresses.

32
• Investors’ complaints relating to non-redemption of deposits, non-receipt of annual
reports, non-receipt of dividend, etc.
• Complaints regarding mis-management, falsification of accounts etc.
3.28 During the period April, 2007 to November, 2007, the Ministry received 38,690 grievances
relating to registry/DIN services. Under MCA21, there is a mechanism to promptly redress such
grievances. Each grievance is allotted a ticket number, generated online, 31239 grievances have
been redressed during this period. Under the system, such complaints are normally redressed in a
period of 2-4 days. The MCA21 system has resulted in reduction in the number of grievances
pertaining to delivery of services due to enhancement in efficiency.
3.29 Investor Protection Cell (IPC) was set up in 1993 for redressal of investors’ complaints. It
provides for online system for filing of grievances. A nodal team has been set up in each ROC/RD
office. The IPC takes up each grievance with the concerned company and forwards the reply to
complainant after redressal of the grievance. Out of the 903 complaints received from
various investors by the Investor Protection Cell of this Ministry during the period April, 2007 to
November, 2007, 332 complaints were redressed. The average time taken in redressal of grievances
of this category is about 2 months.
3.30 The Ministry has identified specific section/officer to handle such grievances. Action is
initiated in 7-10 days to examine each grievance in consultation with RD/ROCs concerned. The
reply is sent to complainant after redressal of grievance. In this category, 127 complaints were
redressed out of 137 received. Since these redressals are dependent on the response of the
companies/ROC concerned, the time taken for redressal is about 1-2 months.
3.31 Each grievance is allocated complaint number, which forms the basis for monitoring.
Periodic reports are generated and are looked into by senior officers. Further, monthly meetings are
taken by the Secretary, MCA where all such cases are reviewed.
3.32 A website www.investorhelpline.in with the funding from Investor Education and Protection
Fund (IEPF) has been launched on September 8, 2006. The website provides a free of charge,
interactive, internet-based service to the investors for assistance in grievance redressal. It provides
for online filing of grievance/online status to complainant and reply to each complainant is sent
after redressal.
3.33 The Committee was also apprised of the status of Grievance handled till October 31, 2007
as under:
Total valid grievances registered 3690
Grievances redressed 1092
Grievances unresolved as matter sub-judice 947
Grievances returned undelivered 399
Average time taken for redressal 98 days
Ministry of Tribal Affairs
3.34 The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 12th December, 2007.
The Committee was informed that the Ministry has designated one of the Joint Secretaries as the
Director of Grievances of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and his details such as room number,
Telephone Number, etc. have been widely circulated. The Director of Grievances also holds regular
meetings with officers/staff and sometimes with their representatives to hear their problems and
grievances.

33
3.35 Even though the Ministry was created in October, 1999, due to shortage of space, the
Ministry has not been able to establish a single window system at the Reception or elsewhere in
the Ministry for receipt of the grievances. Efforts are, however, on to establish a single window
system for receipt of grievance/RTI applications. In any case, the Ministry is not receiving many
grievance representations from the public, directly or through the Department of Administrative
Reforms. During the last three years, the Ministry has received only five grievance representations,
as per the details given below:
Year Nos. of grievances received
2005 Nil
2006 Nil
2007 Five (one through the Ministry of Environment and Forests and four through
Department of Administrative Reforms). All the five grievance representations
received during 2007 have been disposed off.
Ministry of Information And Broadcasting
3.36 The Ministry is sensitized to redress grievances received from public and employees directly
or through Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances in a responsible and
effective manner through the following:
• A Grievance Cell under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Admn.) is functioning in
the main Ministry.
• Complaint Committee has been constituted to deal with the complaints of sexual
harassment of female employees in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
• Similar Cells have been set up in all the attached and subordinate offices.
• Citizen’s Charter has been formulated by all the Media Units/Autonomous Organisation/
Public Sector Undertakings under the control of this Ministry.
• E-mail address of the Grievances Cell of the Ministry has already been registered for
grievance monitoring.
• The pendency of the Grievance is monitored at the highest level.
3.37 Grievance petitions, emanating from Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances, Department of Public Grievances, Cabinet Secretariat, Department of Pension and
Pensioner’s Welfare and the individuals concerned when received in the Ministry is registered in
the Grievance cell. An officer of the rank of Joint Secretary has been designated as the Head of
the Internal Grievance Redressal Machinery of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. At
present, Joint Secretary (Policy, PG and Admn.) has been functioning as the Head of the Internal
Grievance Redressal Machinery. The petitions thus received after registration are processed in the
computerized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (PGRAMS). All the petitions
received are acknowledged. The acknowledgement letter contains registration number of the
grievance. The grievance petition is sent to the concerned media units/offices/divisions for final
time bound disposal with the direction to send a final reply to the petitioner within the approved
time frame. These petitions are monitored to keep track of their disposal by the concerned. In all
the media units, an officer of the rank of Joint Secretary/Director/Deputy Secy. has been
designated as Public Grievances officer of the concerned media units. In important cases, the heads
of concerned media units/offices are also called for discussion for quick disposal. The position
regarding final disposal of petition is also intimated to Department of Administrative and Public

34
Grievances, Department of Public Grievances, Cabinet Secretariat, Department of Pension and
Pensioner’s Welfare and the individual concerned.
3.38 The guidelines received from time to time regarding redressal of public grievances/activating
machinery for redressal of public grievances etc. from Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances, Department of Public Grievances, Cabinet Secretariat, Department of Pension
and Pensioner’s Welfare etc. are circulated to all media units/autonomous bodies etc. functioning
under this Ministry.
3.39 As regards the time-frame of redressal of the grievances and details regarding grievances
petitions received in this Ministry during 2006 and 2007 (14 Dec., 2007), the Committee was
apprised as under:
A. Time-frame
Sl.No. Subject/Issue Time
1. Issue of acknowledgement/interim reply to the petitioner 2 weeks
2. Forwarding of the grievances/petition to the concerned 2 weeks
authority
3. Final disposal of transferred/referred cases by the 3 months
concerned Ministry/Department/State and time-limit for
informing the position of the outcome.
4. Cases referred to Complaint Committee on “Sexual 3 months
Harassment of Women at Workplace”.
B. Petitions received in this Ministry during 2006 and 2007
Year No. of No. of Pending Rem arks
grievance grievance
petitions petitions
received disposed off
Pending with various media units/
2006 88 57 31 divisions.
They have been reminded
periodically to dispose off these
petitions.
2007 95 41 54 Pending with various media units/
(upto 14th divisions.
Dec., 2007) They have been reminded
periodically to dispose off these
petitions.
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
3.40 The mandate of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is to work towards the
mainstreaming of the disadvantaged and marginalised sections of the society such as the Scheduled
Castes, Backward Classes, aged persons, persons with disabilities and victims of substance abuse.
The objective is to empower the target groups through their educational, economic and social
development and build self-reliance and self esteem.

35
3.41 The Ministry has a ‘Facilitation Centre and Public Grievances Cell’ to look after the
grievances of the public and the employees of the Ministry. Director in-charge of administration in
the Ministry is looking after the Public Grievances Cell. This is a single window system for Public
Grievances, RTI Applications and Facilitation to information seekers.
3.43 Presently, the Ministry is dealing with the grievances manually. The grievance petitions are
entered into a register and the petitions are forwarded to the concerned organisations/officers for
their redressal with a direction to reply within three months. Necessary follow up action is
invariably taken. Now, the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances has
developed a software called ‘Central Public Grievances Redressal and Monitoring System’
(CPGRAMS) and has trained one official of the Ministry and one official of the NIC unit of the
Ministry to operate the software. The process of operationalising the software is underway and it
is expected to start functioning shortly.
Number of applications received during 2006-07 126
Number of applications received during 2007-08 (till date) 71
Sample cases
I. Grievance of Programme Executives
3.44 On 19th December, 2007, the Committee met the representatives of Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati. During the course of deliberations, the Committee raised the
issue of problems faced by the employees working as ‘Programme Executives’ in the Ministry.
Inspite of working hard and honestly for the institution for 21 long years they did not get
promotion or financial benefits. The Committee felt that due to such problems the employees lose
faith in the institution to solve his/her grievance and take the shelter of the courts. The Committee
feels that the problem/grievance which could easily be solved by the Ministry by taking appropriate
measures at the right time have resulted in things went hay wire because due attention was not
paid and the situation got worse. According to the Ministry the reason for delay was that they
don’t have the powers to recruit/hold DPCs because of Expenditure Refoms Committee and Geeta
Krishnan Committee’s recommendations and they have to depend upon other agencies like approval
by the Finance Ministry in case of promotions and SSC, UPSC, DoPT to fill up or promote their
employees. The Committee then called all the four departments under one roof to settle their issues.
Had it been done earlier by the Ministry lots of aggrieved employees would have been discouraged
to take the shelter of courts and would have reduced some burden on the courts. The Committee
then impressed upon all the Departments to use electronic means in identifying vacancies, sending
it to the recruitment agencies etc. The Committee felt that these steps would not only save lots
of time but also help in retaining precious talent.
II. Inordinate delay in holding DPC by UPSC
3.45 The Committee came to know that the DPC of employees (which are required to be done
by UPSC) in respect of many departments were pending at different stages due to one reason or
the other. In order to address the issue, the Committee called the Secretary, DoPT and the
Secretary, UPSC to know about the reasons for delay, as considerable time had already been lapsed
due to which the promotions of different employees working in various departments were held up.
The Committee met the representatives of UPSC and DoPT and impressed upon them to hold DPCs
and try to reduce the time gap between DPCs and promotions. After the Committee’s intervention
it has come to the notice of the Committee through media that things have started working in the
right direction and the DoPT has called more than 70 Departments to clear the DPC matters and

36
UPSC has also started cooperating with it. The Committee therefore feels that lack of
coordination between various agencies departments are the reasons for delay.  The
Committee impresses upon them to prepare all the documents through e-governance so that
the particulars of the DPC could be formulated electronically. The Committee is pleased and
satisfied to note this development, but also felt that things would have been much better
if the DPCs would have been conducted at the right time.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
3.46 The Committee is of the view that generally, people are not aware that a system of
grievance redressal exists in many of the Government departments and its subordinate
offices where they are required to visit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that wide
publicity through national, regional and local media as well as through electronic media to
create awareness regarding the redressal mechanism among people is the need of the day
particularly for the weaker sections of the society, women and those challenged with
handicaps and also the people living in remote areas. The Committee also feels that every
Government office should not only display its organizational structure at a prominent place,
indicating names of officers and their functions with location of their rooms, particularly in
respect of the grievance redressal officers but also the wide publicity needs to be given
through periodic advertisements, in media, publishing and distributing the bulletins,
pamphlets on this issue and putting up relevant information on its website. The Committee
feels that such steps will certainly help and depict to the people, friendly interface of the
Government.
3.47 The Committee also recommends that grievance-handling system should be accessible,
simple, quick, fair, responsive and effective. It is not uncommon to hear from people
complaining against harassment, waste of time and money, repeated visits to offices etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that every Ministry/Department in the Union/State
Government/UTs should have a dynamic public grievance redressal mechanism in place with
special focus on the information delivery system. The Committee further feels that the
language and the content of various application/complaint forms should be user friendly and
should be widely available in various outlets, like post offices, on websites for downloading etc.
In addition, the applications or petitions should be acknowledged through acknowledgement
slips.
3.48 The Committee is of the view that time-limits should be fixed for approval or
rejection of applications on the basis of well-publicized and uniformly applied criteria. Also,
redressal should be done within a reasonable time period as prescribed for each stage of
redressal without indulging in lengthy technicalities of the procedure. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that due attention should be given to timely redressal of grievances
lodged. It is also of the considered view that officers responsible for delay should be made
accountable and suitable action taken against them.
3.49 The Committee feels that improvements as suggested in the Committee findings
above in the already existing set up of public grievances redressal mechanism can work to
the satisfaction of any citizen if we bring about behavioural change in attending to each and
every grievance. The work becomes all the more important in those departments which have
direct dealing with the public like banks, post offices, passport office, dispensaries etc. The
Committee also feels that monitoring is one of the most important aspect of PGR system
and there must be a separate unit in each and every department which caters to the needs
of the citizens or a computerized system like PGRAMS should be used in each and every
departments so that a grievance can also be lodged online and a number is given to the
aggrieved so that he can see the status of its grievance online.

37
3.50 The Committee further feels that a wrong notion has entered into the mind of the
public that the Right to Information Act is an instrument to solve their grievances by
giving/providing them information written/oral required by them. The Committee feels that
this wrong notion needs to be changed because information seeking is altogether different
from the redressal of grievances and need to be looked in a different manner. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should immediately take some urgent
steps like taking the help of NGOs working in the field of Right to Information, print and
electronic media, organising nukkad natak in the rural and urban area on the subject to
educate people about their rights etc. The Committee also recommends that in order to
solve the problems of the people, the Government must give statutory backing to the Public
Grievances Redressal Mechanism on same line that of the Right to Information Act, the
both will work parallel to each other and help in solving the grievances.
3.51 The Committee, further recommends that the Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism
should be envisaged in a statutory form on the line of the Right to Information Act, 2005
which would make it mandatory on all State Governments/UTs/Ministries/Departments/
Organisations to pursue the grievance till their final disposal. The Committee also
recommends that like Right to Information Act in the PGRM system there should be a time
limit of 30 days and provision of fine on delay should be there.
3.52 The Committee feels that each Department/PSU/Bank Trust etc. is having their
internal system for redressal of grievances of its personnel but it is not working
satisfactorily and that is the reason that non settlement of grievances result in filing of
petitions in the courts on petty issues. Our judicial system which is already overburdened
by over 3 crore cases pending in various courts of the country contains a large segment of
cases on small and petty issues which could have been settled by the parent Department/
organizations had their been a good and mature internal grievance redressal system there.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that internal grievance redressal methods available
in various Ministries/Departments and the organisations should be strengthened or
restructured in a way like both the representative of the organisation and the aggrieved
party must be present before the designated authority and the grievance is settled then and
there.
3.53 The Committee feels that if the grievance of an individual is settled then and there
then one thing is for sure that it will certainly result in decline in filing of cases and there
will be a win win situation both for the aggrieved and the organization and resultantly the
judicial system will be less burdened. It will automatically reduce a large number of cases
and motivate others to settle their grievances through the internal machinery itself. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that innovative methods like settlement of grievance
through video conferencing where the officials and the aggrieved both can see and speak
to each other can be used in the redressal of grievances.
3.54 The Committee is of the considered view that there is a need to bring about a total
change in the attitude/behaviour of public servants or in other words, the mind set towards
redressal of public grievances at all levels and to pinpoint responsibility for action against
grievances of the people. The Committee also feels that one step towards bringing in
attitudinal change lies in improving the motivational levels of public servants through
rewarding good work and awarding effective suggestions and punishing the deliberate
negligence. The Committee refers to the Himachal Pradesh Specific Corrupt Practices Act
which equates omissions on the part of officers to discharge their statutory and bona fide
duties with a corrupt practice. The Committee feels a legal support is essential requirement
to achieve the objective of PGRM. The Committee therefore, observes if we are able to

38
change our behaviour/attitude we can win hearts and in turn help the banks and the PSUs
to be stronger in today’s cut throat competition.
3.55 The Committee also feels that monitoring is one of the most important aspect of
PGR system and there must be a separate unit in each and every Ministry/department
which caters to the needs of the citizens or a computerized system like PGRAMS should be
used in each and every Ministry/departments so that a grievance can also be lodged online
and a number is given to the aggrieved so that he can see the status of its grievance online.
3.56 The Committee is of the opinion that the guidelines issued by the Union Ministry are
not properly adhered to in many of the PSUs as well as the banks. Some of the
organizations were not even aware of revised guidelines which were issued from time to
time. The Committee feels that such a lackadaisical approach was the main reason behind
weak PGR system. The Committee is of the view that here the role of administrative
ministries becomes all the more important and they have to see that the instructions,
guidelines so issued are properly followed.
3.57 There is therefore a need for monitoring at the level of Administrative Ministry to
ensure and strengthen the PGRM in bodies under their control. The Committee
recommends that adherence to the guidelines/circular issued by the Government must be
ensured by both the Administrative Ministries as well as the PSU/Bank and a feedback must
be obtained by DARPG from each of the administrative Ministries so that a cross check can
be there to see that the instructions issued are followed properly. The Committee observes
that this is a continous process and yearly report must be sent to the Government of India
by the administrative Ministries to check the instructions issued by the Government are
complied with.
3.58 The Committee taking into account the huge number of cases, mostly trivial in
nature and are pending in the courts in which Government of India is a party and filed by
the employees of the Government and the people suffering mainly due to unfair and
ineffective service, being provided by the Government departments and its other
organizations feels that we still carry the colonial legacy. In colonial days the notion was
that if you were not satisfied, go and knock the door of judiciary for the redressal of
grievances. This attitude or mind set has to be changed. Otherwise the cases would continue
to pile up in courts and people would continue to suffer. The Committee strongly feels that
an efficient, quick and fair PGRM will reduce the number of cases being filed in the various
courts across the country. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Personnel, PG and Pensions (DoPT) should impress upon all the Ministries/Departments etc.
to further improve, sensitize and strengthen the internal grievance redressal mechanism so
that the grievances could be redressed by the Ministry/Departments but the burden on the
courts is also lessened.
3.59 The Committee further recommends that Government of India should give rewards
to those Ministries/Departments which are least involved in court cases and has taken some
good and innovative methods to strengthen the system. The employees working in the
Public Grievance office should be suitably rewarded or given promotion if he or she has
done a good job in handling grievance cases and making the aggrieved employees withdraw
their cases from the court and settling it by arbitration/conciliation methods.
3.60 The Committee is pleased to note that the CPGRAMS has been introduced and is
working in all Ministries and Departments. The Committee further feels that the
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances may pursue the matter with
those Ministries who have yet to fully implement the PGRAMS and take expeditious steps
in this regard to install the same without further delay.

39
3.61 The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training) should impress upon all the Ministries/Departments
to issue such guidelines to all the Public Sector Banks/Public Sector Undertakings which
falls under their purview to include four items namely Implementation of Right to
Information Act, Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism, Citizen’s Charter and
Reservation Policy under Corporate Social Responsibility in their Annual Report so that one
can have the idea about the institution and adherence to all the Acts/Guidelines/Circulars
issued by the Ministry from time to time.

40
CHAPTER-IV
RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005 AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL
MECHANISM
4.1 The Right to Information Act has brought a revolution in the working of the governmental
institutions. Day by day people are getting aware of their rights and Right to Information Act has
given a power in the hands of a normal citizenry to check the working of the system by way of
asking governmental bodies to provide information which was otherwise hard to get in the past.
Nowadays more and more people have started using RTI to get information about the status of
their applications and no doubt they have started getting information within a prescribed time limit
of 30 days by merely paying the nominal fees.
4.2 The Committee has been instrumental in bringing out the RTI Act in its present form. No
doubt the Right to Information Act has become a weapon in the hand of the common people to
get information but redressal of a grievance or a complaint is totally different from getting
information. A common man is happy to get information but is ignorant that merely getting
information doesn’t mean its redressal. Redressal of a grievance can be possible only by way of
‘public grievance redressal mechanism’ and that system has to operate in each and every Ministry/
Department/PSU/Bank/Trust etc. After examining PSUs/Banks. The Committee felt that like Right
to Information had been legislated upon and become an Act in the same way Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism should be given statutory backing, only then the whole process of getting
information and its redressal could be completed.
4.3 During its visit to different parts of the country to have on the spot assessment of the
implementation of RTI Act, the Committee had interacted with various PSUs and Banks and sought
their opinion on whether RTI also helps the redressal of the grievances and whether Public
Grievance Redressal Mechanism supported by a Statute would be effective in redressing the
problem of a petitioner in a better way? The response of some of the organisations are given
below:
(a) Paradip Port Trust:— Right to Information Act provides guidelines for issue of information
to an applicant. It does not redress the grievance. Since there is a separate mechanism and body
for redressal of public grievances, it is not desirable to combine redressal mechanism with RTI Act.
RTI Act should be limited to information only. The Redressal Mechanism is available in the
administrative level, judicial level and through Parliamentary Committee.
(b) Northern Coalfields Limited:—  Yes, if the public grievance redressal mechanism is made
a statutory law, it will provide an alternative forum for redressal of grievances which at the long
run will give relief to the citizens.
(c) Bharat Heary Electricals Limited:—  RTI Act is meant to provide information to public
whereas Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism is meant to resolve conflict/disputes. Therefore,
both should be separate.
(d) HSCC (India) Limited:— The RTI is an enactment for providing information to citizens
and it is required to be made understood to all through increased awareness about its usefulness.
Public grievance redressal mechanism as a law could also help the public at large whenever a
petitioner is facing genuine difficulties in resolving his issues.
40

41
(e) Steel Authority of India (Rourkela Steel Plant):—  Seeking information under the RTI
Act is different from redressal of a grievance. The grievance redressal mechanism if made
statutory, possibly it may help.
(f) National Aluminium Company Limited:—  Yes, the RTI Act, 2005 provides only the
information available with the Public Authority in the material form. It does not provide for any
mechanism for redressal of grievances, whatsoever, of an information seeker. The Public Grievance
Redressal Mechanism if made a statutory law will definitely provide an alternative mechanism for
redressal of grievances of an information seeker in a better way.
4.4 In support of its foregoing recommendations/observations, The Committee, strongly
recommends that the Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism should be envisaged in a
statutory form on the line of the Right to Information Act, 2005 which would make it
mandatory on all State Governments/UTs/Ministries/Departments/Organisations to pursue
the grievance till their final disposal. The Committee also reiterates that like Right to
Information Act in the PGRM system there should be a time limit of 30 days and provision
of fine on delay should be there.

MINUTES

44

45
45
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 14th December, 2005, in
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES
I. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances)
1. Shri P.I. Suvrathan, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shymalima Bannerjee, Director
II. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
1. (Department of Consumer Affairs)
Shrimati Alka Sirohi, Additional Secretary

46
2. (Bureau of Indian Standard)
1. Shri S.P. Sharma, Director General
2. Shri Rakesh Verma, Additional Director General
2.1 The Chairman informed Members about the presentation proposed to be made by the
representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and the Department
of Consumer Affairs on the different aspects relating to “Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism”.
They made their presentation on “Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism” under the broad subject
of ‘Administrative Reform’, covering the issue of implementation of citizen's charters and Right to
Information Act, 2005.
2.2 They apprised the Committee of the current initiatives of Government of India in the
direction of implementation of Citizen’s Charters and Right to Information Act, as effective
measures to redress the public grievances. To make citizens the centre point of service delivery,
to achieve prescribed standards, for benchmark quality of service delivery, and to make Grievance
Redressal Mechanism more effective, a Citizen’s Charter Mark Model had been prepared. Its
objective would be to focus on Government Citizen Interface and improving the quality of public
services delivered. According to them, in countries like United Kingdom they had a Charter Scheme
and in USA they have been following U.S. Excellence Model to cater to the needs of its citizens,
where the concept of ‘Consumer is the King’ has been in practice. Public Grievance Redressal
Mechanism exists in all the Ministries/Departments of Government of India, with designated Public
Grievances officers to redress the grievances and their reoccurrence.
2.3 The Representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs informed the Committee that
they have worked with Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances to develop
this model, which was being tested on various Departments and Non Governmental Organisations,
and was found to be perfect to redress the grievances. The work of the Bureau was actually to
set standards for compliance. They mentioned that out of 40 Departments observed under this
scheme, only one, i.e. Delhi Metro, was up to the prescribed standard.
2.4 Some Members of the Committee were of the opinion that development of the new technique
of redressing Public Grievances sounds good, but was practically not possible in India. In India,
an ordinary citizen could never be in a position to meet the Superintendent of Police of his area
and therefore, the question of redressing his grievances could appear to be a distant goal. The
police department's image was very dismal, as far as redressing of grievances was concerned
therefore, there was a need to change their attitude towards citizens, only then this Charter Mark
Scheme could be fruitful. The Chairman impressed upon the representatives the need to set certain
ISO standards for services also.
3. The Committee then took up for review the progress regarding examination of the subjects
of ‘Electoral Reforms’, ‘Judicial Reforms’ and ‘Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism’, as a part
of the study of ‘Administrative Reforms’. The Chairman informed the Members that the views of
political parties on “Electoral Reforms” have been sought. The Committee was already in the
process of examination of implementation of Legal Aid programmes, as envisaged under the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987, and being monitored by National Legal Services Authority (NALSA).
“Working of CBI” was also under examination of the Committee. For in-depth study/examination
of the issues pertaining to “Electoral Reforms” and “Judicial Reforms” and to make an assessment
and appraisal of implementation of the Right to Information Act and the Citizens’ Charters, it would
be appropriate to interact with the senior level functionaries of Central Government/State
Governments/local bodies and of the State Legal Services Authorities, as well as to site visit the
Lok Adalats and Legal Aid Camps, being organized in States and (iii) hold discussions with the
managements of some Public Sector Undertakings. For this purpose, the Committee decided to visit

47
Chennai, Bangalore, Mumbai and Goa in January, 2006 and Kolkata, Bhubaneshwar, Visakhapatnam,
Hyderabad and Thiruvananthapuram in February, 2006. The Committee authorised its Chairman to
finalise details of the above visits and approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for his permission
for the Committee’s visits.
4. The Committee, then, adjourned at 5.35 
P.M.

48
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16th October, 2006, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Dr. P.C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
5. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Shri M. Ramadass
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
2. The Committee took up for discussion the Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism as
available in the Central Government offices and the Public Sector Undertakings. The Chairman of
the Committee suggested that before preparing a report on the subject, the officials of the various
Departments of the Government of India may be asked to appear before the Committee and apprise
it about the working of the Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism in their Departments.
3. The Chairman further stated that the Committee should be particular about the matter/
nature of the Public Grievances and should confine itself to the matters which were of general
nature. He referred to the grievances of Bhopal Gas Victims and the interlinking of rivers at the
national level. The Chairman opined that the Committee could make use of the novel ideas/
suggestions coming through such public grievance petitions to make tangible and implementable
recommendations/observation and also to create sensitivity in the Government departments in such
matters.
4. One of the Hon’ble Members opined that public grievances system had not been functioning
properly and the Government officials have apathy towards such matters. The general public do
48

49
not get satisfactory replies to their grievances from the Government officials. The Member referred
to the Right to Information Act and stated that in spite of the Act, the information sought for is
kept on hold. As there had been no penal provisions provided for in the Act for those who are
entrusted with the duty to supply the information resulting in the apathy and neglect.
5. Members were of the unanimous opinion that the Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism
was nothing but a farce as there was no statutory support to it. They suggested calling some select
Ministries to find out what sort of mechanism they were having in their departments for redressing
public grievances.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.

50
50
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 4th October, 2007, in Committee Room ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Raj Babbar
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary;
2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Director General of Health Services;
3. Dr. Shiv Lal, Additional Director General of Health Services;
4. Shri Vineet Chawdhry, Joint Secretary;
5. Shri D. Panda, Joint Secretary;
6. Dr. (Shrimati) Anita Nanda, Director, Central Government Health Scheme;
7. Dr. Ramesh Anand, Additional Director, Central Government Health Scheme;
*** Relates to some other matter.

51
*** Relate to some other matters.
8. Dr. Ajay Agarwala, Director;
9. Dr. Jagdish Prasad, Medical Superintendent, Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi; and
10. Dr. N.K. Chaturvedi, Medical Superintendent, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital,
New Delhi.
III. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri C.B. Paliwal, Joint Secretary;
2. Shri P.K. Tripathi, Joint Secretary;
3. Shri Suresh Pal, Director; and
4. Shri K.G. Verma, Director.
• Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
Shri R.K. Gupta, Deputy Secretary.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare then made a presentation on the “Public
Grievances Redressal Mechanism” and “Backlog of reserved vacancies of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes/Other Backward Classes and Physically Handicapped” in the Ministry and the organisations and
Public Sector Undertakings falling thereunder. While elucidating upon the subject “Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism”, the Secretary stated that the bulk of the grievances received in the Ministry
are related to the Central Government Health Scheme and informed the Committee that considerable
efforts were made to streamline the system of dealing with public grievances. He deposed that an
officer in the rank of Joint Secretary is the nodal officer in respect of grievances and that the Indian
Public Health Standards had been formulated by the Ministry.
7. The Medical Superintendent Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital stated that a Chief Medical
Officer was designated along with the Welfare Commissioner, to analyse the complaints received
from the public and that the complaints are forwarded to the Grievances Redressal Committee
which is headed by a senior consultant. He also stated that appropriate punitive action is taken if
the findings of the Committee are against the staff of the hospital. The Joint Secretary, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare apprised the Committee that concerted efforts were made to
computerize the Out Patient Department (OPD) registration in the Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. Ram
Manohar Lohia Hospital and that the OPD attendance of different departments was monitored weekly.
8. Speaking on the subject “Backlog of reserved vacancies”, the Secretary stated that since there
was a ban on direct recruitment in 2001, a number of vacancies had built up and that concrete steps
to improve the situation were taken after the lifting of the ban in 2005 for technical posts.
9. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew) .
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The meeting was adjourned at 1.35 
P.M.

52
52
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 1st November, 2007, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Raj Babbar
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Prof. M. Ramadass
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
14. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Mines
1. Shri J.P. Singh, Secretary;
2. Shri V .K. Thakral, Joint Secretary;
3. Shri Gautam Dhar, Deputy Director General (Personnel)-Geological Survey of India;
4. Shri C.P. Ambesh, Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines;

53
5. Shri C.R. Pradhan, Chairman and Managing Director, National Aluminium Company Ltd.;
and
6. Shri R.K. Panigrahi, Chief Manager-Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd.
II. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Personnel and Training
1. Dr. Syamal Kumar Sarkar, Joint Secretary;
2. Shri K.G. Verma, Director; and
3. Shri G.S. Bothyal, Director (Department of Public Enterprises).
• Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
Shri Manish Mohan, Deputy Secretary.
2. The Secretary, Ministry of Mines while deposing before the Committee on the issue of
Backlog of reserved vacancies of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward Classes and
Physically Handicapped, apprised the Committee of the data regarding the backlog in various Public
Sector Undertakings(PSUs)/Subordinate Offices under the Ministry. He stated that the guidelines
issued by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions were scrupulously adhered to
in the Ministry. While speaking on the subject of Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism, he stated
that a Joint Secretary was the nodal officer for public grievances and that the disposal of
grievances in the subordinate offices were actively monitored in the quarterly and monthly
meetings. He informed the Committee that all the PSUs/Subordinate Offices under the Ministry had
introduced the Centralised Public Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System.
3. The witness responded to the points raised by the Committee.
(The witness then withdrew) .
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The meeting was adjourned at 4.11 
P.M.

54
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 12th December, 2007, in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Dr. P.C. Alexander
8. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri Satyanand Mishra, Secretary;
2. Dr. Syamal Kumar Sarkar, Joint Secretary;
3. Shri G.S. Bothyal, Director (Department of Public Enterprises); and
4. Shri K.G. V erma, Director.
• Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
Shri Manish Mohan, Deputy Secretary.
54

55
II. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
III. Shri Jose Verghese, former Vice Chairman, Central Administrative Tribunal.
IV. Ministry of Corporate Affairs
1. Shri Anurag Goel, Secretary;
2. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary;
3. Dr. Joseph Abraham, Economic Adviser; and
4. Shri Jaikant Singh, Director.
V. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
Dr. Bachittar Singh, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members/representatives of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Dr. Jose V erghese,
former Vice Chairman, Central Administrative Tribunal to the meeting of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman initiated the discussion on inclusion of Citizens’ Charter, Public
Grievance Redressal Mechanism, Backlog of reserved vacancies of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes/Other Backward Classes and Persons with Disabilities and Implementation of Right to
Information in the Annual Reports of all Departments/Ministries of Government of India. The
Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions enlightened the Committee that
most of the Ministries/Departments/Organisations had formulated their Citizens’ Charter and that the
Ministry would like the implementation of Citizens' Charter to be reflected in the Annual Reports.
He stated that the data regarding implementation of the Right to Information Act, 2005 (RTI) could
also be suitably reflected in the Annual Reports. Speaking on the issue of backlog of reserved
vacancies of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward Classes and Persons with
Disabilities, he apprised the Committee that though the instruction of the Department of Personnel
and Training to include details on reservation and Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism in Annual
Reports existed, many Ministries/Departments were not complying with it. He suggested that a
template format could be issued by the Ministry to all the Ministries/Departments and Organisations
with the instruction that their Annual Reports should be prepared in that format only. He informed
the Committee that the Ministry attached great importance to filling up reserved vacancies and that
it was monitored by the Government at the highest level.
3. Dr. Jose Varghese, while deposing before the Committee on the issue of backlog of reserved
vacancies of SCs/STs/OBCs and Persons with Disabilities, stated that the need of the hour was
simplified and consolidated guidelines which had become complicated due to interpretations given
by the Supreme Court of India. He emphasized the need to modify the modes through which
underprivileged people could gain improved access to advertisements of employment opportunities.
He was of the view that pre-employment and post-employment training should be given to such
people and that the implementation of reservation policies should be strictly monitored. He opined
that imposing sanctions and granting incentives commensurate with the percentage of compliance
of the reservation policy, when compared to the Central Standards would ensure implementation of
the reservation policy. He further opined that in the long term, the reservation system should be
replaced with “rules of preferences” wherein all eligible and available candidates from such
communities would be inducted.
4. The witnesses responded to the points raised by the Chairman and Members of the
Committee.

56
(The witnesses then withdrew) .
(The Committee then adjourned for tea and re-assembled at 12.30 P.M.)
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, while giving an overview of the Grievance
Redressal Mechanism existing in the Ministry, stated that they had introduced an e-governance
project called MCA-21, through which all services were delivered online. He apprised the
Committee that a system called ticket management existing in the Ministry captured any problem
which came or was raised from the system and handled them electronically. He stated that such
mechanisms reduced the time taken for service delivery significantly. He informed the Committee
that all the applications under the RTI Act were resolved and that there were 12 appeals with the
Chief Information Commission. A power point presentation was then made with the help of slides.
6. The representative of the Ministry apprised the Committee that an online Investor Protection
Cell was available for redressal of investors’ complaints. The Committee was informed of the
constraints faced by the Ministry in filling up the reserved vacancies of SCs/STs/OBCs and Persons
with Disabilities.
7. The witnesses replied to the queries raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew) .
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The meeting was adjourned at 1.50 
P.M.

57
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19th December, 2007, in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
9. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Prof. M. Ramadass
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
1. Shrimati Asha Swarup, Secretary;
2. Shri Uday Kumar Varma, Additional Secretary;
3. Ms. Stuti Kacker, Joint Secretary;
4. Ms. Zohra Chatterjee, Joint Secretary;
5. Shri B.S. Lalli, Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati;
6. Shri Arun Kumar Jain, Member (Finance), Prasar Bharati;
57

58
7. Shri L.D. Mandloi, Director General, Doordarshan;
8. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sharma, Additional Director General (Administration and Finance),
Doordarshan;
9. Ms. Noreen Naqvi, Deputy Director General (Policy), All India Radio;
10. Shri D. Mukhopadhyay, Director General, Directorate of Field Publicity;
11. Shri N.N. Singh, Director, Song and Drama Division;
12. Ms. Veena Jain, Additional Director General, Publications Division; and
13. Shri P. Bapaiah, Registrar, Indian Institute of Mass Communication.
II. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
Dr. Syamal Kumar Sarkar, Joint Secretary.
2. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Chief
Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati to the meeting and requested them to make presentation on the
Implementation of Citizens’ Charter, Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism, Implementation of the
Right to Information Act, 2005, Stagnation in Promotion and Backlog of reserved vacancies of
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Persons with Disabilities.
3. The Secretary, while deposing before the Committee, stated that in the Ministry, there is a
system of grievance redressal mechanism headed by Joint Secretary and an Information Counter
functions as a facilitation counter for the public who seek information. She narrated the campaigns
taken up by the Ministry to propagate information to the public regarding various Government
programmes/schemes.
4. Speaking on the issue of stagnation in promotion, she stated that as a result of the
Expenditure Reforms Committee's recommendations and the Geeta Krishnan Committee’s Report,
vacancies had remained unfilled and that even for promotion, permission of the Ministry of Finance
had to be sought to fill up the posts. She apprised the Committee that many SC/ST vacancies were
filled up as a result of special campaigns. She highlighted the need for enhancing the budget at their
disposal by various Ministries to give publicity to their programmes.
5. The Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati deposed that comprehensive efforts had been
made to give wide publicity to campaigns such as Right to Information Act and Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme.
6. The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of
the Committee and for rest of the queries, they promised to send written replies within a week.
(The witness then withdrew) .
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting was adjourned at 1.25 
P.M.

59
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 31st January, 2008, in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Raj Babbar
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
11. Dr. C. Krishnan
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
1. Dr. Veena Chhotray, Secretary;
2. Shri D.V.S. Ranga, Joint Secretary;
3. Shri Ashish Kumar, DDG;
4. Shri G.S. Raju, Director;
5. Shri Bipin Mallick, Director.
59

60
II. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
1. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Joint Secretary; and
2. Shri K.G. Verma, Director.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment and her colleagues to the meeting of the Committee. Thereafter, Secretary, Social
Justice and Empowerment made an exhaustive presentation on the subjects Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism, Backlog of reserved vacancies of SCs/STs/OBCs/Physically Challenged
(Person differently able), Implementation of RTI Act, Citizens Charter, Stagnation in Promotions in
the Ministries/Departments, Organisations, PSUs etc. Members raised some queries, which were
replied to by the witness.
(The witnesses then withdrew) .
3. * * *
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The meeting was adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

61
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. to 1.10 P.M. and again at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 7th February,
2008, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Dr. P.C. Alexander
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
1. Shrimati Asha Swarup, Secretary;
2. Shri B.S. Lalli, Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati;
3. Shri Deepak Sandhu, Principal Director General (M&C), PIB
4. Ms. Stuti Kacker, Joint Secretary;
5. Ms. Zohra Chatterjee, Joint Secretary;
6. Shri U.K. Mishra, Director General, D.A.V .P.;
7. Shri D. Mukhopadhyay, Director General: D.F.P.;
8. Shri N.N. Singh, Director, Song and Drama Division;
61

62
9. Ms. Veena Jain, Addl. Director General, Publications Division;
10. Shri V . Shivakumar, Member (Personnel), Prasar Bharati;
11. Shri L.D. Mandloi, DG: Doordarshan;
12. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sharma, ADG (A&F), Doordarshan;
13. Shri Ashok Jailkhani, Aditional Director General, Doordarshan;
14. Ms. Rita Kumar, DDG (A), Doordarshan;
15. Ms. Noreen Naqvi, DDG (Policy), All India Radio;
16. Ms. Grace Kujur, DDG (P), DG, A.I.R.;
17. Shri P.K. Pathak, DDG (A), DG, A.I.R.;
18. Ms. Mridula Ghai, Director (A), DG, A.I.R.
II. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
1. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Joint Secretary; and
2. Shri K.G. Verma, Director.
III. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances)
1. Shrimati Meenakshi Sharma, Director; and
2. Shri R.K. Gupta, Deputy Secretary.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Information and Broadcasting, Chief
Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati and their colleagues to the meeting of the Committee. Thereafter,
the Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati made an exhaustive Power Point presentation on the
subjects of Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism, Backlog of reserved vacancies of SCs/STs/
OBCs/Physically Challenged (Person differently able), Implementation of RTI Act, Citizen’s Charter,
Stagnation in Promotions in the Ministries/Departments/Organisations/PSUs etc. Members raised
some queries, which were replied to by the witness.
(The witnesses then withdrew) .
3. * * *
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The meeting was adjourned at 5.11 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

63
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21st October, 2008 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Dr. C. Krishnan
10. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Adv. P. Sathedevi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh Rana, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
63
*** Relate to some other matters.

64
Adoption of Draft 29th and 30th Reports of the Committee
4. The Committee then took up for consideration its draft 29th Report on “Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism” and draft 30th Report on “Constraints being faced by Kendriya Bhandar”.
After some discussion, the Committee adopted both the Reports with minor changes.
The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shrimati Najma A. Heptulla, and
in her absence Shri Virendra Bhatia, MP to present both the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and
Shri V . Radhakrishnan, and in his absence Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa, to lay them in Lok Sabha on
the 21st October, 2008.
5. * * *
6. A verbatim rercord of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.