  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2020 / Bhadra, 1942 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
104 
 
ONE HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE-HUNDREDTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS 
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 (Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 (Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

  
     CS (P & L) - 207 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
   
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2020 / Bhadra, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE-HUNDREDTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS 
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 (Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
(Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 (Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 
 
 
 

  
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii)     
   
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                   (iii)-(iv) 
 
4. REPORT 1 - 40 
(i) CHAPTER I                     
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY  
(ii) CHAPTER II                                                                                                             
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH TH E COMMITT EE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY  
(iii) CHAPTER III                                                                                                           
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPE CT OF WHICH COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS G IVEN FOR NOT ACCEPTI NG ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS.    
 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE                             41 - 47                
 
6. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                    48-49 
 
7. APPENDICES      50-57 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                      
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral 
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
4. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
6. Shri P. Wilson 
7. *Shri Abhay Bharadwaj 
8. *Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
9. *Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy 
10. *Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Pradan Baruah 
12. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
13. Shri Vinod LakhamshiChavda 
14. Shri MohanbhaiSanjibhaiDelkar 
15. Shri P. P. Mohammed Faizal 
16. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
17. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua 
18. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
19. Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone 
20. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
21. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Chirag Paswan 
24. Shri Suresh Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
2. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
4. Shri Ashok K.  Sahoo, Director 
5. Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary 
7. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Assistant Committee Officer 
_____________________ 
*Nominated w.e.f. 23rd July, 2020 
(i) 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred  Fourth Report on 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the One  
Hundredth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. 
2. The One Hundredth Report  of th e Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 6th March, 2020. 
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action 
Taken Replies on the One Hundredth Report of the Committee in June, 2020. The Committee 
considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 8th September, 2020. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         BHUPENDER YADAV 
8th September, 2020                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

  
ACRONYMS 
 
ACIS   Advance Case Information System 
ASCI    Administrative Staff College of India  
ARC   Administrative Reforms Commission 
AIS   All India Service Officers 
APAR   Annual Performance Appraisal Report 
ARPG   Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
CVC    Central Vigilance Commission  
CAT    Central Administrative Tribunal  
CBI   Central Bureau of Investigation 
CRC   Cadre Review Committee 
CSS   Central Secretariat Service 
CS   Central Secretariat 
CSSS   Central Secretariat Stenographer Service 
CSCS   Central Secretariat Clerical Service 
CPENGRAMS Centralized Pension Grievances Redress And Monitoring 
System 
CSE   Civil Services Examination 
CAPFs   Central Armed Police Forces  
CIC    Central Information Commission  
DPG   Directorate of Public Grievances  
DLC   Digital Life Certificate  
DP   Disciplinary Proceedings 
EP   Expert Panel 
IAS   Indian Administrative Service 
IPS    Indian Police Service 
IFS   Indian Forest Service 
ICEI   International Center for Excellence in Investigation 
IDBI   Industrial Bank of India 
IIPA   Indian Institute of Public Administration 
ICEI   International Centre for Excellence and Investigation 
 
 
 
(iii) 

  
 
iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training 
ISTM   Institute of Secretariat Training and Management 
LIMBS  Legal Information Management & Briefing System  
LBSNAA   Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration  
MSF   Multi Source Feedback 
NCT   National Capital Territories 
NBCC   National Building Construction Corporation 
NABARD  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
QCI   Quality Council of India 
RBI   Reserve Bank of India 
SIDBI   Small industrial Development Bank of India  
SCM   Selection Committee Meeting 
SCS   State Civil Services 
STQC   Standard Testing And Quality Certification  
SCOVA   Standing Committee of Voluntary Agencies  
SSC   Staff Selection Commission 
UIDAI   Unique Identification Authority of India 
UPSC    Union Public Service Commission  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
R E P O R T 
  
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations 
of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundredth Report on the Demands for Grants (2020 -
21) of the Ministry, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok 
Sabha on the 6th March, 2020. 
2. The Committee had made as many as 4 6 recommendations/observations in its One 
Hundredth Report. Replies of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
thereto have been categorized and scrutinized under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction 
of the Committee. Out of 46 rec ommendations where final replies have been received as 
many as 34 (74 percent approximately) of total recommendations are satisfactory.  These 
replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations (17) which have been accepted  by the 
Ministry, i.e. in respect of paras 2.18, 2.72, 3.2, 3.10, 3.19, 3.25, 4.3, 5.2, 
5.14, 5.15, 6.20, 6.25, 7.7, 7.15, 8.12, 8.15 and 8.18  of the Report. The 
Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted those 
recommendations. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations (17) which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry, i.e. in respect of paras 
2.7, 2.40, 2.43, 3.13, 3.27, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 5.3, 5.12, 6.9, 6.21, 6.27, 6.31, 7.9, 
8.6 and 8.10  of th e Report. The Committee is satisfied with the 
explanations advanced by the Ministry and does not wish to pursue those 
as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations (12) in respect of which Committee has 
not accepted the replies of the Ministry, i.e. with regard to paras 2.21, 3.6, 
3.16, 3.22, 4.4, 5.9, 5.13, 6.5, 6.7, 6.13, 6.18 and 7.12  of the Report. The 
Committee does not accept the reasons given for not accepting its 
recommendations of the Committee and reiterates the same. 
3. The Committee d esires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by the 
Committee in this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in t he 
succeeding pages. 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY: 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.0 The Ministry is implementing only two schemes - i) Training Schemes;   ii) 
Administrative Reforms and Pensioners’ Schemes. An allocation of 194.27 crore was made 
for the Schemes in BE2019 -20 which was reduced to 168.43 crore at RE stage. The Ministry 
has been able to spend only 94.98 crore i.e. just 56.39%  of the funds till 31st January, 2019. 
The Committee expresses its concern over the pattern of expenditure and recommends the 
Ministry to take corrective measures for proportionate and timely disbursement of funds. It is 
also observed that the outlay provi ded for the Schemes in BE 2020 -21 is 4.27 crore less than 
the allocation made in BE 2019 -20. The Committee recommends that all possible efforts be 
made by the Ministry to devise more Schemes aimed at capacity building, strengthening 
human resource potentia l, reforming administration and improving governance. The 
Committee strongly feels that there is a need for boisterous Government support to such 
schemes.                    (Para 2.18) 
Action Taken 
1.1 RE 2019 -20 allocations were in tune with the requirem ents of funds for the two 
Training schemes in the previous financial year.   The concern of the Department Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee shown on the slow pace of utilization of funds in FY 
2019-20 has been noted and will be taken care of for ne cessary compliance in future. BE 
2020-21 allocations of Rs 190.00 Crore in respect of the two schemes of the Ministry seems 
adequate at this point, however any additional requirement of funds would be taken up with 
M/o Finance at appropriate stages in the financial year.   
1.2 As regards the Committee’s recommendation to make all possible efforts to devise 
more Schemes aimed at capacity building, strengthening human resource potential, reforming 
administration and improving governance, it is informed that a n Integrated Government 
Online Training (iGOT) programme has been launched in December, 2018 to augment the 
existing training mechanism with on -line module based training coupled with certification 
with the objective of making training inputs available to Government officers /officials on -
sight and on-flexi time basis.  
1.3 In this sequence, a new version of iGOT (iGOT 2.0) is being launched not only to 
support delivery of structured and demand driven capacity developments to put in place an 
institutional and robust training delivery system using digital technologies, but also to help in 
enhancing capacity and skills of public servants, through well defined framework of 
competencies and core values. The objective is improved effectiveness of training and 
capacity building programs delivered by central and state level training institutes targeting 
public servants.  
1.4 iGOT 2.0 has resources for online, face to face and blended learning. It will subsume 
the existing iGOT portal hosted on and build upon its existing smart features to further the 
vision of a digital India served by a digital force with significantly more c apabilities. This 
will overcome existing infrastructure bottlenecks, to create an ecosystem where capacity 

3 
 
building efforts reach the last level of officials. The iGOT 2.0 platform will be a digital 
backbone which will allow many other layers and solutions  to be built on top, as the platform 
evolves, paving the way for larger transformations to happen. 
1.5 It is relevant to mention here that in pursuance of the decision of the Empowered 
Group on Augmenting Human Resources and Capacity Building set up by the  Hon’ble Prime 
Minister under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises), DoPT 
has launched a tailored version of iGOT on 07 th April, 2020 to train all the COVID -19 
warriors of India. As on 03 rd June, 2020, 10,52,410 users have been enrolled in iGOT for 
Covid learning platform. 
Further Observation 
1.6 The Committee appreciates the Department for devising more schemes in 
general and Integrated Government Online Training (iGOT) programme in particular 
which aim at augmenting human resou rce potential and improving governance . 
However, it would like to reiterate its recommendation that the Ministry should take 
necessary corrective measures to ensure proportionate and timely disbursement of 
funds.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 The Committ ee does not see any logic for the difference of 12 crore between the 
projection made by UPSC to the Ministry of Finance for the financial year 2020 -21 and 
Budget allocated to them in BE 2020 -21 as UPSC has the distinction of spending more than 
99% of the allocated budgetary amount for the last three financial years. The Committee is of 
the view that full allocation of required funds has to be made in future to UPSC so that the 
most premier recruitment institution of our country is not made to face uncalled for 
hardships due to paucity of funds.                              (para 2.72) 
Action taken 
2.1 Budgetary allocations to the Ministry and its various attached/ subordinate offices are 
made by Ministry of Finance and on the basis of the discussions in the Pre -Budget meeting 
taken by Secretary (Expenditure) with the representatives of the Ministry, Sub ordinate and 
Attached Offices.  
2.2 Observations of the Committee have been noted and in future, M/o Finance would be 
requested to make adequate financial allocations to the UPSC to discharge its obligations 
effectively.    
Further Observation 
2.3 The Comm ittee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the 
Department would pursue with the Ministry of Finance for providing  additional 
budgetary allocation to UPSC as per their projection at RE stage so that the premier 
recruitment agency can adequately carry out its constitutional mandate. 
 
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT: 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 The Committee expresses its concern over significant vacancies in the Indian 
Administrative Service, which is the backbone of the administrative machinery of thi s 

4 
 
country. The Committee is of the view that the induction of IAS officers must keep pace with 
the evolving needs of the Indian administration. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommends the Department to bridge the gap between the sanctioned strength an d the in -
position strength and to address the problem of deficit of bureaucrats afflicting the Indian 
administration pronto.                     (Para 3.2)   
Action Taken 
3.1 The occurrence of vacancies in IAS and its filling up is an ongoing process. The 
Government has increased the annual intake of IAS officers to 180 every year through Direct 
Recruitment, since Civil Services Examination (CSE) 2012. Further, vacancies in IAS  under 
Promotion Quota are filled up every year by the Government, based upon a proposal from the 
concerned State Governments and as per the recommendations of the Selection Committee 
Meeting (SCM) convened by Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) for app ointment of 
State Civil Services (SCS) and non -State Civil Services (non -SCS) Officers, by induction 
into IAS.  
Further Observation 
3.2 The Committee is pleased to note that the Government has increased the intake 
of IAS officers to 180 every year since 2012. However, the Committee is of the 
considered view that the increased intake should be commensurate with the whopping 
gap between the sanctioned strength and the in -position strength and it should not be 
fixed at 180 only. The Committee would like the Department to prepare a detailed road 
map elaborating on how long it would take to mitigate the existing gap between the 
sanctioned strength and the in -position strength as per the extant plan and furnish the 
same to it. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.0 The Committee appreciates the Department for streamlining the cadre review process 
and hopes that the cadre review of the remaining 38 services where the review is pending for 
more than five years will be completed well in time. The Committee would like to be informed 
about the status of cadre review of pending services in the Action Taken Note .                                    
           (para 3.10) 
Action Taken 
4.1 The 38 services, where cadre review is pending for more than 5 years and the 
Committee has observed/recommended for taking action in time, the summarized status is as 
under: 
 
 Proposals of 18 services are under active consideration at various levels. 
 In 2 services, regular action is being taken for addressing issues and meeting the 
functional req uirement and organizational need met with creation of 
posts/readjustment regularly caters the need of cadre review. 
 In 2 Services, the CCA not felt requirement of detailed cadre review. 
 In 4 Services, declared as dying cadre, consolidated steps are being t aken by the 
Cadre Controlling Authority rather than normal cadre review and the DoPT is 
facilitating its approvals wherever required. 
 In remaining 12 Services, two/three rounds of meetings have already been conducted 
with the CCA concerned and all of them have informed that they have initiated the 
proposal and the same would be finalized at the earliest. 

5 
 
 
4.2 The Service wise status of the 38 services/detailed status is as under:  
 
(A) Proposals of 18 services are under active consideration at various levels. 
 
[Proposal examined by CRC and approved by MoS (PP) and FM and now 
requires approval of Cabinet - 1 (Indian Defence Estates Service) - MoD has 
initiated the Draft Cabinet Note]  
 
[Proposal examined by DoPT and DoE and would be placed before the Cadre 
Review Committee- 3 (Indian Radio Regulatory Service, Indian Naval Armament 
Service, Survey of India Group ‘A’ Service)] 
 
[Proposal examined by DoPT and referred to DoE- 5 (Central Geological Service, 
GSI Physics, GSI Chemistry and GSI Engineering Service, I ndian Corporate Law 
Service)] 
 
[Proposals under consideration of DoPT and recommendations would be finalized 
shortly- 6 (Indian Cost Account Service, Central Health Service, Indian Ordnance 
Factories Health Service, Medical Cadre of BSF, Medical Cadre of ITBP, 
Medical Cadre of CRPF)] 
 
[Proposals examined by DoPT and CCA concerned advised for making certain 
revisions- 3 (Indian Economic Service, RPF and Indian Railway Medical 
Service). 
 
(B) In 2 services, regular action is being taken by CCA concerned for a ddressing 
issues and meeting the Functional requirement and organizational need with creation 
of posts/readjustment regularly and this caters the need of cadre review:  
 
 [Indian Audit & Accounts Service and Indian Foreign Service]. 
 
(C) In 4 services, declared as dying cadre, consolidated steps are being taken by the 
Cadre Controlling Authority rather than normal cadre review and the DoPT is 
facilitating its approvals wherever required. 
 
 [Indian Broadcasting Engineering Service, Indian Broadcasting 
 Programme Service, Indian Supply Service and Indian Inspection  Services] 
 
(D) In 2 services, the CCA not felt requirement of detailed cadre review 
 
 [Defence Research Development Service and Indian  Meteorological 
Service] 
 
(E) In remaining 12 services, two /three round of meetings have already been 
conducted with the CCA concerned and all of them have informed that they have 
initiated the proposal and the same would be finalized at the earliest. In some cases, 
it is at final stage of preparation with the CCA. 
 

6 
 
 [Indian Defence Service of Engineers, Central Engineering Service 
 (CPWD), Central Electrical and Mechanical Service (CPWD),  Central 
Architect Service (CPWD), Indian Ordnance Factories  Service, Central Labour 
Service, Defence Quality Assurance  Service, Central Water Engineering 
Service, Central Power  Engineering Service, Indian Legal Service, Indian 
Revenue Service  and Indian Revenue Service (Customs & Central Excise)] 
 
4.3 The DoPT is taking various steps for completion of cadre review of these pe nding 
services. Apart from D.O reminders, meetings are also being taken at the AS level with the 
concerned CCA. Further, the meetings are also organized at the DS level to discuss the 
difficulties being faced by the CCAs in preparation of proposal and wher ever required the 
guidelines are being explained to them enabling early finalization of the proposal. 
 
4.4 As explained to the Committee, the DoPT had issued calendar for cadre review in 
2018 and 2019 placing various services in different months for submis sion of proposal. For 
all such services, meetings are taken at DS level one month prior to the due month. 
 
4.5 Additionally, the DoPT has identified the services, where the cadre review would be 
pending in upcoming moths and initiated action so that the cadre review periodicity of 5 
years would be complied. One of such proposal, viz. Indian Skill Development Service which 
would be pending in second half of 2020, has already been examined in consultation with the 
CCA  
 
4.6 Calendar for cadre review for year 2020 (FY 2020 -21) is being prepared based on the 
status of the pending proposals and proposal which would be pe nding in this year. The said 
calendar would be issued shortly. Initiatives taken so far for conducting meetings with these 
CCAs one month prior to due month would continue in this year also with the objective to 
address the difficulties being faced by the CCA concerned. 
 
4.7 The recommendations of Working Group on cadre structure is under active 
examination and keeping in view the recommendations of the Group, the need of policy 
changes to streamline the cadre review further would also be initiated, once th e final decision 
on the report is taken.   
 
4.8 The status of cadre review proposal (both approved and pending) is continuously 
being updated on monthly basis and placed at the website of DOPT to ensure transparency 
and disseminate information to its stakeholders and this practice would continue. 
 
4.9 The cadre management is primarily concern of the Cadre Controlling Authority. 
Under the extant guidelines, the CCA concerned has to provide the proposal. Within the 
ambit of existing guidelines, the DoPT is ta king all the necessary action for timely 
completion of cadre review like issuance of calendar, DO letters, regular meetings and 
simplification enabling timely time submission of cadre review and exploring various other 
alternatives also. Further, for data management, various steps have been taken enabling the 
CCAs to have a close look on the manpower issues.  
 
4.10 Based on the initiatives taken by the DoPT and assurance given by the Cadre 
Controlling Authorities, it is expected that by the end of this year , the pendency of cadre 
review would be reduced to zero. This would include all the pending cadre reviews and also 
the cadre review due in years 2020. 

7 
 
 
Further Observation 
4.11 The Committee has noted the detailed reply of the Ministry. The Committee 
hopes that the proposed calendar for cadre review during financial year 2020 -21 will be 
finalised soon and followed as per time schedule. The Committee is hopeful that the 
pendency of cadre review would be reduced to zero as claimed, by the end of this year. 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.0 The Committee notes that at present, candidates have to appear for multiple 
examinations conducted by multiple agencies at different points of time for similar posts 
resulting in enormous burden on time, effort and cost of youn g people. The Committee is of 
the view that NRA will be the major reform in recruitment to Non -Gazetted posts in 
government jobs and public sector banks. The Committee therefore recommends the 
Government to expedite the process of setting up of NRA and to ensure that the proposal 
materializes soon. Since the examination is broad based and is proposed to be conducted 
online, the Committee recommends that the Department must take necessary measures to 
mitigate the vulnerability of exam infrastructure to malpr actices. The Committee also 
recommends that NRA should be an independent, professional and specialized recruitment 
organisation and that it should be well equipped to discharge its mandate effectively. 
                  (para 3.19) 
Action Taken 
5.1 Recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
Further Observation 
5.2 The Committee has noted the assurance of the Ministry to comply with the 
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, however, desires to be apprised of 
the development made in regard to setting up of NRA. 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.0 The Committee notes the action taken by the Government to review the performance 
of officers on a yearly basis and to remove those people who were not productive. The 
Committee recommends that review should be done on a regular basis without any biased 
and favouritism and non -performing officers should be removed. This will also motivate the 
performing officers.                    (para 3.25) 
 
Action Taken 
6.1 All India Service Officers (AIS): The recommendation is aligned to the extant Rules. 
All the state cadres will once again be requested to take timely action for review of the 
performance of AIS officers as per Rule 16(3) of The AIS (DCRB) Rules. 
6.2 Central Civil Services Employees: The Appropriate Authority has the absolute right 
to retire a Governmentservant under FR 56(J), FR 56(I) or Rule 48 (1) (b) of CCS (Pension) 
Rules, 1972 as the case may be, if it is necessary to do so in public interest to strengthen the 
administrative machinery by developing responsible andefficient workers at all levels and 
efficiency, economy and speed in the disposal of Government functions. 
6.3 Government has noted the recommendation of the Committee for undertaking rev iew 
of the performance of the Government servants on regular basis, without any bias and 

8 
 
favouritism. In this regard, instructions have been issued by the Government from time to 
time, requiring the appointing authorities to carry out periodical review of the performance of 
the Central Government servants. All these guidelines/instructions have been placed in public 
domain. Further, these guidelines inter-alia provide that such reviews are to be undertaken in 
each quarter of the year for cases falling due in subsequent six months. The guidelines further 
provide that after carrying out the review, based on the overall personal records of the officer, 
and not confined to Annual Performance Appraisal Report alone, an officer can be 
prematurely retired, on the g rounds of inefficiency and doubtful integrity. Further, 
instructions have also been issued from time to time, inter alia, highlighting the observations 
made by various Courts in the matter. These guidelines provide an enabling framework for 
removal of deadwood, as also to eliminate bias and favouritism while deciding the cases and 
to promote efficiency in the Government.  
6.4  Central Secretariat: The review of performance of the officers is undertaken 
periodically under FR 56 (j). In CSS cadre, one officer each in the grades of Director, Deputy 
Secretary, Under Secretary and Assistant Section Officer was retired under FR 56 (j) during 
past five years. 
6.5 As far as CSSS officers/officials are concerned, so far none has been identified as 
non-performers and of doubtful integrity during past five years and none has been 
prematurely retired on the basis of non -performance and doubtful integrity. CSCS is a 
decentralized cadre and so far no cadre unit has reported to this Department about any non -
performers or any official with doubtful integrity for premature retirement. 
Further Observation 
6.6 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS: 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.0 The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in the second chapter that full 
allocation of required funds has to be made in future to UPSC so that the most premier 
recruitment institution of our country is not made to face uncalled for hardships due to 
paucity of funds.           (para 4.3) 
 
Action Taken 
7.1 Remarks of the Committee have been noted and in future, M/o Finance would be 
requested to make adequate financial allocations to the UPSC to discharge its obligations 
effectively.  
Further Observation 
7.2 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
TRAINING INSTITUTIONS: 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.0 The Committee feels that Globalization has brought about paradigmatic 
transformation in government, governance and public administration. Civil Servants are 
expected to deliver under very trying circumstances and with adequate resources. They are 
required to develop new knowledge and skills in order to meet this challenge of globalization. 
Emotional Intelligence can equip and prepare the Civil servants to handle such pressures 

9 
 
and constraints with ease. Thus, the Committee recommends LBSNAA to re-orient its training 
strategy and curriculum aimed at making Civil Servants emotionally intelligent. 
(para 5.2) 
Action Taken 
8.1       All the Training Courses in the LBSNAA have a heavy component of Self -
Improvement. Sessions on ‘Emotional Intelligence’ are conducte d, especially for MCTP 
courses. 
8.2 The recommendations of the Committee to LBSNAA to re -orient its training strategy 
and curriculum aimed at making Civil Servants emotionally intelligent, and to recalibrate its 
course content so as to make civil servants ethical and responsible have been noted by the 
Academy / Management faculty for compliance. 
Further Observation 
8.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.0 The Committee notes that IIPA is specialized in policy eva luation, service delivery 
and impact analysis studies. The Committee has been apprised that the current practice is to 
submit the findings of research to the Ministry/Department concerned. The Committee is of 
the opinion that a well researched document det ailing how effective a scheme is or how well 
or poorly a scheme is performing, what is working on ground and what is not, should be kept 
in public domain. The Committee believes that providing public access to such research 
findings will enhance transparen cy, increase accountability and strengthen participatory 
governance.                                                       (para 5.14) 
 
Action Taken 
9.1 IIPA undertakes Research Studies/Evaluation of Schemes of various Ministries and 
Departments. The relationship between IIPA and the sponsoring Ministry/Department is 
basically a client relationship. As such, the reports are submitted to the respective 
Ministries/Departments which further take a decision whether putting the Report in public 
domain or not. IIPA would convey the recommendation of the 100 th Report of Parliamentary 
Standing Committee to the sponsoring Ministries/Departments and request their permission 
for putting the report on IIPA website accordingly. 
Further Observation 
9.2 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and is of the view that the 
present age is an age of transparency and all the research findings, studies or reports of 
the IIPA concerning any Ministry or Department should be made public unless the 
studies conducted, are of confidential nature or publication of such findings, studies or 
reports are detrimental to the security and integrity of the nation. The IIPA may put a 
clause to this effect in its terms and conditions while entering into an agreement with 
any Ministry or Department to conduct research and prepare a report on any issue or 
subject. This will prove to be a small step in the direction of an open Government. 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.0 The Committee observes that the Institute, with its limited resource base, is not able to 
garner adequate funds for augmenting existing infrastructure which is old. The Committee 

10 
 
recommends DoPT to provide additional amount under Capital Head towards augme ntation 
of infrastructure. This capacity building exercise will enable IIPA to cater to the consistently 
growing demand for quality research and training in the field of public administration and 
ultimately contribute to nation building.                                                        (para 5.15) 
Action Taken 
10.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. Efforts will be made to provide additional 
funds to IIPA depending on the requirement and allocation of funds by Ministry of Finance. 
Further Observation 
10.2 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND SERVICE MATTERS: 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.0 The Committee notes that over 48000 cases are still pending disposal and that over 
28000 cases are pending for 1 -5 years. Denial of timely justice amounts to denial of justice 
itself. This state of affairs makes a case for institutionalizing a pre -litigation conciliation 
mechanism to resolve the grievances of Govt servants at pre -litigation stage. The Committee 
strongly impresses upon all Ministries/Departments to implement the executive directions 
issued by DoPT with respect to the use of pre-litigation conciliation mechanism to resolve the 
grievances of Government servants at pre-litigation stage.               (Para 6.20) 
Action Taken  
11.1 Pendency of Cases: Since 1985 till December, 2019, about 8,14,796 cases have been 
instituted and out of these 7,65,831 cases have already been disposed of, which is about 94% 
of the cases instituted during the period. Despite the shortage of Members, 26,040 cases have 
been d isposed of against the 24,952 cases instituted during the year 2019, which is about 
104.36% of the cases instituted during the said period.  
 
11.2 As regards the reasons for pendency, it is pertinent to mention here that the cases 
instituted within one yea r are not considered to be a part of the arrears as these cases are in 
circulation for completion of the service and pleadings. In so far as the pendency of cases ripe 
for hearing is concerned, it is primarily for the reason that decision to be passed by h igher 
courts (High Courts and Supreme Court) in similar cases are being awaited by Hon’ble CAT 
to pass decision in large number of similar cases pending before it. 
 
11.3 Pre-litigation conciliation: Since its inception in 1985 and till December, 19, a tota l of 
8,14,796 cases have been filed in CAT, out of which 7,65,831 cases have been disposed of, 
i.e. about 94% cases being disposed. Despite the shortage of Members, 26,040 cases have 
been disposed of against the 24,952 cases instituted during the year 2019 , which is about 
104.36% of the cases instituted during the said period. Therefore, the fundamentals of 
establishment of CAT, which is based on providing speedy disposal of cases filed on service 
matters, appears to have been successfully served with the rate of disposal of cases. 
 
11.4 However, with an aim to mitigate the volume of litigations filed in CAT/ other courts, 
executive directions have been issued from time to time, such as one issued by DoPT vide 
OM dated 31.12.2014, for addressing the issue of  effective use of pre -litigation conciliation 
to resolve the grievances of Govt. servants at pre-litigation stage.   
 

11 
 
11.5 Also, DoPT issued an OM dated 20.06.17 vide which the suggestions made in a 
meeting chaired by Secretary (Justice) related to the ste ps required to be taken for reduction 
of pendency of court cases were circulated in this Department with a request to take similar 
steps. 
Further Observation 
11.6 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.0 The data f rom the National Crime Records Bureau and RBI shows that financial 
frauds have witnessed an exponential growth in recent years. Fraudsters are using 
increasingly innovative methods to bypass vigilance. It is imperative that CVC stays one step 
ahead of frau dsters. The Committee recommends CVC to improve vigilance administration 
by leveraging latest technologies like Block chain technology, artificial intelligence and 
machine learning to strengthen preventive vigilance and disincentivize fraud.  
                     (Para 6.25) 
Action Taken 
12.1 The Commission has taken note of the recommendations of the Committee for 
strengthening preventive vigilance through leveraging latest technologies. The focus and 
thrust of the Commission towards preventive vigilance measures is a continuous process and 
Commission has issued detailed guidelines for use of technology to prevent and 
disincentivize frauds. 
Further Observation 
12.2 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and emphasizes that 
leveraging cutting edge technologies will bring down frauds of all nature. 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES: 
Recommendation/observation 
13.0 The Committee is highly appreciative of the measures being taken by the Department 
to strengthen the Grievance Redressal mechanism and make it more citizens friendly. The 
Committee is pleased to note that the pace of disposal remained unaffected despite th e rapid 
increase in the volume of grievances being filed. The Committee desires that there should be 
a nodal authority in the department to whom complaints against the orders/decisions of 
individual Ministries/Departments can be made.                             (Para 7.7) 
 
Action Taken 
13.1 The Directorate of Public Grievances (DPG) in the Cabinet Secretariat of Government 
of India is the nodal authority to obtain responses to unresolved grievances on matters 
relating to  Central Government Departments and Organizations. DPG can help the 
aggrieved person to obtain a response and resolution on these grievances from the department 
or organization. 
13.2 However in pursuance of recommendation of the Standing Committee, DARPG 
has requested all Central Ministries and Departments to designate a senior officer  to function 
as nodal authority in their Ministry/ Department to whom appeal against the orders/decisions 

12 
 
of individual Ministries/ Departments can be made. We expect that Ministries will take 
appropriate steps to the suggestion. 
 
Further Observation 
13.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.  
Recommendation/Observation 
14.1 The Committee notes that Sevottam was implemented during the 12th Five Year Plan 
2012-2017 in Administrative Training Institutes/Govt. approved Training Institutions in 10 
States namely, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, NCT Delhi, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Jharkhand. The Committee desires that 
Sevottam should be progressively im plemented in all States and UTs as strengthening State 
Administrative Training Institutes/Central Training Institutes will go a long way in 
promoting Good Governance at the grass roots level. The Government should provide 
boisterous support for the Scheme.                        (Para 7.15) 
Action Taken 
14.2 The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances has written to the 
Chief Secretaries / Lt Governors/Administrators of 10 States namely, Punjab, Haryana, 
Rajasthan, NCT Delhi, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh and Jharkhand to provide their views on effectiveness of the project particularly with 
reference to the performance of ATIs in improving capacity of grass root level organizations   
in services delivery.  
Further Observation 
14.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
 
PENSION AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE: 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.0 The Committee greatly appreciates the initiatives being taken by the Department to 
resolve Pensioners’ wo es. The fact that over 13000 long pending grievances have been 
resolved across the table during two All India Pension Adalats drives home the message that 
such Adalats are indeed an effective platform for grievance redressal. Infact, the Department 
through this unique experiment blazed a trail for other Departments to follow.  As per the 
Data furnished by the Department in its written replies 25,012 family pension cases and 
35,853 grievances pertaining to Super Senior Citizens (those who retired before 1995)  were 
registered on CPENGRAMS portal during the last five years. The Committee notes that out of 
total grievances, 161 grievances as on 24.01.2020 are pending for more than one year and 
out of these 39 family pension grievances and 41 grievances pertaining  to Super Senior 
Citizens (those who retired before 1995) are pending for more than one year. The Committee 
recommends the Department to hold a Pension Adalat to redress the grievances pertaining to 
family pensioners and super senior citizens. 
(Para 8.12) 
Action Taken 
15.2 The Department acknowledges the appreciation of the Committee.  

13 
 
15.3 The Department is following -up on a war -footing the pending 161 (as on 24 th 
February, 2020) over one year old grievances with the individual Ministries/Departments. 
This recommendation of the Committee is noted for future Pension Adalats in which 
grievances pertaining to family pensioners and Super Senior Citizens will be given a special 
emphasis. 
Further Observation 
15.4 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/observation 
16.0 The Committee notes from the written replies of the Department that around 
47%grievances received in CPENGRAMS pertain to Non -civil Ministries/Departments. 
Presently, Bhavishya covers only Central Government Civil Ministrie s. The Committee 
suggests the Department to progressively cover Non -Civil Ministries/Departments, CPSUs 
and CPSBs as well under this scheme.                (Para 8.15) 
Action Taken 
16.1 DoPPW is regularly taking up this matter with all the Non -Civil 
Ministries/Departments (Railways, Posts, Telecom and Defence) to digitize their Pension 
Processing and Sanctioning System on the pattern of ‘Bhavishya’ software. 
Further Observation  
16.2 The Committee has noted the reply and recommends that the Department 
should regularly pursue with non -civil Ministries for getting their Pension Processing 
and Sanctioning System digitized on the pattern of ‘Bhavishya’ software. 
Recommendation/Observation 
17.0 The Digital Life Certificate was launched with the objective to enable pensioners 
especially the old and the infirm to submit life certificate from the comfort of their homes 
anywhere in the country or abroad. Jeevan Pramaan undeniably has the potential t o improve 
ease of living for the aged and the elderly. The Committee suggests the Department to display 
the list of agencies authorized to sell the biometric devices on its website and to extend the 
coverage of DLC from Home Pilot Project to more cities in  coming years. Further, DoPPW 
and UIDAI should together address the inconvenience being experienced by the elderly 
because of issues related with registration of the unique identification number and their 
changing biometrics due to age.                                   (Para 8.18) 
Action Taken 
17.1 In order to improve Ease of Living for the aged and elderly, DoPPW has directed the 
Banks to visit the home of such aged and elderly pensioners and collect Digital Life 
Certificate at home. For this, the bank can charge the amount of maximum Rs.60 as fee. 
17.2 The bio -metric devices for submitting Digital Life Certificate are prescribed by 
UIDAI/ MeitY only. Accordingly, the list of such UIDAI certified biometric authentication 
devices along with their device v endor name is available at UIDAI website i.e, 
https://uidai.gov.in/images/resource/List_of_UIDAI_Certified_Biometric_Devices_13072017
.pdf 
 
17.3 In com pliance with the Committee suggestions, the above mentioned URL will be 
hyperlinked at the website of DoPPW. 

14 
 
 
17.4 DoPPW will make sincere efforts to cover larger number of cities under the ambit of 
DLC from Home. 
17.5 In compliance with the Committee’s suggestions, DoPPW will also take-up the matter 
with UIDAI to address the inconvenience being experienced by the elderly because of issues 
related with registration of the unique identification number and their changing biometrics 
due to age. 
Further Observation 
17.6 The Committee is pleased to note that DoPPW has directed the Banks to visit the 
home of aged and elderly pensioners and collect Digital Life Certificate at home as it 
will ease the life of elderly pensioners. The Committee is also pleased to note  that steps 
were taken by the Department to address the inconveniences experienced by the elderly 
with respect to registration of the unique identification number and their changing 
biometrics due to age.  The Committee recommends the Department to coordina te with 
concerned bodies and create a single window online portal linking  Aadhar – Digital life 
certificate –Pension disbursing agency/Bank so that seeding of aadhar details, 
submission of DLC and withdrawal of pension becomes smooth and hassle free. 
 

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY: 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.0 The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has apprised the 
Committee in its written replies that it has projected an outlay of 3130.16 crore to the 
Ministry of Finance under Demand No.73 for BE 2020 -21 against which the Ministry of 
Finance has approved an outlay of 1 754.54 crore. Thus, the approved outlay is just 56.05% 
of the projected outlay. The budgetary allocation made to the Ministry at BE and RE stages 
for the ongoing fiscal year is 1726.59 crore and 1705 crore respectively, which clearly 
indicates a significant cut in funds at RE stage. The Ministry of Personnel Public Grievances 
and Pensions and various bodies under its administrative control play a significant role in 
matters relating to personnel management, grievance redressal, administration and 
Governance. Thus, the Committee recommends that adequate funds should be provided to the 
Ministry and various Bodies under its administrative control so as to enable them to 
discharge their mandate to the fullest extent possible. The Committee also recommends that 
additional requirement of funds may be provided at the RE stage.               (Para 2.7) 
Action Taken 
1.1 Budgetary allocations to the Ministry and its various attached/ subordinate offices are 
made on the basis of budgetary ceilings approved by M/o Financ e and on the basis of the 
discussions in the Pre -Budget meeting taken by Secretary (Expenditure) with the 
representatives of the Ministry, Subordinate and Attached Offices.  
1.2 The Budget Estimates of 2020 -21 is Rs 1754.54 Cr. Additional requirement of fu nds, 
as and when required, will be taken up with M/o Finance at the various Supplementary stages 
& the Revised Estimate stage during the financial year 2020-21.  
1.3 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for adherence and compliance. 
Further Observation 
1.4 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry 
and its subordinate and attached bodies utilize every penny effectively and efficiently in 
a time bound manner and press for additional funds at the Revised Estimate S tage and 
Supplementary Stages as per the requirement so that they can discharge their mandate 
to the fullest extent possible. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 With this trend of allocation of funds and utilization thereof, the Committee feels that 
completion of various infrastructure related projects of CBI during this financial year would 
be difficult. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that the Department will have to make 
concerted efforts with CBI to ensure that the ongoing construction projects at M aidangarhi, 
Saket, Port Blair, Nagpur and Shillong as well as purchase of land at Mumbai for 
construction of office/residential complexes under CBI Schemes are implemented at a faster 
pace, so that optimum utilization of the allocated funds can be made.  
The Committee also feels that additional allocation of funds, if required,  

16 
 
should be made at RE stage for CBI.                  (Para 2.40)
                                 
Action Taken 
2.1 Funds to the tune of Rs.70.27 Crore were allocated in Budget Estimate 2019-20 which 
were enhanced to Rs.88.96 Crore in Final Grant 2019-20. 
2.2 Funds to the tune of Rs. 83.3576 Crore have been utilized against the Final Grant of 
Rs.88.96 Crore which is 93.70%. The balance funds could not be utilized due to lock-down in 
the country since 24.03.2020 onwards. 
2.3 In Financial Year 2020-21, funds to the tune of Rs.74.71 Crore have been allocated to 
CBI under this Scheme and demand of additional funds will be projected in Revised Estimate 
stage. 
Further Observation 
2.4 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the 
infrastructure projects are completed well in time with the boisterous support of the 
Government. For additional funds, if required, under this head, the Committee feels 
that the Ministry s hould impress upon the Finance Ministry at RE stage as no 
infrastructure related project should suffer for want of funds. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 The Committee notes that the office of Lokpal was operationalized in March, 2019 
with the appointment o f its Chairperson & 8 Members and started functioning from a 
temporary office at the Ashok Hotel, New Delhi. Proposal for shifting of office of Lokpal to a 
new premise at the ICADR Campus, Vasant Kunj is under way and budgetary provision of 
74.70 cr has be en made for 2020 -21 to meet the requirement. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the action initiated and pursued in regard to the establishment of proper 
infrastructure for Lokpal as soon as possible. The Committee hopes that Lokpal in 
consultation with the Department will seek additional funds, if any, at RE stage and ensure 
that it becomes fully functional as soon as practicable.                         (Para 2.43) 
Action Taken 
3.1 The Lokpal has shifted its office to the new premises at Plot No. 6, Vasant Kunj 
Institutional Area, New Delhi (former ICADR campus) in the third week of February, 2020 
and is now functional. 
3.2 With regard to additional requirement of funds over and above Rs.74.70 crore 
allocated in BE -2020-21, it is stated that the expen diture of the Lokpal is charged upon the 
Consolidated Fund of India. In terms of Section 40 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, 
it is for the institution of Lokpal to prepare its Budget, in such form and at such time in each 
financial year showing its estimated receipts and expenditure requirements. Any requirement 
of augmentation of funds in the financial year will be taken up with Ministry of Finance. 
Further Observation 
3.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 

17 
 
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT: 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.0 The Committee notes that appointments made through Lateral Entry are contractual 
in nature. The fact that Lateral entry brings in qualified human resources, domain expertise 
and new ideas is irrefutable. Hence, the Committee fe els that the performance of Lateral 
appointees should be reviewed at regular intervals and high performing appointees should be 
retained and promoted to the next level. The Committee believes that consistent recognition 
and positive reinforcement will incentivize them do their best and make a positive and lasting 
impact on the administration.                                                                (Para 3.13) 
Action Taken 
4.1 The appointment of Joint Secretaries through Lateral Recruitment is on 
contract/deputation basis for a period of three years. As per the contract agreement/terms of 
deputation, the performance of these appointees will be evaluated annually. The procedure 
for review will be the same as Annual Performance Appraisal Report (APAR ) for the 
equivalent level in the Central Government. 
4.2 Upon successful completion of contract, it will be open to the Government to offer a 
similar assignment to the concerned Joint Secretary for a further period of one year at a time. 
However, in no ca se shall the aggregate period of contract exceed five years including the 
initial three-year period. 
4.3 Furthermore, these appointees are expected to revert to their parent organisation (in 
case of those appointed on deputation) or leave Government servic e (in case of contractual 
appointees), after the period of their deputation/contract ends. Their retention beyond the 
stipulated period or promotion to the next higher level is not envisaged in the terms of 
appointment. It has been the endeavour of the Gov ernment to ensure that Joint Secretaries 
appointed through lateral recruitment not only make up for the shortfall of officers at these 
levels, but also make a positive and long -lasting contribution in policy formulation/ 
administration in the respective Ministries/Departments 
Further Observation 
4.4 The Committee is satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and is in favour of 
roping in subject/domain experts from the private sector as they will bring in more 
expertise into government agencies. However, the Committee is of the considered view 
that the Government should establish a robust mechanism to prevent nepotism and 
people with vested interests while making lateral entry appointments at such high level 
plum posts. 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.0 The Committee notes that 360 degree performance appraisal intends to capture the 
qualities of officers in terms of integrity, capability and general reputation based on an 
appraisal of the Annual Performance Appraisal Report (APAR) by an Expert Committee and 
feedback received from various stakeholders. The Committee notes that such a system of 
empanelment has widened representation in the Central Government to all services. It has 
also eliminated discretion and scope for lobbying associated with senior level positio ns. 
However, the Committee notes that feedback in this process is obtained informally leaving it 
susceptible to manipulations. The Committee observes that the feedback received from 
subordinates and stakeholders may sometimes be biased and can lack objecti vity, 

18 
 
particularly if the officer had an occasion to discipline his subordinate or he was unable to 
meet the unjustified demands of stakeholders. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should take steps to ensure that such biased feedback is not reli ed upon in order 
that honest and deserving civil servants are not victimized.                                    (Para 3.27) 
Action Taken 
5.1 Multi Source Feedback from relevant stakeholders in Empanelment process (360* 
performance appraisal):- The Multi Source Feedback (MSF) system has been introduced with 
an aim at ensuring comprehensive assessment of officers for empanelment to hold senior 
positions in Government. Under it, officers are assessed by an Experts Panel (EP) not only on 
the basis of their ACR/APAR grades but also based on a feedback obtained from a minimum 
of 05 stakeholders including Seniors, Juniors, Peers, External Stakeholders and serving 
Secretaries. MSF is taken on seven clearly defined attributes which include decision making, 
ownership, pro-activeness, delivery, leadership, honesty and suitability for higher positions. 
In case of large variation between feedbacks of stakeholders, the EP may take more feedback 
from additional stakeholders. In addition, overall service record and vigilan ce inputs, etc. 
about the officers are also taken into account. Feedback from a diverse range of stakeholders 
and anonymity and confidentiality in the process ensures objectivity and transparency. 
 
5.2 In order to ensure fairness and objectivity in the process, assessment is done by the EP 
comprising four/five carefully chosen members of very high merit and integrity. The 
feedback obtained by the EP is appended to the final report thus, making it a well -
documented record rather than an informal process.  
5.3 A system of review is in place for officers not empanelled. In such cases, review is 
done by a separate panel of Experts, who obtain fresh MSF from a different set of 
stakeholders. 
5.4 Thus, it may be seen that feedback from diverse range of stakeholders  and anonymity 
and confidentiality in the process under MSF system ensures objectivity, transparency and 
fairness in the empanelment process.  
Further Observation 
5.5 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS: 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.0 The Committee notes that frequent cancellation of examinations by SSC on account of 
paper leakages is causing untold agony to examinees and wastage of resources besides 
delaying the recruitment process. There has been a surge  in the number of petitions being 
filed against SSC in recent years. As per the available record on Legal Information 
Management & Briefing System (LIMBS) Portal as on 27.01.2020 there are 2123 court cases 
where SSC is a party. The Committee feels that SSC  should undertake a review of the 
mounting cases and if possible, consider out of the court settlement of the cases as an option 
to reduce the volume of litigations.                                         (Para 4.7) 
Action Taken 
6.1 Almost all the pending  court cases of the Commission have been filed by the 
candidates. The court cases are normally filed by candidates raising grievances pertaining to 
the recruitment/ examinations. The Commission generally files only appeals against the 

19 
 
Orders of Lower Court s, if required. The monitoring of the court cases is done by the 
Commission at the level of Chairman on a weekly basis.  
6.2 There is generally no scope for out of court settlement in respect of the court cases 
filed against the Commission since these pert ain to recruitment of candidates. However, the 
Commission would try to undertake all possible measures to expedite the disposal of pending 
court cases in association with Government Counsels and its Regional/ Sub-Regional Offices. 
Further Observation 
6.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and recommends that a fool 
proof examination system should be developed by the SSC to avoid large number of 
litigations being filed by the candidates. 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.0 The Committee observes that the need of the hour is to reform the recruitment process 
and make it as fair and transparent as possible by making widest possible use of technology 
to thwart the attempts of fraudsters who are using increasingly innovative methods to game 
the system. The Committee observes that SSC’s shift to Computer based mode examination 
from traditional OMR based mode Examination is a step in the right direction. The 
Committee recommends the Staff Selection Commission to hire computer experts to conduct 
independent audit of each stage of the process to ensure that the online recruitment process 
is entirely foolproof.                                                                 (Para 4.8) 
Action Taken 
7.1 With a view to scrutinize/ audit various processes related to software and their 
applications used during the process of Computer Based Examination, the Commission has 
already approached the Standard Testing and Quality Certification (STQC), Agency under 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India.  
7.2 Preliminary discussions with the experts of Service Provider and STQC have already 
taken place. The matter is, therefore, already in process and necessary follow up steps will  be 
taken by the Commission to make its Computer Based Examination processes more robust 
and reliable. 
Further Observation 
7.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.0 The Committee recommends that the status of SSC  vis-a vis NRA may be submitted to 
it in its Action Taken Note.                                                                                          (Para 4.9) 
Action Taken 
8.1 The draft proposal to set up of NRA is yet to be approved by the Government. The 
status of SSC vis -à-vis NRA will be shared with the Committee as and when the NRA is set 
up. 
 Further Observation 
8.2 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and recommends that the 
Committee should be apprised of the further deve lopments with regard to setting up of 
NRA.  

20 
 
TRAINING INSTITUTIONS: 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.0 The Committee is of the view that civil servants should act in the best interest of the 
public at all times. Though there are laws, Institutions and mechanisms in place to curb 
corruption, it is increasingly being realised that such mechanisms alone are not sufficient to 
instill integrity in them. Thus, the Committee strongly feels that Civil servants should be 
sensitised about ethics and values in pub lic life through training. The Committee 
recommends LBSNAA to recalibrate its course content so as to make civil servants ethical 
and responsible in both interpersonal and intrapersonal realms. The Committee recommends 
LBSNAA that the measures taken to ins till ethics and values in public life in civil servants 
through training may be submitted to the Committee in its Action Taken Note.         
                                                                              (Para 5.3) 
Action Taken 
9.1 The mission of the LBSNAA is ‘To promote good governance by providing quality 
training for building a professional and responsive civil service in a caring, ethical and 
transparent framework’.   In keeping with this mission, it is the constant endeavour of the 
Academy to include the following core values of the Academy in all the inputs in different 
courses being administered here: 
(i)  Serve the Underprivileged : Be humane in your approach while dealing with 
people; be the voice of the underprivileged and be  proactive in addressing any injustice 
against them. You can achieve success in this endeavor if you act with integrity, respect, 
professionalism and collaboration. 
 
(ii) Integrity: Be consistent in your thoughts, words and actions which will make you 
trustworthy. Have courage of conviction and always speak the truth to even the most 
powerful, without fear. Never ever tolerate any degree of corruption, be it in cash, kind or 
intellectual. 
 
(iii) Respect: Embrace diversity of caste, religion, colour, gen der, age, language, region, 
ideology and socio -economic status. Reach out to all with humility and empathy. Be 
emotionally stable, grow with confidence and without arrogance. 
 
(iv) Professionalism: Be judicious and apolitical in your approach; be professio nal and 
completely committed to your job with a bias for action and results; and continuously 
pursue improvement and excellence. 
 
(v)  Collaboration: Collaborate in thoughts and actions by engaging deeply with all to 
evolve consensus. Encourage others, pro mote team spirit and be open to learning from 
others. Take initiative and own responsibility. 
 
9.2 The measures taken to instill ethics and values in public life in civil servants through 
training are as follows: 
1. Exclusive modules / sessions on Ethics, Ethical Dilemmas, Ethics in Public Service 
etc. are organized for the Officer Trainees as a part of the course curriculum.  The 
participants are also expected to write case studies on Ethical Dilemmas in Administration.  

21 
 
These case studies are further util ized as discussion drivers for bringing out the ethical issues 
in governance. 
2. All the Training Courses in the Academy have a heavy component of personal 
awareness and Self Improvement.  Sessions on Ethical Leadership, Emotional Quotient, 
Team Work, Beha vioural Insights for Administrators etc. are conducted.  The purpose of 
these modules / exercises is to delve deeper into the issues of personal ethics and values and 
how they impact governance.  The effort is on Self -awareness i.e. awareness of ones 
behaviour and attitudes, biases etc., which would enable the officer to deliver governance 
which is fair, transparent and humane.  
3. Academy also exposes the young Officer Trainees to eminent Guest Speakers who 
have exhibited very high moral standards in their  public and personal life with the objective 
that the trainees are persuaded to achieve high ethical and moral standards in public 
governance, through “moral suasion”.  
4. In order to cover practical aspects of transparency and fairness in the sphere of pu blic 
governance, and to inculcate a sense of financial integrity and proprietary in the participants, 
modules on Public Procurement, Financial Rules, Conduct Rules, Discipline and Appeal 
Rules etc. are also organized by the Academy.  These form standard in puts in all the courses 
at the Academy.  Through these classes the Officer Trainees acquire the requisite perspective 
and the financial skills needed for ensuring a fair and clean public administration. 
5. Academy believes in imparting training which not o nly makes the officers competent, 
but also imbibes in them an approach to public governance which is humane, sensitive and 
inclusive.  As a part of this endeavour, various modules on Social Inclusion (Gender, 
Differently Abled, Under Privileged) are also o rganized.  Field visits like Village Visits, 
Attachment with NGOs / Aspirational Districts, Tribal Areas etc. during the Bharat Darshan 
are also organized, which expose the officer trainees to the challenges faced by people on the 
ground.  This helps in inculcating in trainees respect and empathy for all.  
6. The Academy also has a system of mentoring the young recruits to the civil services.  
Under this, every officer trainee is assigned to a counsellor group and is mentored by a 
Faculty of the Academy.  T he emphasis of the Counsellor Group Meetings is to orient 
officers towards becoming civil servants with high integrity, sensitivity and competence 
Further Observation 
9.3 The Committee is pleased to note various steps taken by LBSNAA  to instill 
ethical values and responsibility among new Civil Services  recruits and hopes that such 
steps will achieve intended objectives in the long run. 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.0 The Committee is pleased to note that IIPA is conducting a large number of training 
programmes for public functionaries. Its flagship programme, APPPA is successfully running 
and is now in its 45th year. The Committee observes that the programme has benefited mid 
senior level All India, Central Services and defence Forces officers and tha t there is a huge 
demand for this programme. In view of the above, the Committee recommends DoPT to 
approve the proposal of IIPA to launch another APPPA programme in addition to the 
existing one.                                                            (Para 5.12) 
 
 

22 
 
Action Taken  
10.1     The Government has not yet received any proposal for conducting another APPPA 
course from Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA), New Delhi. Efforts are made to 
nominate all the eligible officers for the APPPA course of IIPA. 
Further Observation 
10.2  The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND SERVICE MATTERS: 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.0 The Committee observes that 789 posts in Executive ranks, 77 posts of law  officers 
and 415 posts of technical officers & staffs are lying vacant, which leads to an inevitable 
conclusion that CBI is facing a massive shortage of personnel. The Committee thinks that it 
may increase pendency, hamper the quality of investigations an d ultimately reduce the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency. The Committee therefore recommends that 
necessary action may be initiated to fulfil the large number of vacant posts in CBI on urgent 
basis.                                                                                (Para 6.9) 
Action Taken 
11.1 Details of the Strength of CBI are as under (as on 30.04.2020): 
Cadre Sanctioned 
Strength Actual Strength Vacancy. 
Executive ranks 5000 4193 807 
Law officers 370 290 80 
Ministerial, Technical 
and canteen staff 1903 1476 427 
Total 
 7273 5959 1314 
 
11.2 It is submitted that the Central Bureau of investigation, as a multi-disciplinary premier 
investigation agency, investigates cases wherein sensitivity and dimensions require high 
degree of expertise, hard work professionalism and responsibility.    
11.3 Due to the deputation character of Bureau, there will always be certain vacancies due 
to the cyclical nature of officers coming and going on deputation. The process of selection of 
new officers on deputation is an on-going process.  
11.4 CBI is proactively making efforts and pursuing all stakeholders to ensure filling up of 
its vacancies at all ranks. Actions taken by CBI to fill up the existing vacancies in a time 
bound manner are as under:- 
 

23 
 
(A)  Deputation: 
 Action to fill up vacancies in various ranks und er deputation quota, are being 
taken as per the provision in Recruitment Rules pertaining to the ranks. Circulars/ 
Advertisements are being issued/ published for inviting applications for filling up 
various gazetted and non- gazetted posts. 
 
 Induction of o fficials of CPOs/ State Police/ Banks etc. as Inspector/ Dy. SP in 
CBI on deputation basis is under process. Requisitions have been sent to their 
parent departments for furnishing their service particulars, ACR folders, etc. 
 
 DO letter from CBI sent to Ban ks/ MHA/ NABARD/ SIDBI/ IDBI/ Additional 
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General (Human Resources and Local bodies) 
for sponsoring names of DSP and Inspector on deputation in CBI. 
 
 DO letter from CBI sent to DGs of CPOs and Department of Finance Services, 
RBI for sponsoring names of Inspectors on deputation in CBI. 
 
 Proposals have been sent to UPSC through DoPT for induction of suitable 
officers in various Technical ranks in CBI which are of totally isolated posts in 
nature. 
 
 Personnel in the rank of Constab le from various CPOs/State Police are being 
selected on deputation in CBI. 
 
 All CPOs/State Police/Banks etc. are regularly requested to send nomination of 
officers/ officials for deputation. 
 
(B) Direct Recruitment:- 
  Requisitions are being made for dossiers from the recruiting agencies i.e. 
UPSC/SSC for filling up the posts under direct recruitment quota such as Law 
Officer i.e. PP/ APP, Sub-Inspector, LDC & Stenographers. 
(C)   Promotion:- 
  Action is being taken to hold DPCs for promotion of officers  in various ranks 
under promotion quota. 
   
11.5 Mode of recruitment a contributing factor in filling up of vacancies: -UPSC/ SSC also 
takes its own time in conducting the examination and sending the dossiers of the selected 
candidates. Overcoming delays in p rovision of dossiers/nominations from the UPSC/SSC 
will help immensely in quicker filling of vacancies.  
Further Observation 
11.6 The Committee agrees with the view that filling up of vacancies is an ongoing 
process and that there will be certain vacant po sts at any given point of time. However, 
nothing can justify such a large number of vacancies, especially in a premier 
investigation agency which deals with complicated and high -profile cases. The 
Committee recommends CBI to scale up efforts and ensure tha t shortage of personnel 
doesn’t impede its functioning and performance. 

24 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.0 The Committee notes that Tribunals were established with the objective to provide 
speedy and inexpensive justice to the litigants. However, the level of  pendency in CAT puts 
across a serious point that this basic object of overcoming delays in dispensation of justice is 
far from being achieved. Hence, the Committee recommends the Government to identify the 
root causes of piling up of cases in tribunals an d apprise the Committee of the measures 
taken to cut the backlog of pending cases in the Action Taken note.                        (Para 6.21) 
Action Taken 
12.1 The Central Administrative Tribunal is a quasi -judicial body, created under the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, for the adjudication or trial by Administrative Tribunals 
of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service o f persons 
appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any 
local or other authority brought under its jurisdiction under section 14(2) of the Act.  
 
12.2 At present, the Tribunal exercises jurisdiction over the Departments of Government of 
India, Union Territories and 214 Boards, Corporation and Societies owned or controlled by 
the Government of India. The Central Administrative Tribunal has 07 regular Benches and 21 
Circuit Benches all over India. 
 
12.3 Since 1985 till December, 2019 about 8,14,796 cases have been instituted and out of 
these, 7,65,831 cases have already been disposed of, which is about 94% of the cases 
instituted during the period. Despite the shortage of Members, 26,040 cases have been 
disposed of against the 24,952 cases instituted during the year 2019, which is about 104.36% 
of the cases instituted during the said period.  
 
12.4 The primary reason of pendency of cases is that decision to be passed by higher courts 
(High Courts and Supreme Court) in similar cases are being awaited by Hon’ble CAT to pass 
decision in large number of similar pending cases. 
 
12.5 Also, another major reason is the vacancies of Members in the Tribunal. As on date, 
there are a total of 27 vacancies of Members (14 -Judicial and 13 -Administrative). For the 
vacancy year 2018, offer of appointment of 06 new Administrative Members have already 
been issued. One of them has assumed the charge of the office. On assumption of charge by 
other 05 Administrative Members, the number of vacancies will come down to 22.  
 
12.6 The process of filling up the vacancies for the year 2019 got deferred due to re -
formulation of the rules made under the Finance Act 2017. The Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal 
and other Authorities (Qualifications, Exper ience and other Conditions of Service of 
Members) Rules, 2020 have recently been notified on 12.02.20 under the Finance Act, 2017 
on implementation of Hon’ble Supreme Court’s judgment dated 13.11.19 passed in Civil 
Appeal No.  8588/2019 (Roger Mathew Vs So uth Indian Bank Ltd. & Others). Now, the 
advertisement for inviting applications for the vacancies of Members (CAT) for the vacancy 
year 2019 will be issued shortly.  
 
12.7 It is also to be placed on record that the functioning of the Tribunal is different  than 
those of other regular Courts, where Benches can be constituted by any two Judges. Here in 
the Tribunal, a Division Bench could only be constituted of one Judicial and one 

25 
 
Administrative Member. Thus, the deficiency in either category hampers the fun ctioning of 
the Tribunal. 
 
12.8 The Hon’ble Chairman is closely monitoring the disposal of Benches and also 
impressing upon to make every endeavour to reduce backlog pendency.  
 
12.9 It may be worth mentioning that implementation of Advance Case Informatio n 
System (ACIS) in CAT, which facilitates E -courts facility and includes e -filing, online 
remittance of fee, hearing of the cases through video conferencing at the discretion of the 
Tribunal is currently under progress. Once the ACIS will be operational, M embers of 
different Benches may constitute a Division Bench and hear the cases through video 
conferencing, which may be helpful to reduce the pendency of old cases to some extent.   
Further Observation 
12.10 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministr y and hopes that Advanced 
Case Information System is operationalized soon. 
Recommendation/Observation 
13.0 The Committee notes that Lokpal is not fully operational yet. The Committee suggests 
the Ministry to expedite the process and ensure that Lokpal becomes fully functional as soon 
as practicable.                                                                                       (Para 6.27) 
Action Taken 
13.1 The Lokpal has shifted its office to the new premises at Plot No. 6, Vasant Kunj 
Institutional Area, New Delhi (former ICADR campus) in the third week of February, 2020, 
and is now functional. 
13.2 The Lokpal (Complaint) Rules, 2020, which prescribe the form in which the 
complaints are required to be made and acted upon have been notified on March 2, 2020.  
Further Observation 
13.3 The Committee is pleased to note that the office of Lokpal, an institution meant 
for eliminating corruption is now functional and hopes that it will help in checking the  
growing menace of corruption in high offices.  
Recommendation/Observation 
14.0 The Committee feels that CIC is staring at a mountain of appeals. This pendency 
affects the system as much as it affects the appellants. This pendency is invariably linked to 
the strength of the Commission. The Committee recommends the Government to fill the 
vacancies of Information Commissioners as stipulated in the Act without any further delay.
                                                                                                             (Para 6.31) 
Action Taken 
14.1 As per section 12 (2) of the RTI Act 2005, the Central Information Commission shall 
consist of the Chief Information Commissioner and such number of Central Information 
Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be deemed necessary.  
14.2 The Government has appointed the Chief Information Commissioner and one 
Information Commissioner in the Central Information Commission on 06 th March, 2020. At 

26 
 
present the Central Information Commission has the Chief Information Commissioner and 6 
Information Commissioners in position. 
Further Observation 
14.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES: 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.0 The Committee recommends the Department to ensure speedy implementation of the 
reforms suggested by the Quality Council of India as it would serve the twin purposes of 
reducing the volume of grievances and increasing citizen satisfaction.                      (Para 7.9) 
Action Taken 
15.1 QCI had suggested  systemic reforms for the  top 20 grievance receiving Ministries/ 
Departments based on the root cause analysis of public grievances. The suggestions were 
forwarded to the concerned Ministries/ Departments of which about 35 suggestions have been 
implemented.  
 15.2 DARPG has   written to the concerned Ministries to examine the feasibility of 
implementation of the remaining suggestions made by QCI. 
Further Observation 
15.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the 
Ministries/Departments will implement the re forms suggested by Quality Council of 
India.  
PENSION AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE: 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.0 21st Century is characterized as Information age. Providing access to information is 
a means of empowering people. The Committee observes that there is a need to make people 
aware about the Schemes and initiatives launched by the Government for their welfa re. The 
motto is to Educate Engage and Empower people. The Schemes being implemented by the 
Government would have no meaning if the target beneficiaries are not aware of the benefits. 
The Committee further observes that the Budgetary allocation for Pension ers’ Portal has 
been cut down from 6 crore in BE 2019 -20 to `5 crore at RE stage. Further, an outlay of 5 
crore has been earmarked for the same in BE 2020 -21.Outlay provided for Advertising and 
Publicity (43.01.26) under the Head Pensioners’ portal has bee n continually reduced from 4 
crore in BE 2019 -20 to 2.84 crore in RE 2019 -20 to 2.29 crore in BE 2020 -21.The 
Committee therefore recommends the Department to reach out to the target beneficiaries 
through various means including print and electronic media a nd particularly social media 
for Social media has emerged as a powerful participatory medium of communication in 
recent times.                                                       (Para 8.6) 
Action Taken 
16.1 DoPPW employs the modes of Print &  Electronic Media to make the Pensioners 
aware about the Schemes and initiatives launched under the Scheme. This is in addition to the 
Awareness workshops which are held in various parts of the country inviting the targeted 

27 
 
group viz. Pensioners/Retirees/Staffs dealing with pension cases. DoPPW plans to continue 
with this format of awareness in compliance with the Committees recommendations. 
16.2 During the year 2019 -20, in -line with the Government’s policy, the DoPPW has 
adopted a gradual shift towards spr eading awareness amongst the targeted groups through 
social media such as Facebook, Twitter and Documentary films, You Tube etc. It is with this 
objective that the Department has newly created a Social Media team and with the help of the 
same launched its first series of info -graphics on Family Pension. The Department has also 
been creating awareness through SMSs which are sent directly on the Mobile Phone of 
pensioners. This has resulted in creating greater awareness in the targeted group at minimal 
costs. 
Further Observation 
16.3 The Committee appreciates  DoPPW for taking various steps to make Pensioners 
aware about the Schemes and initiatives through such measures as awareness 
workshops, social media, documentary films etc. and hopes that the target grou ps will 
be immensely benefited by these initiatives.  
 Recommendation/Observation 
17.0 The Committee is happy to note that the average disposal rate of the grievances 
lodged on CPENGRAMS portal is above 90% and the average time taken for the disposal of 
grievances came down from 104 days to 31 days over the years. However, the fact that the 
Department has been receiving a negative feedback from grievance holders puts across a 
serious point that grievances are being disposed of summarily by the respective 
Ministries/Departments. There is a need to focus on quality of grievance redressal along with 
focusing on quantity. Therefore, the committee is of the considered view that there should be 
a nodal authority in the Department to whom appeals against the orde rs/decisions of 
Ministries/Departments can be made.                                                 (Para 8.10) 
 
Action Taken 
17.1 DoPPW has the role of monitoring of grievances disposed by respective 
Ministries/Departments as the final disposal is done by  these Ministries who are the Pension 
settling offices of the respective pensioners. 
17.2 Department will emphasize upon all Ministries/Departments to nominate officers of 
appropriate level who could function as Appellate Authority for considering the appe als 
against the orders/decisions of Ministries/Departments; preferred by the aggrieved 
pensioners. 
Further Observation 
17.3 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.  
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE 
HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE INISTRY 
 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY: 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.0 It has been observed that the Ministry has utilised about 77% of the funds allocated 
to it till 31 st January, 2020. Furthe r, the analysis of the utilization trends of various bodies 
under the administrative control of the Ministry revealed that about 20% of the funds 
allocated to them are lying unspent as on 31 st January, 2020. In view of Finance Ministry’s 
instructions impos ing a ceiling limit on the expenditure that can be incurred in the last 
quarter and last month (March), the Committee is apprehensive whether the remaining funds 
will be optimally utilized by the end of the on -going fiscal year. The Committee desires that 
the Ministry should look into the reasons for slow pace of utilisation of funds as poor fiscal 
discipline is symptomatic of ineffective planning and delivery.                    (Para 2.21) 
 
Action Taken 
1.1 Noted 
 
Further Observation 
 
1.2 The Committee notes that the details of final expenditure have not been 
furnished by the Ministry as it would have given a more accurate picture of the trend in 
the utilization of funds. Nevertheless, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should make all efforts to  properly utilize allocations on quarterly basis and should not 
wait till the fag end of the financial year. 
 
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT: 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 The Committee takes note of the dismal implementation of the reservation policy by 
Ministries/Departments. It feels that mounting number of backlog vacancies year on year 
points to a serious malaise afflicting the entire recruitment system as a whole. The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministries/Departments concerned to fill up the identi fied backlog 
vacancies through special recruitment drives without any further delay. The Committee also 
feels that the Government should take stock of the situation, identify the root causes of 
backlog vacancies and take necessary remedial measures to prev ent recurrence of the same.                                                             
           (Para 3.6)   
Action Taken 
2.1 DoPT monitors the progress in filling up of backlog reserved vacancies for Scheduled 
Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs) and Other Backward Classes (OBCs) with ten 
Ministries/Departments, having more than 90% of the employees in Central Government. 
2.2 DoPT has already issued instructions to all Ministries/ Departments to constitute an 
in-house Committee for identification of ba cklog reserved vacancies, to study the root cause 

29 
 
of such vacancies, to initiate measures to remove the factors causing such vacancies and to 
fill them up through Special Recruitment Drives. 
2.3 Central Secretariat: Employee positions - There are three modes of Recruitment for 
the employees viz. Direct Recruitment, fast track promotion through Limited Departmental 
Competitive Examinations and Seniority Quota promotion.  
2.4 In Direct Recruitment quota, there are no backlog vacancies.  
2.5 For Limited Departmental Competitive Examination quota, the unfilled vacancies are 
taken into consideration for reporting to SSC or UPSC, as the case may be, for the current 
year.  At times, the vacancies may remain unfilled as the eligible officers appearing for the 
Limited Departmental Competitive Examinations fail to qualify and sometimes eligible 
officers are also not available.  
2.6 For Seniority Quota Promotion, the backlog vacancies are available due to non -
availability of eligible officers. However, there are no back log vacancies in the grades of 
Deputy Secretary/ Director (CSS)/ Sr.PPS/ PSO (CSSS) as reservation in promotion is not 
applicable for such grades (promotion from Group -A to Group-A). Presently promotions are 
on hold due to pending litigation in Supreme Cou rt on own merit and reservation matters. 
Appropriate action will be taken based on the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.  
Further Observation 
2.7 The Committee has noted that DoPT has issued instructions to all 
Ministries/Departments to constitute an  in-house Committee for identification of 
backlog reserved vacancies, to study the root cause of such vacancies, to initiate 
measures to remove the factors causing such vacancies and to fill them up through 
Special Recruitment Drives. The Committee believe s that backlog vacancies affect the 
recruitment cycle and addressing backlog vacancies will lead to better management of 
human capital. 
2.8 The Committee is aware of the fact that all Ministries and Departments are 
supposed to have liaison officers of the rank of Deputy Secretary or above and setting 
up of special reservation cell for enforcement of orders of reservation in posts and 
services. DoPT is mandated to monitor the progress in filling up of backlog vacancies 
for SCs, STs and OBCs in central Ministries and Departments. There are still many 
Departments and Ministries which have still not set up reservation cell and appointed 
liaison off icers. DoPT should pursue with such Departments and Ministries in this 
regard for compliance and furnish list of such Departments and Ministries which have 
not instituted reservation cell and appointed liaison officers even after reminders.  
2.9 The Commit tee is not satisfied with the explanation that non -availability of 
eligible officers and non -qualification of available reserved category candidates for 
seniority promotion and departmental exam promotions respectively. The Committee 
strongly feels that th is may be a ploy to not fill reserved quota backlog vacancies on 
some pretext or the other. The Committee would like to be furnished a note containing 
category wise (General/SC/ST/OBC) details of candidates from all Ministries and 
Departments who were denied promotion through limited competitive exam on account 
of their non -qualification in exams. The Ministry should intervene and ensure that all 
Ministries and Departments fill up such backlog vacancies from amongst available 
candidates by relaxing criteria as there are no objective criteria to determine suitability/ 
eligibility. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that not enough is being done to fill 

30 
 
up the backlog vacancies and recommends that the DoPT should impress upon all the 
Ministries/Departments to take such steps as they deem proper to address the malaise. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 Therefore, Committee is of the view that the Ministries should be grouped into 
clusters/sectors, for instance, rural cluster/sector, Social cluster/sector, fin ancial 
cluster/sector and officers should be assigned to a particular cluster/sector based on their 
knowledge, competence, interest and inclination. Once assigned to a particular sector, the 
civil servant will spend the rest of his career within the sector  concerned. This system will 
enable Civil servants to acquire skills, expertise and professional excellence in a particular 
domain. The Committee thinks that this administrative reform can usher in Good 
Governance.                    (Para 3.16) 
 
Action Taken 
3.1 All India Service Officers:  All India Service officers predominantly work in their 
respective State Cadres and come to the central Government on deputation for a specific 
period. In the PAR form of IAS officers, reporting officers are required to  recommend the 
domain assignment for the Officer reported upon (ORU).  The domain assignments for IAS 
officers include the following domains: 
 Agriculture and Rural Development  
 Public Finance and Financial Management  
 Social Development 
 Industry and Trade 
 Culture and Information 
 Internal Affairs and Defence 
 Natural Resource Management 
 Housing and Urban Affairs 
 Energy and Environment 
 Personnel and General Administration, Governance Reform, Regulatory Systems 
 Communication Systems and Connectivity  
 Infrastructure 
 Science and Technology  
 
3.2 It is further informed that for IAS officers the mapping of Departments to Domains 
have been done in the PAR Rules 2007, copy of this mapping is enclosed at Appendix II. 
3.3 For other All India Services viz IPS and IFS in the PAR form, reporting officers are 
required to recommend the domain assignment for the ORU. These domains are relevant to 
the specialized requirement of these services.The domain assignments for IPS & IFS officers 
are enclosed at Appendix III. 
3.4 2nd Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) has made certain 
recommendations regarding assignment of domain to the officers of All India Services to 
encourage specialization. The recommendations are with the Government. 
3.5 So far as Central Secretariat Services are concerned, it is stated that  

31 
 
1)  The Central Secretariat (CS) Division deals with the cadre  management of 
Central Secretariat Service (CSS) and cadre  management of Central Secretariat 
Stenographer Service (CSSS)  and Central Secretariat Clerical Service (CSCS).  
2)  The CSS forms the foundation on which the edifice of central  secretariat 
stands. They constitute the junior and the middle  management of the Government 
and comprise of the Assistant  Section Officer, Section Officer, Under 
Secretary, DS/Director and  JS (in-situ) grades. 
3)  The Rotational Transfer policy was also revised with this very aim of  
harmonizing the seemingly opposite objectives of developing specialization versus 
overall growth of officers. Presently all CSS officers are transferred after a defined 
tenure in each Ministry/ Department and this system is running smoothly. 
4)  ln case it is deemed appropriate to group the Ministries/  Departments into 
sectors/ clusters, then for CSS officers, this  specialization should happen from the 
middle management level  only. At the lower level, the officers of ASO and SO 
level should  be given an exposure to the functioning of Government in a 
 generalized manner to enable them to acquire an understanding of  the overall 
functioning of the Government.  
5)  Acquiring of specialization in particular sectors and the utilisation   of the 
expertise so acquired will, no doubt, ensure better governance. However, on the 
flipside, assigning officers of CSSS  and CSCS cadres based on specializations even 
after some residency period in the cadres after induction may reduce the system 
flexibility/ resource pool. 
6)  It is felt that if specialisation is allowed to emerge gradually at mid -career 
level through a process  of customised training programmes of a selected few only 
without disturbing the cadre matrix to the extent possible may facilitate officials/ 
officers in specialising as they move up in the hierarchy based on their revealed 
aptitude, inclination and performance record. Therefore, the same may be worked out 
with some flexibility keeping all pros and cons in consideration. Thereafter, such 
officials/ officers  may conveniently be posted to those Ministries/ Departments 
requiring incumbent having such speciali sation in public interest without ignoring 
administrative convenience. 
Further Observation 
3.6 The Committee feels that as regards to All India Services, as per the extant rules, 
the reporting officers are required to recommend domain assignment for the of ficer 
reported upon. However, the Committee has a different view in this regard. The 
Committee is of the view that such an issue should not be left to the discretion of the 
reporting officer. The Committee recommends that the educational, professional, 
regional, social, cultural background of the officer should be given primacy while 
considering his or her domain of choice. Besides, the officer should have the leeway to 
decide the domain of his or her choice as per his or her self -assessment of knowledge, 
skills, expertise and competence. Therefore, the Committee reiterates that there should 
be grouping/ clusterisation of Ministries and assignment of officers to clusters of their 
choice based on their interest, aptitude and inclination.  
 
 

32 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.0 The Committee notes that 338 IAS officers haven’t filed their Immovable Property 
Returns in the preceding year. Civil servants are expected to maintain the highest standards 
of integrity and morality. The Committee views it seriously and recommends DoPT to  take 
stringent measures to ensure that civil servants comply with the guidelines and file 
Immovable property Returns in time. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
status of compliance of the 338 IAS officers who haven’t filed Immovable Property Returns in 
the preceding year in its Action taken Note.                     
           (Para 3.22) 
Action Taken 
4.1 The officers who do not fill their IPR in time are denied Vigilance Clearance in 
accordance with the Vigilance Guidelines. 
4.2 Further in case of non -filing of IPR, the States are authorised to initiate Disciplinary 
Proceedings (DP) in accordance with the relevant Rules. Government of India had also issued 
instructions to this effect to the states. 
4.3 As per Rule 16 (2) of all India Servic es (Conduct) Rule, 1968, every member of the 
Service shall submit an annual return in such form as may be prescribed by the Government 
in this regard, giving full particulars regarding the immovable property inherited by him or 
owned or acquired by him or held by him on lease or mortgage, either in his own name or in 
the name of any member of his family or in the name of any other person. 
4.4 The vigilance clearance in respect of IAS officers for the purpose of:- 
(a)  Inclusion in the offer list  
(b)  Empanelment 
(c)  Any deputation for which Central Government clearance is  necessary 
 including deputation under rule 6[1] and 6[2] (ii) of the AIs (Cadre) Rules  
(d)   Appointments to sensitive posts  
(e)  Assignments to training programmes (except mandatory training)  are 
 examined as per guidelines contained in DoP&T OM No.104/33/2005 -AVD-I 
 dated 29.10.2007 and 7.9.2011.  
4.5 It had been clarified at para (f) of the OM dated 7.9.2011 that vigilance cleara nce 
shall be denied to an officer if he fails to submit his annual immovable property return of the 
previous year latest by 31 st January of the following year, as required under Government of 
India decisions under Rule 16 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rule, 1968.   
4.6 Accordingly, vigilance clearance is denied to IAS officers for the purposes mentioned 
above, if they fail to file their Immovable Property Returns within the prescribed time as per 
Rule 16 (2) of the AIS (Conduct) rules, 1968. 
Further Observation  
4.7  The Committee had desired to be apprised about the status of compliance of the 
338 IAS officers who hadn’t filed Immovable Property Returns in the preceding year; 
however, the Ministry has avoided furnishing the details. The Committee reit erates that 
a status note on the IAS officers who hadn’t filed Immovable Property Returns till date 

33 
 
along with the reasons and action taken against such officers, be furnished to the 
Committee at the earliest. 
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS: 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.0 The Committee notes that a number of reforms have been introduced by UPSC in the 
Civil Services Examination since 2010. The Committee recommends UPSC to apprise it 
about the changes effected in the Civil Services Examination since 2010 and the impact of 
those reforms in general in the Action Taken Note. The Committee also recommends UPSC to 
apprise it about the reforms that UPSC is contemplating to introduce in the Civil Services 
Examination system in coming years to improve t he recruitment system further in the Action 
Taken Note.                    (Para 4.4) 
Action Taken 
5.1 The Commission conducts the Civil Services Examination (CSE) in accordance with 
the Rules of this Examination notified by the Government (Department of Personnel and 
Training) annually and recommends the candidates to the Government for making 
appointment against the vacancies reported to the Commission by the participating services.  
 
5.2 The changes effected in the CSE since 2010 were based on the recommendations of 
Expert Committees, whose recommendations were considered by the Government while 
introducing the said changes in this Examination. Details of such changes since 2010 to date 
are at Appendix I. 
 
5.3 No specific impact assessment study has been carried out by the Commission in 
respect of the changes brought about in the scheme of the CSE since 2010. However, the 
Expert Committee are constituted by the Commission from time to time to examine the 
changes required in this Examination to make it in tune with the need of the changing time so 
that the candidates with the requisite qualities continue t o get selected to man the premier 
central services of the country including All India Services. 
 
5.4 In recent past, the UPSC constituted an Expert Committee to comprehensively 
examine the various issues, raised from time to time regarding the Civil Servic es 
Examination with respect to the eligibility, syllabus, scheme and pattern of the Examination 
under the chairmanship of Shri B.S. Baswan, IAS (Retd.) on 12 th August, 2015. The 
Committee submitted its report to the Commission on 09 th August, 2016 and the Commission 
sent the Report to the Government (DoP&T) on 10 th August, 2016. The Commission 
finalized its comments on the recommendations of the Baswan Committee, which were sent 
to the Government (DOP&T) vide letter dated 20th March, 2017 
 
5.5 Baswan Commit tee report along with UPSC’s recommendations on it is presently 
under the examination of the Government. 
 
 
Further Observation 
 
5.6 The Committee further recommends that a detailed study should be conducted 
by an expert committee to assess the impact of the drastic changes brought about by the 

34 
 
Commission in the scheme of examination since 2010 both on the administration and on 
the candidates level, who were impacted by such changes. 
 
5.7  The Committee would further like to be apprised of the details in reg ard to 
number of candidates’ background wise (rural/urban)and language wise 
(English/Hindi/other vernacular taken as a medium of examination) selected by UPSC 
between 2005-10 and between 2010-2018. 
 
TRAINING INSTITUTIONS: 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.0 Keeping in view the manpower status of ISTM and Budget allocated to it, the 
Committee observes that ISTM is not only under staffed but is also not adequately funded. It 
also observes that an odd 15 trainers and some guest faculty are imparting training to about 
6000 candidates and that too, with meagre funds. The Committee expresses its concern over 
the deficit of trainers, the core requirement of any training programme. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends DoPT to provide adequate funds to ISTM and also ens ure that there 
is no shortage of faculty, at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that a quality audit 
of the training imparted at ISTM be conducted. 
(para 5.9) 
Action Taken 
6.1 The present status of staff strength in this Institute is as follows: 
Name of 
Post 
Total Sanctioned 
posts 
 
In Position Vacancy 
Faculty posts 
 
28 15 13 
Non Faculty posts 
 
69 42 27 
Total 
 
97 57 40 
 
6.2 Efforts are being made to fill up all the vacant posts as per provisions of recruitment 
rules in consultation with UPSC etc. which is an ongoing process. The filling up of posts is 
regularly being monitored at higher level in the Department. Funds are made available to the 
ISTM for all its requirements by making additional budgetary allocations as and when 
required.  
 
6.3 On completion of each and every training programme, ISTM obtains feedback from 
the trainee participants on a scale of 1 to 5. The overall feedback received in the courses 
conducted has been more than 4, i.e. (more than 80% satisfaction of the participants).  In 
addition, post-training seminars are conducted for some of the Cadre Training Programmes to 
get the feedback on impact of the training programmes in which feedback of the supervisory 
officers is also obtained. The outcome of the post training seminars provides inputs for design 
review of the cadre training programmes. It is pertinent to mention that ISTM is an ISO 
9001-2015 certified Institute. As recommended by the committee, feasibility of conducting 
the quality audit will be explored and conducted 
 
 

35 
 
Further observation 
6.4 The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Ministry and 
recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the Finance Ministry to allocate 
additional funds to ISTM as per projection at RE stage so that they could recruit  
permanent staff against vacancies. The Committee is also not satisfied with the reply of 
the Ministry as no concrete action plan in regard to filling up of almost 40 percent of 
vacant faculty positions have been furnished.  The Committee is of the view th at the 
ISTM is a premier training institution and it cannot be run with guest faculty. The 
Committee recommends that the ISTM should be adequately staffed and fund should 
not be a constraint in this regard. The Committee hopes that all the vacant positions  
will be filled up during this financial year.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.0 The Committee observes that IIPA has a limited resource base. Besides the Grants-in-
aid provided by DoPT, IIPA generates revenue from Training Programmes, Research &  
Evaluation Studies, Publications and User charges. Further, the Committee notes that IIPA 
has fully utilized the grant provided by DoPT. The Committee is of the view that IIPA is 
making both ends meet and has barely any surplus left to innovate or invest in training in a 
big way. Therefore, the Committee recommends DoPT to increase the quantum of grants 
provided to IIPA.                                                                                                        (para 5.13) 
Action Taken 
7.1 The suggestion of the committee is noted. IIPA has been provided required funds to 
meet their expenditure. Efforts will be made to provide additional fund to IIPA depending 
upon the requirement and allocation of fund by Ministry of Finance. 
Further Observation 
7.2  The Committee recommends that adequate funds should be provided to IIPA so 
that it can discharge its mandate effectively. The Committee recommends the 
Department to pursue with the Ministry of Finance to allocate additional funds to IIPA 
as per its p rojected demand at RE stage as any shortfall in allocation will adversely 
affect IIPA’s capacity to invest in training and research.  
 
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND SERVICE MATTERS: 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.0 The Committee observes that the mandate of CBI has expanded considerably over the 
years and CBI is also grappling with the problem of infrastructure deficit. However, the 
country’s premier investigation agency has received an allocation of just 802 crore against 
the projection of 1386 crore made to the Ministry of Finance. This shortfall in allocation will 
adversely affect CBI’s ability to invest in training, research, equipment and other support 
structures. The Committee is of the view that funds constrain t should not impede CBI from 
discharging its mandate effectively and accordingly recommends the Government to provide 
adequate funds for meeting the growing needs of the country’s premier investigating agency. 
The Committee recommends that action taken in this regard may be submitted to it in its 
Action Taken Note.            (para 6.5) 
 
 

36 
 
Action Taken 
8.1 It is submitted that funds to the tune of Rs. 802.79 Cr have been allocated to CBI 
against the demand of funds of Rs.1386.26 Cr. Demand of additional fund s over and above 
the sanctioned Budget Estimate 2020 -21 will be projected in Revised Estimate stage with 
physical and financial progress and with due justification. 
Further Observation 
8.2   The Committee has noted that Rs 781.01 Cr was allocated to CBI in  BE 2019-20 , a 
marginal increase from Rs 778.93 Cr allocated in 2018 -19. Again, only Rs. 802.79 Cr 
have been allocated to CBI against the projected demand of Rs. 1386.26 Cr. The 
Committee understands that the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), a premi um 
investigating arm of the Government investigates large number of sensitive, high-profile 
corruption and economic fraud cases against public servants, private persons, firms. 
Besides this, CBI also probes and pursues several extradition cases against fug itive 
economic offenders as well as criminals in courts of other countries. Such investigation 
and probes require large scale deployment of human resources and funds. The 
Committee hopes that additional funds will be provided to the premier investigation 
agency at RE stage so that it can discharge its tremendous responsibilities without any 
hindrance.  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.0 The Committee notes the persistent trend of underutilization of funds meant for 
strengthening the infrastructure and modernization of CBI. The underutilization of Funds 
points to deficiencies in planning and budgetary exercise and consistent failure to uti lize the 
allocated funds. The Committee is of the view that it is high time the deficiencies/anomalies in 
their budgetary planning and expenditure are rectified and measures are taken to ensure 
maximum utilization of funds.                                                                   (Para 6.7) 
Action Taken 
9.1 The suggestion of the Committee has been noted and CBI has affirmed that efforts 
will be made to utilize the allocated funds fully. 
Further Observation 
9.2 The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. The Committee in its 
previous Reports including its 95 th Report on Demands for Grants (2018 -19) had 
expressed its displeasure over slow pace of utilisation of funds  by CBI. The Committee 
noted that  on account of underutilisation or slow pac e of utilization of funds , 
allocations to CBI were reduced at the RE stage and consequently the Budget Estimates 
of next year are also reduced and it happened this financial year also. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that a robust monitoring  mechanism should be set up 
in the organisation to monitor the pace of implementation of schemes and projects from 
start to finish and consequently proper utilisation of funds is ensured. 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.0 The Committee notes that the prestig ious Centralized Technology Vertical -CBI 
project which was approved in 2016 has not seen the light of the day yet. Further, 
International Centre of Excellence in Forensic Science and International Centre of 
Excellence in Investigation which were announced long back are still under examination. The 
Committee recommends that both CBI and the government should introspect, identify the 

37 
 
bottlenecks and devise remedial measures and take necessary measures to ensure timely 
implementation of the projects.                                                   (Para 6.13) 
Action Taken 
10.1 Observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
Further Observation 
10.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the plain reply of the Ministry. The 
Committee is of the view that The Centralised Technology Vertical (CTV) project, 
which aims to facilitate real -time information sharing with investigators across the 
country, is an important project of CBI and it should be operationalized at the earliest. 
Besides this,  International Centre of Excellence in Forensic Science and International 
Centre of Excellence in Investigation should also be established soon. The Committee 
should be a pprised of the steps taken for completion of both the projects and hurdles 
being faced by the Ministry in this regard.  
Recommendation/Observation 
11.0 The Committee notes that CAT is faced with the twin problems of Human resource 
deficit and Infrastructur e deficit. Both these deficits contribute to arrears and backlog of 
cases. The Committee therefore strongly recommends that DoPT and CAT should together 
identify the procedural bottlenecks delaying the commencement of construction of buildings 
and take nec essary remedial measures at the earliest. The Committee understands the 
difficulty of the Central Administrative Tribunal in handling the avalanche of litigations with 
its current strength. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government to expedite the  
process of filling up of vacancies and ensure timely dispensation of justice.           (Para 6.18) 
 
Action Taken 
11.1 Infrastructure Deficit: The Central Administrative Tribunal has been functioning with 
its seventeen Benches all over India including Principal Bench at New Delhi. Out of these 17 
Benches, 08 Benches namely Principal Bench, Ahmadabad Bench, Allahabad Bench, 
Chandigarh Bench, Ernak ulum Bench, Hyderabad Bench, Jaipur Bench and Jodhpur Bench 
are functioning from its own buildings, 02 Benches namely Cuttack Bench and Patna Bench 
are functioning from Government buildings without any rent or license fee. 02 Benches 
namely Bangalore Bench and Kolkata Bench are functioning from Government buildings by 
paying license fee. Rest 05 Benches namely Chennai, Guwahati, Jabalpur, Lucknow and 
Mumbai Benches are functioning from rented buildings and status of construction of own 
building or acquiring  of land for these Benches or accommodating them in Government 
buildings on license fee basis is as under:  
(i) Mumbai Bench has recently been allotted accommodation in Government Building by 
CPWD and is likely to be shifted shortly. 
 
(ii) The matter of procuring l and near High Court premises or obtaining Government 
accommodation for Chennai Bench is under process. 
 
(iii) Land for construction of own buildings in respect of Jabalpur, Lucknow and Guwahati 
Benches have already been purchased. Current status of construction of buildings for 
these Benches are as under: 
 

38 
 
(a) Construction of building for Jabalpur Bench is in full swing and likely to be 
completed by the calendar year 2020. 
 
(b) Revised preliminary drawings strictly as per the norms of the Directorate of 
Estates for construction of building in respect of Lucknow Bench is yet to be 
received from CPWD.  The matter is being pursued vigorously. 
 
(c) The CPWD, Guwahati has been requested to provide the Building Layout Plan 
for construction of Guwahati Bench. The matter is being pursued vigorously. 
 
 
Sincere efforts are continually being made to get own buildings/ space in GPOA Building in 
respect of Benches, those are presently functioning from the rented buildings. 
 
11.2 Human Resource Deficit: There are 66 sanctioned posts of  Hon’ble Chairman/ 
Members (33- Judicial and 33- Administrative). As on date, 27 posts of Hon’ble Members are 
vacant in various Benches (14 - Judicial & 13 -Administrative). Some more vacancies will 
arise during the year 2020. 
 
11.3 For the vacancy year 2018 , offer of appointment of 06 new Administrative Members 
have already been issued. 01 of them has assumed the charge of the office. On assumption of 
charge by other 05 Administrative Members, the number of vacancies will come down to 22. 
 
11.4 For the vacancy year 2019, the process for filling up the vacancies of Members (CAT) 
got deferred, as the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunal and other Authorities (Qualifications, 
Experience, and other Conditions of Service of Members) Rules, 2017 notified under the 
Finance Act, 2017 regarding terms and conditions of service of Hon’ble Chairman and 
Members of the Tribunal were struck down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide judgment 
dated 13.11.2019 in Civil Appeal No. 8588/2019 (Roger Mathew Vs South Indian Bank Ltd. 
& Others). 
 
11.5 The Hon’ble Court directed the Central Govt. to re -formulate the rules in accordance 
with the principles delineated by the Hon’ble Court in various judgments from time to time. 
Accordingly, the Central Govt. has notified the Tribunals, Appellate T ribunal and other 
Authorities (Qualifications, Experience, and other Conditions of Service of Members) Rules, 
2020 w.e.f. 12th February, 2020. Now, the advertisement for inviting applications for the 
vacancies of Members (CAT) for the vacancy year 2019 will be issued shortly.  
 
Further Observation 
 
11.6 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry delineating the progres s 
made with regard to addressing the problems of infrastructure and human resource 
deficits nagging CAT Infrastructure Deficit. The Committee also takes note of the fact 
that out of seventeen benches, only eight benches are functioning from their own 
buildings, four benches are functioning from Government buildings and rest five 
Benches are functioning from rented buildings. The Committee is of the considered 
view that all nine benches including those which are functioning from Government 
buildings on rent or otherwise should have their own buildings and all necessary steps 
such as identification of sites, construction of buildings etc should be completed in time 

39 
 
bound manner, however, priority should be given to benches which are functioning 
from rented buildings.  
 
11.7 The Committee further notes that out of 66 sanctioned posts of Hon’ble 
Chairman/ Members (33 -Judicial and 33 -Administrative) 27 posts (14 -Judicial & 13 -
Administrative) of Hon’ble Members are vacant in various Benches and more vacancies 
are likely to arise this year. The Committee strongly recommends that all the vacancies 
should be filled up on priority basis at the earliest to reduce arrears and backlogs of 
cases.  
 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES: 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.0 The Right of Citizens for Time -bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal 
of their Grievances Bill, 2011 is essentially citizen centric and will ensure time bound 
delivery of Goods and services as well as facilitate timely redressal of grievan ces besides 
strengthening accountability and promoting transparency. The Committee in its 95th Report 
recommended the Government to consider the reintroduction of the said Bill and till then 
implement the proposed scheme without any further delay. The Comm ittee reiterates its 
earlier recommendation.                    (Para 7.12) 
Action Taken 
12.1 A CoS note on Delivery of Services and Grievances Redressal Scheme was referred 
to the Cabinet Secretariat. The proposal is being examined in consultation with the concerned 
authorities for appropriate action.  However, DARPG has taken the following measures to 
improve effectiveness of service delivery and grievance redressal: 
Service Delivery:  DARPG in its efforts to provide more responsive and citizen -
friendly governance coordinates with the Central Ministries to formulate and 
operationalise Citizen’s Charters.   Recently the Ministry has undertaken certain 
steps on Citizen Charter of Ministry of External Affairs and Central Board of 
Direct Taxes to review their Citizen’s Charters.  Based on this, the charter of both 
the organizations have been revamped to make them one stop information 
platform. DARPG is regularly  taking meetings with   Ministries on review and 
updation of their Citizen’s Charter. 
Public Grievances: DARPG has initiated the CPGRAMS Reforms by process re -
engineering of existing CPGRAMS for faster and qualitative resolution of 
grievances. The CPGRAMS 7.0 facilitate direct mapping of grievances with  last 
mile  officer  responsible for resolution to r educe the   disposal time , enable 
automatic escalation of the grievance to the next higher level if not resolved by the 
sub-ordinate office within the stipulated timeframe and  enable better identification 
of gaps between policy and delivery. 
12.2 The reform has already been implemented in 9 Ministries / Departments - Department 
of Posts, Telecom, DFS (Banking & Insurance), M/ Road Transport and Highways, M/ 
External Affairs, D/ School Education and literacy, M/ Health & FW and M/ Petroleum.   
Dept. of Posts reported that CPGRAM reforms have covered 1.5 lac post offices, saving 2323 
Mondays and reduced timelines of disposal substantially. 

40 
 
12.3 The reform would be implemented in all other Ministry/Departments/Organizations in 
phased manner. 
12.4 Further NIC has  developed web APIs to facilitate integration of State Grievance 
Portals with CPGRAMS. 8 States portals have been integrated so far.  
Further Observation  
12.5 The Committee is appreciative of the initiatives taken by DARPG to improve 
service delivery and facilitate speedy redressal of grievances. However, the Committee 
observes that the Ministry has avoided giving any reply in respect of the 
recommendation made by the Committee for reintroduction of the Right of Citizens for 
Time-bound Delivery of Goods an d Services and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 
2011. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as it believes that passage and 
enactment of this bill will ensure time bound delivery of Goods and services and 
facilitate timely redressal of grievances for citizens and strengthen accountability and 
promote transparency. The Committee would like to be apprised of the view of the 
Ministry in this regard. 
 
 
********** 
 
  

41 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE  
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
1. The Committee appreciates the Department for devising more schemes in general 
and Integrated Government Online Training (iGOT) programme in particular 
which aim at augmenting human resou rce potential and improving governance . 
However, it would like to reiterate its recommendation that the Ministry should 
take necessary corrective measures to ensure proportionate and timely 
disbursement of funds.          (Para 1.6) 
 
2. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Department 
would pursue with the Ministry of Finance for providing additional budgetary 
allocation to UPSC as per their projection at RE stage so that the premier 
recruitment agency can adequately carry out its constitutional mandate.  
            (Para 2.3) 
 
3. The Committee is pleased to note that the Government has increased the intake of 
IAS officers to 180 every year since 2012. However, the Committee is of the 
considered view that the increased intake should  be commensurate with the 
whopping gap between the sanctioned strength and the in -position strength and it 
should not be fixed at 180 only. The Committee would like the Department to 
prepare a detailed road map elaborating on how long it would take to miti gate the 
existing gap between the sanctioned strength and the in -position strength as per 
the extant plan and furnish the same to it.       (Para 3.2) 
 
4. The Committee has noted the detailed reply of the Ministry. The Committee hopes 
that the proposed calend ar for cadre review during financial year 2020 -21 will be 
finalised soon and followed as per time schedule. The Committee is hopeful that 
the pendency of cadre review would be reduced to zero as claimed, by the end of 
this year.                    (Para 4.11) 
 
5. The Committee has noted the assurance of the Ministry to comply with the 
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, however, desires to be 
apprised of the development made in regard to setting up of NRA.            (Para5.2) 
 
6. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.            (Para 6.6, 7.2, 8.3) 
 
7. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and is of the view that the 
present age is an age of transparency and all the research findings, studies or 
reports of the IIPA concerning any Ministry or Department should be made public 
unless the studies conducted, are of confidential nature or publication of such 
findings, studies or reports are detrimental to the security and integrity of the 
nation. The IIPA may put a clause to this eff ect in its terms and conditions while 
entering into an agreement with any Ministry or Department to conduct research 
and prepare a report on any issue or subject. This will prove to be a small step in 
the direction of an open Government.       (Para 9.2) 

42 
 
 
8. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.     (Para 10.2, 11.6) 
 
9. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and emphasizes that leveraging 
cutting edge technologies will bring down frauds of all nature.                (Para 12.2) 
 
10. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.                (Para 13.3, 14.3, 15.4) 
 
11. The Committee has noted the reply and recommends that the Department should 
regularly pursue with non-civil Ministries for getting their Pension Processing and 
Sanctioning System digitized on the pattern of ‘Bhavishya’ software.  
(Para 16.2) 
 
12. The Committee is pleased to note that DoPPW has directed the Banks to visit the 
home of aged and elderly pensioners and collect Digital Life Certificate at home as 
it will ease the life of elderly pensioners. The Committee is also pleased to note that 
steps were taken by the Department to address the inconveniences experienced by 
the elderly with respect to registration of the unique identification number and 
their changing biometrics due to age. The Committee recommends the Department 
to coordinate with concerned bodies and create a single window online portal 
linking  Aadhar – Digital life certificate –Pension disbursing agency/Bank so that 
seeding of aadhar details, submission of DLC and  withdrawal of pension becomes 
smooth and hassle free.                  (Para 17.6) 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
13. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry 
and its subordinate and attached bodies utilize every penny effectively and 
efficiently in a time bound manner and press for additional funds at the Revised 
Estimate Stage and Supplementary Stages as per the requirement so that they can 
discharge their mandate to the fullest extent possible.     (Para 1.4) 
 
14. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the 
infrastructure projects are completed well in time with the boisterous support of 
the Government. For additional funds, if required, under this head, the Committee 
feels that the Ministry should impress upon the Finance Ministry at RE stage as no 
infrastructure related project should suffer for want of funds.    (Para 2.4) 
 
15. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.    (Para 3.3) 
 
16. The Committee is satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and is in favour of roping 
in subject/domain experts from the private sector as they will bring in more 
expertise into government agencies. However, the Committee is of the considered 
view that the Government should establish a robust mechanism to prevent 
nepotism and people with vested interests while making lateral entry 
appointments at such high level plum posts.      (Para 4.4) 
 

43 
 
17. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.     (Para 5.5) 
 
18. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and recommends that a fool 
proof examination system should be developed by the SSC to avoid large number 
of litigations being filed by the candidates.       (Para 6.3) 
 
19. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.     (Para 7.3) 
 
20. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and recommends that the 
Committee should be apprised of the further developments with regard to setting 
up of NRA.           (Para 8.2) 
 
21. The Committee is pleased to note various steps taken by LBSNAA to ins till ethical 
values and responsibility among new Civil Services recruits and hopes that such 
steps will achieve intended objectives in the long run.     (Para 9.3) 
 
22. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.              (Para 10.2) 
 
23. The Committee agrees with the view that filling up of vacancies is an ongoing 
process and that there will be certain vacant posts at any given point of time. 
However, nothing can justify such a large number of vacancies, especially in a 
premier investigation agency which deals with complicated and high -profile cases. 
The Committee recommends CBI to scale up efforts and ensure that shortage of 
personnel doesn’t impede its functioning and performance.             (Para 11.6) 
 
24. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that Advanced Case 
Information System is operationalized soon.             (Para 12.10) 
 
25. The Committee is pleased to note that the office of Lokpal, an institution meant for 
eliminating corruption is now functional and hopes that it will help in checking the 
growing menace of corruption in high offices.               (Para 13.3) 
 
26. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.              (Para 14.3) 
 
27. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the 
Ministries/Departments will implement the reforms suggested by Quality Council 
of India.                    (Para 15.3) 
 
28. The Committee appreciates  DoPPW for taking various steps to make Pensioners 
aware about the Schemes and initiatives through such measures as awareness 
workshops, social media, documentary films etc. and hopes that the target groups 
will be immensely benefited by these initiatives.               (Para 16.3) 
 
29. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry.                         (Para 17.3) 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE 
HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE INISTRY 
30. The Committee notes that the details of final expenditure have not been furnished 
by the Ministry as it would have given a more accurate picture of the trend in the 
utilization of funds. Nevertheless, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should m ake all efforts to properly utilize allocations on quarterly basis and 
should not wait till the fag end of the financial year.     (Para 1.2) 
 
31. The Committee has noted that DoPT has issued instructions to all 
Ministries/Departments to constitute an in -house Committee for identification of 
backlog reserved vacancies, to study the root cause of such vacancies, to initiate 
measures to remove the factors causing such vacancies and to fill them up through 
Special Recruitment Drives. The Committee believes that ba cklog vacancies affect 
the recruitment cycle and addressing backlog vacancies will lead to better 
management of human capital.        (Para 2.7) 
 
32. The Committee is aware of the fact that all Ministries and Departments are 
supposed to have liaison officers o f the rank of Deputy Secretary or above and 
setting up of special reservation cell for enforcement of orders of reservation in 
posts and services. DoPT is mandated to monitor the progress in filling up of 
backlog vacancies for SCs, STs and OBCs in central Ministries and Departments. 
There are still many Departments and Ministries which have still not set up 
reservation cell and appointed liaison officers. DoPT should pursue with such 
Departments and Ministries in this regard for compliance and furnish list of such 
Departments and Ministries which have not instituted reservation cell and 
appointed liaison officers even after reminders.      (Para 2.8) 
 
33. The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation that non-availability of eligible 
officers and non -qualification of available reserved category candidates for 
seniority promotion and departmental exam promotions respectively. The 
Committee strongly feels that this may be a ploy to not fill reserved quota backlog 
vacancies on some pretext or the other. The Co mmittee would like to be furnished 
a note containing category wise (General/SC/ST/OBC) details of candidates from 
all Ministries and Departments who were denied promotion through limited 
competitive exam on account of their non -qualification in exams. The Ministry 
should intervene and ensure that all Ministries and Departments fill up such 
backlog vacancies from amongst available candidates by relaxing criteria as there 
are no objective criteria to determine suitability/ eligibility. The Committee, 
therefore, is of the view that not enough is being done to fill up the backlog 
vacancies and recommends that the DoPT should impress upon all the 
Ministries/Departments to take such steps as they deem proper to address the 
malaise.                       (Para 2.9) 
 
34. The Committee feels that as regards to All India Services, as per the extant rules, 
the reporting officers are required to recommend domain assignment for the 
officer reported upon. However, the Committee has a different view in this regard. 
The Committee is of the view that such an issue should not be left to the discretion 
of the reporting officer. The Committee recommends that the educational, 

45 
 
professional, regional, social, cultural background of the officer should be given 
primacy while considering h is or her domain of choice. Besides, the officer should 
have the leeway to decide the domain of his or her choice as per his or her self -
assessment of knowledge, skills, expertise and competence. Therefore, the 
Committee reiterates that there should be gro uping/ clusterisation of Ministries 
and assignment of officers to clusters of their choice based on their interest, 
aptitude and inclination.         (Para 3.6) 
 
35. The Committee had desired to be apprised about the status of compliance of the 
338 IAS officer s who hadn’t filed Immovable Property Returns in the preceding 
year; however, the Ministry has avoided furnishing the details. The Committee 
reiterates that a status note on the IAS officers who hadn’t filed Immovable 
Property Returns till date along with the reasons and action taken against such 
officers, be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.     (Para 4.7) 
 
36. The Committee further recommends that a detailed study should be conducted by 
an expert committee to assess the impact of the drastic changes  brought about by 
the Commission in the scheme of examination since 2010 both on the 
administration and on the candidates level, who were impacted by such changes.  
            (Para 5.6) 
 
37. The Committee would further like to be apprised of the details in re gard to 
number of candidates’ background wise (rural/urban)and language wise 
(English/Hindi/other vernacular taken as a medium of examination) selected by 
UPSC between 2005-10 and between 2010-2018.                                       (Para 5.7) 
 
38. The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Ministry and recommends 
that the Ministry should impress upon the Finance Ministry to allocate additional 
funds to ISTM as per projection at RE stage so that they could recruit permanent 
staff against  vacancies. The Committee is also not satisfied with the reply of the 
Ministry as no concrete action plan in regard to filling up of almost 40 percent of 
vacant faculty positions have been furnished.  The Committee is of the view that 
the ISTM is a premier  training institution and it cannot be run with guest faculty. 
The Committee recommends that the ISTM should be adequately staffed and fund 
should not be a constraint in this regard. The Committee hopes that all the vacant 
positions will be filled up during this financial year.                           (Para 6.4) 
 
39. The Committee recommends that adequate funds should be provided to IIPA so 
that it can discharge its mandate effectively. The Committee recommends the 
Department to pursue with the Ministry of Fi nance to allocate additional funds to 
IIPA as per its projected demand at RE stage as any shortfall in allocation will 
adversely affect IIPA’s capacity to invest in training and research.   (Para 7.2) 
 
40. The Committee has noted that Rs 781.01 Cr was allocated to CBI in BE 2019 -20, a 
marginal increase from Rs 778.93 Cr allocated in 2018 -19. Again, only Rs. 802.79 
Cr have been allocated to CBI against the projected demand of Rs. 1386.26 Cr. 
The Committee und erstands that the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), a 
premium investigating arm of the Government investigates large number of 
sensitive, high -profile corruption and economic fraud cases against public 
servants, private persons, firms. Besides this, C BI also probes and pursues several 

46 
 
extradition cases against fugitive economic offenders as well as criminals in courts 
of other countries. Such investigation and probes require large scale deployment of 
human resources and funds. The Committee hopes that additional funds will be 
provided to the premier investigation agency at RE stage so that it can discharge 
its tremendous responsibilities without any hindrance.                (Para 8.2) 
 
41. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry. The Committee in  its previous 
Reports including its 95 th Report on Demands for Grants (2018 -19) had expressed 
its displeasure over slow pace of utilisation of funds by CBI. The Committee noted 
that  on account of underutilisation or slow pace of utilization of funds , allocations 
to CBI were reduced at the RE stage and consequently the Budget Estimates of 
next year are also reduced and it happened this financial year also. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that a robust monitoring mechanism 
should be set up in the organisation to monitor the pace of implementation of 
schemes and projects from start to finish and consequently proper utilisation of 
funds is ensured.           (Para 9.2) 
 
42. The Committee is not satisfied with the plain reply of the Ministry. The Committee 
is of the view that The Centralised Technology Vertical (CTV) project, which aims 
to facilitate real-time information sharing with investigators across the country, is 
an important project of CBI and it should be operationalized at the earliest. 
Besides this,  International Centre of Excellence in Forensic Science and 
International Centre of Excellence in Investigation should also be established soon. 
The Committee should be apprised of the steps taken for completion of both the 
projects and hurdles being faced by the Ministry in this regard.              (Para 10.2) 
 
43. The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry delineating the progress 
made with regard to addressing the problems of infrastructure and human 
resource deficits nagging CAT Infrast ructure Deficit. The Committee also takes 
note of the fact that out of seventeen benches, only eight benches are functioning 
from their own buildings, four benches are functioning from Government 
buildings and rest five Benches are functioning from rented buildings. The 
Committee is of the considered view that all nine benches including those which 
are functioning from Government buildings on rent or otherwise should have their 
own buildings and all necessary steps such as identification of sites, construct ion of 
buildings etc should be completed in time bound manner, however, priority should 
be given to benches which are functioning from rented buildings.           (Para 11.6) 
 
44. The Committee further notes that out of 66 sanctioned posts of Hon’ble Chairman/ 
Members (33 -Judicial and 33 -Administrative) 27 posts (14 -Judicial & 13 -
Administrative) of Hon’ble Members are vacant in various Benches and more 
vacancies are likely to arise this year. The Committee strongly recommends that 
all the vacancies should be fi lled up on priority basis at the earliest to reduce 
arrears and backlogs of cases.                                                  (Para 11.7) 
 
45. The Committee is appreciative of the initiatives taken by DARPG to improve 
service delivery and facilitate speedy redressal of grievances. However, the 
Committee observes that the Ministry has avoided giving any reply in respect of 
the recommendation made by the Committee for reintroduction of the Right of 
Citizens for Time -bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their 

47 
 
Grievances Bill, 2011. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as it believes 
that passage and enactment of this bill will  ensure time bound delivery of Goods 
and services and facilitate timely redressal of grievances for citizens and 
strengthen accountability and promote transparency. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the view of the Ministry in this regard.                         (Para 12.5)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* * * * * 
  

48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

49 
 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8 th September, 2020 in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi – 110001.  Following Members attended the sitting:- 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral  
3. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
5. Shri P. Wilson 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Mohanbhai S.  Delkar 
8. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
9. Shri Malook Nagar 
10.  Shri Suresh Punjari 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
12.  Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
       Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
       Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
       Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
       Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed Members of the Committee and apprised them 
the agenda for the day i.e., adoption of following four reports:- 
(i) *      *     * 
(ii) *      *     * 
(iii) Draft One Hundred -fourth Report on the Action Taken on One Hundredth   
Report of the Committee   on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to the   
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; and 
(iv) *      *     * 
 
3. Thereafter, Members deliberated on the Reports and the Reports were adopted 
without any alterations/modifications. Since both Houses of Parliament were not in Session 
and the presen t Committee’s term was going to expire on 13 th September, 2020, the 
Committee decided to present the above mentioned Reports to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha, before they are presented/ laid before both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing 
session. 
4. *     *     * 
5. The meeting was then adjourned at 11.30. AM.  
_____________________ 
***relates to other matters 
 

50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
  

51 
 
 
 
 


52 
 
 
 
 
 
 


53 
 
 
  


54 
 
 
  


55 
 


56 
 


57 
 
 
