PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 48
DEPARTMENT  RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9 DECEMBER, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 9 DECEMBER, 2011)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9 DECEMBER, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 9 DECEMBER, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9 th DECEMBER, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 9 th DECEMBER, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2011/AGRAHAYANA, 1933 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-95

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE BY C HAIRMAN ......................................................................................................... (iii)-(v)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—141
CHAPTER 1- Introduction .................................................................................................. 1—4
CHAPTER 2- Committee Proceedings and Timelines .................................................... 5—6
CHAPTER 3- The Concept of Lokpal: Evolution and Parliamentary History ............. 7—10
CHAPTER 4- Citizens’ Charter and Grievance Redressal Mechanism ........................ 1 1—16
CHAPTER 5- The Prime Minister: Full Exclusion Versus Degrees of Inclusion ....... 17—24
CHAPTER 6- Member of Parliament: V ote, Speech and Conduct within the House 25—28
CHAPTER 7- Lokpal and State Lokayuktas: Single Enactment and Uniform Standards 29—36
CHAPTER 8- Lower Bureaucracy: Degrees of Inclusion ............................................. 37—44
CHAPTER 9- False Complaints and Complainants: Punitive Measures ....................... 45—47
CHAPTER 10- The Judiciary: To Include or Exclude ..................................................... 48—53
CHAPTER 11- The Lokpal: Search and Selection ............................................................ 54—60
CHAPTER 12- The Trinity of the Lokpal, CBI and CVC: In Search of an Equilibrium 61—79
CHAPTER 13- Constitutional Status: If, How and How Much. ..................................... 80—85
CHAPTER 14- The Jurisdictional Limits of Lokpal: Private NGOs, Corporates and
Media ............................................................................................................ 86—96
CHAPTER 15- Supports Structures for the Lokpal: Whistle Blowers, Phone Tappers
and Legal Aid/Assistance Issues ............................................................... 97—104
CHAPTER 16- The Lokpal Miscellany: Residual Issues .................................................. 105—107
CHAPTER 17- Afterword: Reasons and Recommendations At a Glance ..................... 108—141
4. M INUTES  OF D ISSENT ............................................................................................................. 143—171
(i) Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte, Shri Kirti Azad, Shri D.B. Chandre
Gowda, Shri Arjun Ram  Meghwal,  Shri  Harin  Pathak  and
Shri Madhusudan Yadav ................................................................... 145—150
(ii) Shri Ram Jethmalani ......................................................................... 151—153
(iii) Shri Ram Vilas Paswan .................................................................... 154—155
(iv) Shri Shailendra Kumar ...................................................................... 156—163
(v) Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar ...................................................... 164—165
(vi) Shri Pinaki Misra ............................................................................... 166—167
(vii) Adv. A Sampath ................................................................................. 168

(viii) Shri S. Semmalai ............................................................................... 169
(ix) Shrimati Deepa Dasmunshi, Ms. Meenakshi Natrajan and
Adv. P.T. Thomas ............................................................................. 170
(x) Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh ................................................................. 171
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS .................................................................................................. 173—220
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 22 1—589
A - The Lokpal Bill, 2011 ....................................................................... 223—276
B - A Gist of the Debate in Both the Houses of Parliament on
27th August, 201 1 ............................................................................... 277—279
C - Comments of the Department of Personnel & Training on the
suggestions contained in Memoranda received from public on
the Bill................................................................................................. 280—580
D - Statement showing the Business transacted by the Committee
in its sittings for the Bill .................................................................. 581—583
E - Views of Justice J.S. Verma, former Chief Justice of India on
the various provisions of the Bill ................................................... 584—587
F - Draft of proposed Constitutional Amendment for the Lokpal
and Lokayukta ................................................................................... 588—589

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(31st August, 2010 - 30 th August, 2011)
*1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shri Amar Singh
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri O.T. Lepcha
/\8. Vacant
@9. Vacant
&10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
13. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Dr. Monazir Hassan
16. Shri Shailendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
18. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
19. Ms. Meenakshi Natarajan
20. Shri Devji M. Patel
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Lalu Prasad
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
25. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
26. Shri Manish Tewari
27. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
28. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
#29. Vacant
$30. Vacant
%31. Vacant
(i)
* Nominated as Chairman of the Committee w.e.f.  26 th July, 2011.
/\ Due to passing away of Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy w.e.f. 7 th December, 2010.
@ Due to induction of Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.  12 th July, 2011.
& Due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik w.e.f.  28 th July, 2011.
# Due to resignation of Shri Arjun Munda from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 26th February, 2011.
$ Due to passing away of Shri Bhajan Lal w.e.f. 3rd June, 2011.
% Existing since the constitution of the Committee on 31 st August, 2010.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2011)
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Shri O.T. Lepcha
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani
10. Shri Amar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
13. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi .
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar
16. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
17. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
18. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
19. Shri Pinaki Misra
20. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Lalu Prasad
23. Adv. A. Sampath
24. Shri S. Semmalai
25. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
26. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
27. Shri Manish Tewari
28. Adv. P.T. Thomas (ldukki)
29. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
30. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
*31. V acant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
(ii)
* Existing since the constitution of the Committee on 31 st August, 2011.

(iii)
PREFACE BY CHAIRMAN
I consider it a singular privilege and a great pleasure to present the Forty-Eighth Report of
this Committee on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
It is ironical, and even somewhat paradoxical, that corruption, an issue as old as mankind*
can generate so much contemporary debate, ignite large volumes of both light and heat. The fact
that corruption, which has spread like a virulent epidemic in the very genetic code of society, has
been brought to the forefront of our collective consciousness in recent times, is both a compliment
to all those who have crusaded for strong anti corruption measures as also a reflection of the
public’s growing angst, revulsion and disgust at the proportions acquired by this disease.
But no one can afford to, and no one should, ignore the basic truth that no magic wand
or special button has been conceived or invented, the activation of which can eliminate or even
significantly reduce this scourge within a short time. Nor can anyone be oblivious to the reality
that corruption can suffer significant and tangible reduction only by a holistic and multi-pronged
approach and that no single initiative in this regard can be even significantly, much less
conclusively, efficacious. To ignore the fact that the Lokpal Bill operates only within the limited
zone of ex-post facto , punitive or deterrent measures would be to ignore reality itself. Such punitive
measures cannot be a substitute for other significant prophylactic initiatives. Corruption flourishes
in the interstices of structures, mechanisms, rules, regulations and practices, which not only
facilitate it but promote its multiplication like an uncontrollable hydra headed monster. It is those
facilitative structures and practices which have to be attacked, if punitive and deterrent measures
like the Lokpal Bill are to have any lasting impact. In a nutshell, law has to seek not only to make
corruption painful and hurtful after the event, but to make corruption unnecessary, undesirable and
difficult to embark upon at the inception. Indeed many of such prophylactic measures do not need
legal changes but intelligent, calibrated and targeted policy changes.
Similarly, even within the punitive and deterrent zone where the Lokpal initiative largely
operates, support structures, ancillary provisions and related initiatives are as much, if not more
important, than the Lokpal itself. Some are discussed in Chapter 15. Many other vital ones, like
initiatives necessary in respect of reducing black money (both domestic and foreign), alteration of
rules and practices in the realm of realty transactions, elimination of discretionary powers
department-wise, focusing upon and targeting state largesse in areas like mines, contracts and so
on and so forth, are not the subject matter of this Report and hence not discussed here. In the
ultimate analysis, it is only a synergical and cumulative aggregation of these diverse legal and policy
initiatives which can effectively attack and reduce this malignant disease.
Though there are many creative initiatives and “firsts” in this Report, it is not possible to
exhaustively list them. They include a specific recommendation to categorically have a statutory
provision imparting genuine independence to the CBI by declaring, for the first time, that it shall
not be subject, on the merits of any investigation, to either the administrative Ministry or the
Lokpal. Secondly, it separates, for the first time, investigation from prosecution, thereby
strengthening each and making each more professional and objective, apart from initiating for the
* In fact, Kautilya in Arthasastra, has given a detailed list, referring to not less than forty ways of embezzlement that the
treasury officers in his time were used to practice. The most common of them were pratibandha or obstruction, prayoga or
loan, vyavahara or trading, avastara or fabrication of accounts, pariahapana or causing less revenue and thereby affecting the
treasury, upabhoga or embezzling funds for self enjoyment, and apahara or defalcation.

(iv)
first time, the creation of a premier prosecution department under the Lokpal. Thirdly, the Selection
Committee, for the first time, includes a joint nominee of the three major constitutional post
holders. Fourthly, Lokayuktas and the Lokpal are, for the first time, sought to be subsumed under
a common enactment. Fifthly, constitutional status is sought to be conferred, again for the first
time, not only upon the Lokpal institution but also upon the proposed Grievances Redressal body.
Sixthly, the Report recommends abolition of all sanctions, by whatever name called. Finally, the
CVC is, for the first time, made responsible for the large chunk of class C employees, with a supra
added reporting requirement to the Lokpal.
The journey of this Committee has been most exciting and enjoyable, irrespective of the
destination, as reflected in the sense of the Committee in this Report or the dissents or the eventual
outcome in Parliament. The Committee held fifteen meetings over less than two and a half months
between the real commencement of its proceedings on September 23, 2011 and the submission of
the actual report in  the second week of December, 2011. In individual terms, it interacted with 140
witnesses and its deliberations spanned approximately 40 hours.
Given the contemporary context in which this Bill was referred to the Committee, as also
the diverse and extremely large canvas involved, there is an understandable sense of satisfaction
in having expeditiously reached the stage of submitting the Committee’s report. On an issue like
this, which inevitably involves a somewhat uneasy melting pot of law, technicalities, the scrutiny
of the nation, pressing exigencies of speed and time, an inevitable dose of politics and an
overarching desire to be true to ones’ individual and collective consciousness, there is bound to
be disagreement and dissension, sometimes even heated. But, personally, I am impressed, indeed
astonished, at the high degree of convergence on a diverse number of issues which are addressed
in this report and which aggregate over 25. Some may see the glass half full, in the sense of
looking at the dissenting notes, but I see the glass well above half full, based on the significant
and laudatory degree of convergence on diverse and contentious issues. Even where there were
disagreements, only in the last couple of meetings prior to adoption (none before), they did not
vitiate the extremely cordial, dignified and principled level of exchanges which have prevailed right
from the inception through to the conclusion of the proceedings of this Committee.
I do not think that I am guilty of any error or exaggeration when I say that the members
of this Committee started this journey as relative strangers, but finished as friends. Equally, I have
no doubt that each member individually, and the Committee collectively, exemplified and symbolised
the V oltairian spirit that wherever they disagreed, they nevertheless upheld the right of the other
person to disagree with them, even vehemently.
In the end, all I can say is that we have not tried to please anyone or everyone. We have
tried to be true, individually to our respective consciences and collectively to Parliament and the
nation. The Report is liable to be judged kindly or harshly by some or, indeed, to be ignored by
others. All one can hope for is that the detailed collection and aggregation, not only of each
conclusion but of every reason and argument in support of that conclusion, summarised in one
chapter (Chapter 17) will be carefully perused before judgment, casual or considered, interim or
final, is passed.
I would be failing in my duty if I did not express gratitude for the constructive cooperation
which I have received from each member of the Committee, irrespective of convergence or chasm.
The witnesses, many of them experts and very eminent, gave willingly and uncomplainingly of their
time and effort and all of it, gratis. The response from the public was overwhelming as reflected
in the written memoranda received. The Administrative Ministry (Ministry of Personnel) was most
helpful and cooperative. Perhaps no Chairman has driven the Secretariat staff harder and longer.
Both Saturdays and Sundays, especially when I dictated the Report, with long hours at the Annexe,
were par for the course. Mr. Deepak Goyal, the head of my team, provided very able leadership

to his entire team and toiled ceaselessly whenever I entrusted anything to him. He was ably
supported by Shri K.P. Singh, Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Ms. Catherine
John L., Shri D.D. Kukreti, Shri Yogendra Singh and Ms. Madhu Rajput and a whole relay chain
of stenographers who willingly took eight hour dictations from me on more than three weekends.
In a lighter vein, I had expressed the certainty of my belief that the Secretariat were praying and
waiting for the day when I would demit office as Chairperson of this august Committee, since they
had no other hope of getting respite! I would also like to place on record my deep appreciation
for all the assistance and support received from everyone, not necessarily named herein, to
complete this endeavour expeditiously.
In the ultimate analysis, the responsibility for all the errors rests with me, and, to a lesser
extent, with the Committee which adopts the Report as reflective of the broad consensus in the
Committee. The reasons for the conclusions flowing from the memoranda, depositions and internal
deliberations have formed the Committee’s recommendations and are set out in detail at the end of
each Chapter. This last section of each Chapter tries to argue and states the persuasive details
behind each conclusion. All these end sections from each Chapter have been aggregated and
reproduced in the last Chapter, Chapter 17, providing a useful and elaborate summary. All dissent
notes have been appended.
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 7, 2011 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice
(v)

1
CHAPTER-1
INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Lokpal Bill, 2011 was introduced * in the Lok Sabha on 4 th August, 2011. It was
referred§§ by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department-Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 8 th August,
2011 for examination and report.
1.2 The Bill (Annexure-A) seeks to provide for the establishment of the institution of Lokpal to
inquire into allegations of corruption against certain public functionaries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereon.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons, appended to the Bill reads as under:–
“The need to have a strong and effective institution of Lokpal has been felt for quite
sometime. The Administrative Reforms Commission , in its interim report on the ‘problems
of Redressal of Citizens’ Grievances submitted in 1966, inter alia recommended the setting
up of an institution of Lokpal at the Centre in this regard. To give effect to this
recommendation of the Administrative Reforms Commission, eight Bills on Lokpal were
introduced in the Lok Sabha in the past, namely in the years 1968, 1971, 1977, 1985, 1989,
1996, 1998  and 2001.  However, these Bills had lapsed consequent upon the dissolution of
the respective Lok Sabha except in the case of 1985  Bill which w as w ithdrawn after its
introduction.
A need has been felt to constitute a mechanism for dealing with complaints on corruption
against public functionaries in high places. In this regard, the Central Government
constituted a Joint Drafting Committee (JDC) on 8th April, 2011 to draft a Lokpal Bill.
Based on the deliberation and having regard to the need for establishing a strong and
effective institution, of Lokpal to inqiuire into allegation of corruption against certain
public functionaries, it has been decided to enact a stand alone legislation, inter alia to
provide for the following matters, namely :–
(i) To establish an Institution of Lokpal with a Chairperson and eight Members of which
fifty per cent shall be Judicial Members;
(ii) T o set up Lokpal’s own Investigation Wing and Prosecution Wing with such officers
and employees a felt by it to be necessary;
(iii) The category of public fumctionaries against whom allegation of corruption are to be
inquired into, namely:-
a. a Prime Minister, after he has demitted office;
b. a Minister of the Union;
c. a Member of Parliament;
1
* Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II, Section 2 dated 4 th August, 2011.
§§ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.1937) dated 9 th August, 2011.

2
d. any Group “A” officer or equivalent;
e. a Chairperson or member or officer equivalent to Group “A” in any body,
Board, corporation, authority, company, society, trust, autonomous body
established by an Act of Parliament or wholly or partly financed or controlled
by the Central Government;
f. any director, manager, secretary or other officer of a society or association of
persons or trust wholly or partly financed or aided by the Government or in
receipt of any donations from the public and whose annual income exceeds such
amount as the Central Government may be notification specify but the
organizations created for religious purposes and receiving public donations would
be outside the purview of the Lokpal.
(iv) T o pr ovide for a mechanism to ensure that no sanction or approval under section 197
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  or section 19  of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988,  will be required in cases here prosecution is proposed by the
Lokpal.
(v) To confer on the Lakpal the power of search and seizures and certain powers of a
Civil Court;
(vi) T o empower the Lokpal or any investigation officer authorized by it in this behalf to
attach property which, prima facie, has been acquired by corrupt means;
(vii) T o lay down a period of limitation of seven years from the date of commission of
alleged offence for filing the complaints before the Lokpal;
(viii) T o confer powers of police upon Lokpal which the police officers have in connection
with investigation;
(ix) T o charge the expenses of Lokpal on the Consolidated Fund of 1ndia;
(x) to utilize services of officers of Central or State Government with the consent of the
State Government for the purpose of conducting inquiry;
(xi) T o r ecommend transfer or suspension of public servants connected with allegation of
corruption;
(xii) To constitute sufficient number of Special Courts as may be recommended by the
Lokpal to hear and decide the cases arising out of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 under the proposed enactment;
(xiii) To make every public servant to declare his assets and liabilities, and in case of
default or furnishing misleading information, to presume that the public servant has
acquired such assets by corrupt means;
(xiv) To pr ovide for prosecution of persons who make false or frivolous or vexatious
complaints .
The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.”
1.4 In slight deviation from the normal procedure followed by Standing Committees for
examination of Bills, there was a detailed discussion on the statement of the Minister of
Finance on the issues relating to the setting up of the Lokpal in both the Houses of
Parliament on the 27
th August, 2011. These proceedings were also transmitted to the

3
Committee. The Rajya Sabha Secretariat communication dated the 30 th August, 2011 in this
behalf addressed to the Chairman, Standing Committee, reads as follows:–
“I am directed to inform you that the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, has desired that the
proceedings of the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha dated the 27th August, 2011 pertaining to
the discussion on the statement made by the Minister of Finance on issues relating to setting
up of Lokpal may be transmitted to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice for its perusal while
formulating its recommendations on the Lok Pal Bill, 2011.
Accordingly, a copy each of the relevant proceedings of the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
is enclosed for your kind perusal.”
1.5 The discussion in the two Houses of Parliament was in the backdrop of divergent views
in the Joint Drafting Committee constituted by the Government for preparing a draft on
the Lokpal Bill. The Committee consisted of five nominees of the Civil Society (led by
Shri Anna Hazare) and five nominees of the Government. Initiating discussion in both the
Houses, Hon’ble Finance Minister gave a background of the matter leading to holding of
discussion in Parliament on the setting up of Lokpal. He enumerated the following six major
areas of divergent views in the Joint Drafting Committee:–
(i) Should one single Act be provided for both the Lokpal in the Centre and Lokayukta
in the State? Would the State Governments be willing to accept a draft provision for
the Lokayukta on the same lines as that of the Lokpal?
(ii) Should the Prime Minister be brought within the purview of the Lokpal? If the answer
is in affirmative, should there be a qualified inclusion?
(iii) Should Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts be brought within the purview
of the Lokpal?
(iv) Should the conduct of Members of Parliament inside Parliament, their right to speak
and right to vote in the House, be brought within the purview of the Lokpal? Presently
such actions of the Members of Parliament are covered by article 105(2) of the
Constitution?
(v) Whether Articles 311 and 320 (3) (c) of the Constitution notwithstanding members of
a civil service of the Union or an All India Service or a Civil Service of a State or
a person holding a civil post under the Union or State, be subject to enquiry and
disciplinary action including dismissal and removal by the Lokpal and Lokayukta, as
the case may be?
(vi) What should be the definition of the Lokpal, and should it itself exercise quasi-judicial
powers also or delegate these powers to its subordinate officers?
1.6 Apart from other issues, the following three issues were discussed in both the Houses:–
(i) Whether the jurisdiction of the Lokpal should cover all employees of the Central
Government?
(ii) Whether it will be applicable through the institution of the Lokayukta in all States?
(iii) Whether the Lokpal should have the power to punish all those who violate the
‘grievance redressal mechanism’ to be put in place?
1.7 During the discussion in Parliament, Members demonstrated serious commitment to evolve
an effective mechanism to deal with the menace of corruption. The discussion covered

4
several related issues as well, besides the three specific issues referred to above. Members
discussed the need to bring all classes of bureaucracy within the fold of the Lokpal while
expressing apprehensions about the overburdening of the institution. Similarly, Members were
concerned about preservation of the federal spirit of our Constitution. The issue of bringing the
grievance redressal mechanism under the Lokpal or having a separate law for this purpose was also
discussed. (A gist of the debate in both the Houses is placed as Annexure B ).
1.8 In his reply to the debate, the Minister of Finance concluded in both the Houses in these
words:–
“This House agrees in principle on the Citizens Charter, Lower Bureaucracy to be brought
under Lokpal through appropriate mechanism and establishment of Lokayukta in the States.
I will request you to transmit the proceedings to the Department-related Standing Committee
for its perusal while formulating its recommendations for a Lokpal Bill.”
1.9 The deliberations in the two Houses of Parliament gave guidance to the Committee in the
accomplishment of the task assigned to it. The Committee, however, also had before it vast
inputs on the subject from various sources. Recommending an appropriate legislative
architecture for the purpose was a complex task for the Committee as it was to propose
a solution which harmonized and married the concerns of constitutional validity, operational
efficacy and consensus amongst the diverse views reflected in the Committee’s
deliberations. The Members of the Committee, however, have put in their best possible
efforts to deal with the essence of the opinions expressed by the House collectively. The
diverse pool of knowledge of the Members, opinions of eminent experts and the suggestions
received from a comprehensive and diverse cross-section of society helped the Committee
to formulate solutions taking into account the aspects of functional feasibility and
constitutional validity in addition to political consensus.
1.10 In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/
suggestions on the issue from desirous individuals/organizations. Accordingly, a press
release was issued inviting views/suggestions. In response to the press release published in
major English and Hindi dailies all over India on the 20th August, 2011, a number of
representations/memoranda were received. The Committee received approximately 10,000
responses from different sections of society.
1.11 The Committee also forwarded 216 select memoranda from out of the ones received from
the individuals/organizations to the Department of Personnel and Training for their
comments thereon. A list of such memoranda along with the gist of views/suggestions
contained therein and the comments of the Department of Personnel and Training thereon
is placed at Annexure-C.

5
5
CHAPTER-2
COMMITTEE PROCEEDINGS AND TIMELINES
2.1 Though the Lokpal Bill, 2011 was referred to the Committee on August 8, 2011, it was
followed immediately by a demonstration by Team Anna, a large gathering at Ramlila Maidan
and a fast by Shri Anna Hazare. These events occupied the space from 16th to 28th August,
2011.
2.2 On August 27, 2011 both the Houses of Parliament discussed the issue and the proceedings
were directed to be transmitted to the Standing Committee. This has been summarized in
the preceding chapters read with the gist of debates annexed at Annexure B.
2.3 Barely four days thereafter, before any work could start, the Standing Committee’s term
lapsed. In effect, in law and in fact, no Standing Committee of Parliament existed from
August 31, 2011 till September 16, 2011. The present Committee could, therefore, become
operational only after re-constitution w.e.f. September 23, 2011 when it held its second
meeting. Hence, though the Committee had with great alacrity held its first meeting with
Team Anna for over two hours on August 10, 2011, a day after the Bill was referred to
it, it could, in effect, commence its deliberations on the Lokpal Bill, 2011 only w.e.f.
September 23, 2011. The fact that the re-constitution of the Committee is always deemed
to be retrospective w.e.f. the date of lapsing (August 31, 2011), does not, however, permit
the actual meeting of the Committee during the period between the lapse and its actual
reconstitution.
2.4 From September 23, 2011 till November 24, 2011, the Committee held 11 sittings spread
over approximately 30 hours. During this period, 38 persons/organizations came before the
Committee as witnesses to present their views. These included virtually every segment of
society, including, lawyers and jurists, former Chief Justices of India, representative
organizations like the Bar Council of India, the heads and office bearers of diverse
chambers of commerce, the heads and office bearers of diverse print and visual media
organizations, NGOs, members of Team Anna (on three occasions spread over
approximately 8 hours), religious organizations, representative institutions from small and
medium size towns across India, CBI, CVC, eminent writers, think tanks and so on and so
forth. In almost all cases the witnesses were accompanied by several associates and the
Committee, therefore, in all, had the presence of 140 witnesses.
2.5 The Committee held the first of its internal meetings and deliberations on November 14, 2011.
It went on to meet on November 15, 24, 25, 30 and December 1 and finally met on
December 7, 2011 to finalise recommendations and to adopt the Report. The. Committee is
thus privileged to present this Report on December 9, 2011.  A Statement showing the business
transacted by the Committee in its different sittings is annexed as ANNEXURE ‘D’.
2.6 In a nut shell, therefore, this Committee could become legally operational only w.e.f.
September 23, 2011 and has completed hearing witnesses on 4th November, 2011.  It had
its total deliberations including Report adoption spread over 14 meetings, together
aggregating 40 hours within the space of ten weeks commencing from September 23, 2011
and ending December 7, 2011.

6
2.7 Though not specific to this Committee, it is an established practice that all 24 Parliamentary
Standing Committees automatically lapse on completion of their one year tenure and are
freshly constituted thereafter. This results in a legal vacuum, each year, of approximately
two to three weeks and occasionally, as in the present case, directly affects the urgent and
ongoing business of the Committee. The Committee would respectfully request Parliament
to reconsider the system of automatic lapsing. Instead, continuity in Committees but
replacement of Members on party-wise basis would save time.

7
7
CHAPTER-3
THE CONCEPT OF LOKPAL :
EVOLUTION AND PARLIAMENTARY HISTORY
3.1 There can be no denial of the fact that corruption has always remained a significant and
highly relevant issue to be dealt with in our country. This stands corroborated from the
findings of various International bodies like the World Bank, Transparency International and
other organizations, which have consistently rated India quite low on this facet. Concerns
have repeatedly arisen, in and out of Parliament, for putting in place appropriate
mechanisms to curb corruption. But the Lokpal concept has had an interesting and
chequered history in India.
3.2 The initial years following independence witnessed legislators conveying the people’s
concerns to the Government over the issue of corruption through raising of questions and
debates in Parliament. At that time, the scope of the debates was contextually confined to
seeking information from the Government about its anti-corruption measures and to
discussions regarding the formation of anti-corruption committees/agencies and vigilance
bodies to put a check on corruption, but it clearly reflected the seriousness on the issue
of corruption in the minds of Members. Acknowledging the need for a thorough
consideration of the issue, the Government set-up a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Shri K. Santhanam to review the existing instruments for checking corruption in Central
Government. The Committee inter alia  recommended the creation of an apex body for
exercising superintendence and control over the vigilance administration. In pursuance of
the recommendations of the Santhanam Committee, the Government established the Central
Vigilance Commission through a Resolution on 11.02.1964. The Commission was concerned
with alleged bureaucratic corruption and did not cover alleged ministerial corruption or
grievances of citizens against maladministration. While laying the report on the creation of
the CVC on the table of the House, the then Deputy Home Minister
1, interestingly,
recognized that the Commission would be overburdened if the responsibility to redress the
citizens’ grievances against corruption were to be placed upon it and the Commission might,
as a result, be less effective in dealing with the core problem of corruption.
3.3 While the country had been grappling with the problem of corruption at different levels
including at the level of Parliament, there emerged globally, and especially in the
Scandinavian countries, the concept of Ombudsman to tackle corruption and/or to redress
public grievances. A proposal in this regard was first initiated in the Lok Sabha on April 3,
1963 by the Late Dr. L.M. Singhvi, MP
2. While replying to it, the then Law Minister
observed that though the institution seemed full of possibilities, since it involved a matter
of policy, it was for the Prime Minister to decide in that regard
3. Dr. L.M. Singhvi then
personally communicated this idea to the then Prime Minister, Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru
who in turn, with some initial hesitation, acknowledged that it was a valuable idea which
1Statement made by the then Deputy Minister in the Ministry of Home Affairs, Smt. Maragatham Chandrasekhar in the
Rajya Sabha on 16
th December, 1963, Rajya Sabha Debates, V ol. XLV , No.21, P.3572.
2Lok Sabha Debates dated 3 rd April, 1963, vol. XVI, P.7556-7558
3ibid., P.7590-92

8
could be incorporated in our institutional framework. On 3rd November, 1963, Hon’ble
Prime Minister made a statement in respect of the possibilities of this institution and said
that the system of Ombudsman fascinated him as the Ombudsman had an overall authority
to deal with the charges of corruption, even against the Prime Minister, and commanded
the respect and confidence of all 4. Resolutions, in this behalf in April, 1964 and April, 1965
were again brought in the Lower House and on both occasions, during the course of
discussions, the House witnessed near unanimous agreement about the viability, utility and
desirability of such an institution 5. However, in his resolution, the .Member of Parliament
(Dr. L.M. Singhvi) did not elaborate upon the functions/powers of the institution, but
instead asked for the appointment of a Committee of Members of Parliament who would
consider all the complex factors relating to this institution and would come forward with
an acceptable and consensual solution. While making a statement in the House on 23rd
April, 1965, Dr. L.M. Singhvi elucidated the rationale of the institution as:
“…an institution such as the Ombudsman must be brought into existence in our country. It
is for the sake of securing justice and for cleansing the public life of the augean stable
of corruption, real and imaginary, that such an institution must be brought into existence.
It is in order to protect those in  public life and those in administration itself that such an
institution must be brought into existence. It is to provide an alternative to the cold and
protracted formality of procedure in course of law that such an institution should be brought
into existence. There is every conceivable reason today which impels to the consideration
that such an institution is now overdue in our country ...6”
3.3A The word Lokpal etymologically, means the “protector of the people”. Adopting the famous
Lincolnian phrase, it can also be seen as a protection/protector “of the people, by the
people, for the people”. The word ‘Ombudsman’, on the other hand, is rooted in the Old
Norse language, essentially meaning “representative”, i.e.  an official charged with
representing the interests of the public by investigating and addressing complaints reported
by individual citizens. Roman Law has also had a similar counterpart viz. the “tribunition
role” of a person/institution, whose role was to intercede in the political process on behalf
of common citizens and in Roman times was fulfilled by elected officials.
3.4 These efforts set the stage for evolving an institution like Ombudsman in India and
consequently, the idea of Lokpal surfaced in the national legislative agenda. Later, the
Government appointed an Administrative Reforms Commission which in its recommendation
suggested a scheme of appointing Lokpal at Centre and Lokayuktas in each State 7.
3.5 Thereafter, to give effect to the recommendations of the First Administrative Reforms
Commission, eight Bills were introduced in the Lok Sabha from  time to time. However, all
4His initial hesitation to this idea was probably due to the Scandinavian origin of the nomenclature of the institution.
In a lighter vein, he happened to ask Dr. L.M, Singhvi “To what zoo does this animal belong” and asked Shri Singhvi
to indigenize the nomenclature of the institution. Dr. L.M. Singhvi then coined the term Lokpal/Lokayukta to modify
the institution of Ombudsman to the Indian context (as related by Dr. L.M. Singhvi to the Chairman of this
Committee). Also referred to by Mr. Arun Jaitley M.P. during the Parliament Debate on 27th August, 2011. He started
the debate in the Upper House thus:- “Now, ‘Ombudsman’ was a Scandinavian concept and, coincidentally, on 3rd
April, 1963,  then an Independent young Member of the Lok Sabha, Dr. L.M Singhvi, in the course of his participation
in a debate for having an Ombudsman in India, attempted to find out what the Indian equivalent could be, and this
word ‘Lokpal’ was added to our vocabulary, the Hindi vocabulary, by Dr. L.M. Singhvi who translated this word.”
5Lok Sabha Debates dated 23 rd April, 1965, p, 10839 - 40.
6Lok Sabha Debates dated 23 rd April, 1965, P. 10844. It is ironic that something described as “overdue” in 1965 by the
MP is being enacted in 2011.
7Problems of Redress of Citizen and Grievances,  Interim Report of the First Administrative Reforms Commission, 1966.

9
these Bills lapsed consequent upon the dissolution of the respective Lok Sabhas, except in
the case of the 1985 Bill which was subsequently withdrawn after its introduction. A close
analysis of the Bills reflects that there have been varying approaches and shifting foci in
scope and jurisdiction in all these proposed legislations. The first two Bills viz. of 1968 and
of 1971 sought to cover the entire universe of bureaucrats, Ministers, public sector
undertakings, Government controlled societies for acts and omissions relating to corruption,
abuse of position, improper motives and mal-administration. The 1971 Bill, however, sought
to exclude the Prime Minister from its coverage. The 1977 Bill, broadly retained the same
coverage except that corruption was subsequently sought to be defined in terms of IPC and
Prevention of Corruption. Act. Additionally, the 1977 Bill did not cover maladministration as
a separate category, as also the definition of “public man” against whom complaints could
be filed did not include bureaucrats in general. Thus, while the first two Bills sought to
cover grievance redressal in respect of maladministration in addition to corruption, the 1977
version did not seek to cover the former and restricted itself to abuse of office and
corruption by Ministers and Members of Parliament. The 1977 Bill covered the Council of
Ministers without specific exclusion of the Prime Minister.
The 1985 Bill was purely focused on corruption as defined in IPC and POCA and neither
sought to subsume mal-administration or mis-conduct generally nor bureaucrats within its
ambit. Moreover, the 1985 Bill, impliedly included the Prime Minister since it referred to the
office of a Minister in its definition of “public functionary”.
The 1989 Bill, restricted itself only to corruption, but corruption only as specified in the
POCA and did not mention IPC. It specifically sought to include the Prime Minister, both
former and incumbent.
Lastly, the last three versions of the Bill in 1996, 1998 and 2001, all largely;
(a) focused only on corruption;
(b) defined corruption only in terms of POCA;
(c) defined “public functionaries” to include Prime Minister, Ministers and MPs;
(d) did not include bureaucrats within their ambit.
3.6 The Lokpal Bill, 2011 enables the Lokpal to inquire into allegations made in a complaint
against a ‘public servant’. With the coining of this new term, the current Lokpal Bill, as
proposed and as sent to this Committee, is distinct from the previous Bills mainly on the
following counts:–
• Its jurisdiction is comparatively wider as it has widened the scope of ‘public servant’
by including the bureaucracy as also institutions and associations, wholly or partly
financed or controlled by the Central Government or those who are in receipt of public
money.
• It provides for separate investigation and prosecution wings of Lokpal.
• It makes the declaration of assets by all ‘public servants’ mandatory and failure to do
so liable to the presumption that such assets have been acquired by corrupt means.
• It is far more detailed and more inclusive then earlier versions, with a large number of
principal and ancillary provisions not found in earlier versions.
3.7 It is thus clear that the concept of the institution of Lokpal has undergone vital and
important changes over time keeping in view the changing socio-economic conditions and
varying nature, level and pervasiveness of corruption in society.

10
3.8 Though the institution of Lokpal is yet to become a reality at the Central level, similar
institutions of Lokayuktas have in fact been setup and are functioning for many years in
several States. In some of the States, the institution of Lokayuktas was set up as early as
in 1970s, the first being Maharashtra in 1972. Thereafter, State enactments were enacted
in the years 1981 (M.P.), 1983 (Andhra Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh), 1984 (Karnataka),
1985 (Assam), 1986 (Gujarat), 1995 (Delhi), 1999 (Kerala), 2001 (Jharkhand), 2002
(Chhattisgarh) and 2003 (Haryana). At present, Lokayuktas are in place in 17 States and one
Union Territory. However, due to the difference in structure, scope and jurisdiction, the
effectiveness of the State Lokayuktas vary from State to State. It is noteworthy that some
States like Gujarat, Karnataka, Bihar, Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh have made provisions
in their respective State Lokayuktas Act for suo motu  investigation by the Lokpal. In the
State Lokayukta Acts of some States, the Lokayukta has been given the power for
prosecution and also power to ensure compliance of its recommendations. However, there
is a significant difference in the nature of provisions of State Acts and in powers from State
to State. Approximately nine States in India have no Lokayukta at present. Of the States
which have an enactment, four States have no actual appointee in place for periods varying
from two months to eight years.

11
CHAPTER-4
CITIZENS’ CHARTER AND GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
4.1 There has been a consistent, universal and widespread demand for creating a Public
Grievances Redressal Mechanism and mandating a. Citizens Charter for all Government
departments and public services in the country. This is to address grievances of the public
in their dealing with public offices for issues not related to corruption but including vital
issues like procrastination, inactivity, unresponsiveness etc. on the part of public
functionaries. Since the Lokpal Bill 2011 drafted by the Government restricted itself to
issues relating to corruption, the issue of Grievance Redressal was not included. The draft
Jan Lokpal Bill presented by the team headed by Shri Anna Hazare includes the issue of
grievances redressal/citizens charter to be also addressed by the institution of Lokpal.
During the debate in Parliament on 27th August, 2011 on the issue of setting up of Lokpal
the Citizens Charter issue was one of the key items of the agenda. The Hon’ble Minister
of Finance while summing up the deliberations stated that the House agreed in principle on,
inter alia , the Citizens Charter to be brought under Lokpal through appropriate mechanism.
Notably the United Nations Convention on Action Against Corruption (UNCAC) does not
directly mention that each signatory State should have a Citizens Charter
1.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
4.1A The memoranda received by the Committee carried the following suggestions/observations:–
• The concept of Citizens’ Charter was first mooted in a White Paper entitled “The
Citizens’ Charter: raising the standard” presented before the British Parliament in July, 1991.
• Basic elements of Citizens’ Charter are: (i) transparency, (ii) accountability,
(iii) availability of information, (iv) declared standards of service, with a promise to
improve upon it and (v) an effective and efficient Grievance Redressal machinery.
• Include Citizens’ Charter, Public Grievances, and Whistleblowers also in the Bill.
• Citizens Charter indicating time frame for each work should be introduced and
responsibility of Government officer to be fixed; should have provisions for penalties
for failure to do so.
• Blue Print of the proposed mechanism
(i) Every citizen’s letter should be acknowledged within a week.
(ii) Every citizen’s letter should be replied within a month.
(iii) Every official who has public contact must wear a name badge.
11
1UNCAC was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly by Resolution 58/4 of 31 st October, 2003 and opened up
for signature at the high level political signing conference in Merida, Mexico from 9–11 December, 2003. The
Convention entered into force on 14
th December, 2005.

12
• Grievance Redressal Mechanism must be separated from Lokpal/Lokayuktas and be
modeled on RTI Act, 2005.
• Slow progress of any citizen’s work to be deemed as “corruption”.
• A comprehensive legal framework should be provided under the Central Law by
bringing in a separate legislation under Entry 8 of List-III of Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution, for the purpose of putting in place an effective Grievance Redressal
Mechanism, simultaneously with the Lokpal Bill.
• Needed, but in separate Bill for Central institutions and schemes, and separately for
each of the States.
• Statutory back up is needed to provide a time limit; service and penalty as imposed
by an appellate authority with Civil Court power; and a second appellate to reviewing
authority be provided. The CVC should be the monitoring agency for citizens’ charters.
• Enact public service delivery law and strong grievance redressal mechanism to
effectively address petty corruption in delivery of services.
• United Nations Convention on Action Against Corruption (UNCAC) doesn’t directly
mention that each State party should have a “citizens’ charter”.
• There are many countries which included the principles of service orientation in their
legislation in one or the other way.
• UNCAC does not mention about who the independent body or bodies should report
to.
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY WITNESSES
4.2 The Ministry of Personnel (DoPT) have, in their comments, observed as follows:–
“...For redressal of public grievances, the Government proposes to bring a separate
legislation before the Parliament...” .
4.3 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, President, Loksatta, while tendering oral evidence before the
Committee, stated thus:
“...There is a case for Citizens’ Charter and laws governing that. But,...it must be
applicable only to the notified agencies where there are no supply constraints. This is a very
important consideration because an omnibus legislation saying that there will be a Citizens’
Charter for every service is, simply, not practicable... ”.
4.4 He further stated:
“...Then, as far as grievances are concerned, Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned before, there
will be hundreds and thousands of grievances everyday. They must not come under Lokpal
and Lokayukta. They must come under a separate grievance redressal authority ...”
4.5 Speaking on this issue, Shri Ashok Kumar Parija (Chairman, Bar Council of India) said:–
“...The third issue is regarding citizen charter and grievances redressal. The Anna Hazare
Lokpal Bill provides that each Government Department will have a citizen charter. We are
of the view that we could have a different law for citizen charter and not mix it with the
Lokpal...”
4.6 Shri Shekhar Singh (NCPRI) deposed before the Committee as under:–

13
“...We are not in favour of the grievance redress or citizen’s charter being under the Lokpal.
But we have suggested that there ought to be a parallel institution like grievance redress
commissions both at the Centre and State levels. My colleagues will give you more details
on that…”
4.7 Shrimati Anjali Bhardwaj (NCPRI), while placing their views before the Committee, stated:–
“...there should be a separate legislation which deals with grievance redressal, and that
legislation should focus on setting up an appropriate decentralized structure for dealing with
issues of grievances. We feel that grievances 
vkSj corruption ds dslst+ ,d lkFk esa ,d
ckWMh u ns[ksA gekjs ns”k esa 1-2 fcfy;u yksx gSa vkSj lHkh ds dqN u dqN grievances
gSaA vxj ,d lky esa fdlh ckWMh ds ikl ,d fcfy;u ls T;knk  grievances vk tk;saxs]
it will collapse under its own weight, and it will not be effective. Therefore, we feel that
a separate body needs to be set up to look into the issue of grievance redress. It needs to
be a decentralized body because people often have very immediate nature of grievances ...”
4.8 Shri Harish Salve, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India, while clarifying his view on the
topic, opined thus:–
“...1 do not see, Sir, in my respectful submission to you, any specific Entry of the State
which would apply to the framing of a Citizens’ Charter and which would then put it
squarely within the power of the Union Parliament. If you do frame a Citizens’ Charter, Sir,
then certainly as an incidental power, the Union Parliament can appoint an agency to
enforce that Charter. And if that incidentally encroaches on the State’ s field, that is
permitted by our Constitution …”
4.9 He further opined:
“...What I suggest is, taking a leaf from the current Electricity Act, which we have, a
structure should be created under the Union law in which States will appoint grievance
redressal authorities. So, that also respects the principle of federalism. We have it already
in the Electricity Act where State Commissions are appointed. So, under the Union law, you
can always leave it to the State Governments to appoint their own grievance redressal
authorities. You can prescribe what the collegium will be and you can prescribe as to how
that collegium will appoint the grievance redressal authority but it must be left to the
States...”
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
4.10 At  this juncture, the Committee also takes note of its earlier recommendations as contained
in its 29th Report on the subject “Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism” wherein the
Committee had observed :–
“... In support of its foregoing recommendations/observations, the Committee strongly
recommends that the Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism should be envisaged in a
statutory form on the line of the Right to Information Act, 2005 which would make it
mandatory on all State Governments/UTs/Ministries/Departments/Organisations to pursue the
grievance till their final disposal. The Committee also reiterates that like Right to
Information Act in the PGRM system there should be a time limit of 30  days and provision
of fine on delay should be there ”.
4.11 The wide cross-section of opinion available to the Committee through memoranda and
depositions overwhelmingly suggested that there was a dire need for enacting a Public
Service Delivery law. Opinion was divided on whether it should be separate and distinct

14
from the Lokpal, i.e., be resident in a separate legislation or be part of the Lokpal, though
the preponderant view inclined towards the former.
4.12 One of the prime reasons for this separation, as cited by various witnesses, was that the
institution of Lokpal would be severely burdened and become unworkable if it also included
the jurisdiction of handling public grievances. Public Grievances Redressal, fortified through
‘a Citizens Charter, would necessarily invite millions of complaints on a daily basis and it
was, therefore, critical that a separate mechanism was set up more akin to the Right to
Information structure.
4.13 The other major reason for keeping the Grievance Redressal Mechanism separate is that
these are qualitatively different and easily severable from the issue of corruption in political
and bureaucratic circles.
4.14 Citizens’ Charter would involve not only framing, but monitoring of a list of DOs and
DON’Ts for the Central Government (and corresponding State Government departments)
which may not at all be feasible for a single Lokpal or a single Lokayukta to handle.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
4.15 The Committee believes that while providing for a comprehensive Grievance
Redressal Mechanism is absolutely critical, it is equally imperative that this
mechanism be placed in a separate framework which ensures speed, efficiency and
focus in dealing with citizens’ grievances as per a specified Citizens’ Charter. The
humongous number of administrative complaints and grievance redressal requests
would critically and possibly fatally jeopardize the very existence of a Lokpal
supposed to battle corruption. At the least, it would severally impair its functioning
and efficiency. Qualitatively, corruption and mal-administration  fall into reasonably
distinct watertight and largely non-overlapping, mutually exclusive compartments.
The approach to tackling such two essentially distinct issues must necessarily vary
in content, manpower, logistics and structure. The fact that this Committee
recommends that there must be a separate efficacious mechanism to deal with
Grievance Redressal and Citizens’ Charter in a comprehensive legislation other
than the Lokpal Bill does not devalue or undermine the vital importance of that
subject.
4.16 Consequently the Committee strongly recommends the creation of a separate
comprehensive enactment on this subject and such a Bill, if moved through the
Personnel/Law Ministry and if referred to this Standing Committee, would receive
the urgent attention of this Committee. Indeed, this Committee, in its 29th Report
on “Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism”, presented to Parliament in October,
2008 had specifically recommended the enactment of such a mechanism.
4.17 To emphasize the importance of the subject of Citizens’ Charter and to impart it the
necessary weight and momentum, the Committee is of the considered opinion that
any proposed legislation on the subject:
(i) should be urgently undertaken and be comprehensive and all inclusive;
(ii) such enactment should, subject to Constitutional validity, also be applicable for
all States as well in one uniform legislation;
(iii) must provide for adequate facilities for proper guidance of the citizens on the
procedural and other requirements while making requests.

15
(iv) must provide for acknowledgement of citizen’s communications within a fixed
time frame;
(v) must provide for response within stipulated time frame;
(vi) must provide for prevention of spurious or lame queries from the department
concerned to illegally/unjustifiably prolong/extend the time limit for response;
(vii) must provide for clearly identifiable name tags for each employee of different
Government departments;
(viii) must provide for all pending grievances to be categorized subject-wise and
notified on a continually updated website for each department;
(ix) must provide for a facilitative set of p rocedures and formats, both for
complaints and for appeals on this subject along the lines of the Information
Commissioners system set up under the RTI;
(x) must, in the event that the proposed Central law does not cover States, make
strong recommendations to have similar enactments for grievance redressal/
citizen charter at each State level;
(xi) may provide for exclusionary or limited clauses in the legislation to the effect
that Citizen Charter should not include services involving constraints of supply
e.g. power, water, etc. but should include subjects where there is no constraint
involved e.g.  birth certificates, decisions, assessment orders. These two are
qualitatively different categories and reflect an important and reasonable
distinction deserving recognition without which Government departments will be
burdened with the legal obligation to perform and provide services or products
in areas beyond their control and suffering from scarcity of supply.
4.18 The Committee strongly feels that the harmonious synchronization of the RTI Act
and of the Citizens’ Charter and Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism will ensure
greater transparency and accountability in governance and enhance the
responsiveness of the system to the citizens’ needs/expectations/grievances.
4.19 Lastly, the Committee wishes to clarify that the conclusion of the Hon’ble Union
Minister for Finance on the Floor of the House quoted in Para 1.8 above of the
Report does not intend to direct or mandate or bind or oblige this Committee to
provide for a Citizen’s Charter within the present Lokpal Bill alone. The Committee
reads the quoted portion in para 1.8 above to mean and agree in principle to provide
for a Citizen’s Charter/Grievance Redressal system but not necessarily and
inexorably in the same Lokpal Bill. Secondly, the reference to ‘appropriate
mechanism’ in para 1.8 above further makes it clear that there must be a
mechanism dealing with the subject but does not require it to be in the same Lokpal
Bill alone. Thirdly, the reference in para 1.8 above to the phrase ‘under Lokpal’ is
not read by the Committee to mean that such a mechanism must exist only within
the present Lokpal Bill. The Committee reads this to mean that there should be an
appropriate institution to deal with the subject of Citizen’s Charter/Grievance
redressal which would be akin to the Lokpal and have its features of independence
and efficacy, but not that it need not be the very same institution i.e.  present
Lokpal. Lastly, the Committee also takes note of the detailed debate and divergent
views of those who spoke on the Floor of both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on this
issue and concludes that no binding consensus or resolution to the effect that the

16
Grievances Redressal/Citizen’s Charter mechanism must be provided in the same
institution in the present Lokpal Bill, has emerged.
4.20 Contextually, the issues and some of the suggestions in this Chapter may overlap
with and should, therefore, be read in conjunction with Chapter 13 of this report.
Though the Committee has already opined that the issue of grievance redressal
should be dealt with in a separate legislation, the Committee hereby also strongly
recommends that there should be a similar declaration either in the same Chapter
of the Lokpal or in a separate Chapter proposed to be added in the Indian
Constitution, giving the same constitutional status to the citizens grievances and
redressal machinery.
4.21 This recommendation to provide the proposed Citizen Charter and Grievances
Redressal Machinery the same Constitutional status as the Lokpal also reflects the
genuine and deep concern of this Committee about the need, urgency, status and
importance of a citizen’s charter/grievance machinery. The Committee believes that
the giving of the aforesaid constitutional status to this machinery would go a long
way in enhancing its efficacy and in providing a healing touch to the common man.
Conclusions and recommendations in this regard made in para 13.12 (j) and (k)
should be read in conjunction herein.
4.22 Furthermore, the Committee believes that this recommendation herein is also fully
consistent with the letter and spirit of para 1.8 above viz. the conclusions of the
Minister of Finance in the Lower House recorded in para 1.8 above.

17
CHAPTER-5
THE PRIME MINISTER : FULL EXCLUSION VERSUS
DEGREES OF INCLUSION
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
5.1 The issue of inclusion or otherwise of PM has received disproportionate media attention.
The Committee received diverse written and oral suggestions varying from  complete
exclusion to deferred inclusion to partia1 inclusion (with subject matter exclusion) to
inclusion subject to significant safeguards/ caveats and finally to total  inclusion simpliciter.
There was, however, one fascinating feature in the internal deliberations of the Committee.
The intense debate and divergence during  deliberations within the Committee was not over
the Government versus the Jan Lokpal or some other draft but was between one group of
Committee Members who  strongly advocated the total, absolute and complete exclusion of
PM and another group which argued for inclusion subject to a few substantive subject
matter exclusions in addition to very significant and broad procedural safeguards (including
a prior clearance from either a 11 member Lokpal or the full Bench of the Apex  Court).
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
5.2 The memoranda received by the Committee carried the following suggestions/observations:-
• Prime Minister cannot be subjected to Lokpal’s jurisdiction in a cavalier manner.
• The PM should be altogether kept out of the jurisdiction of Lokpal since Parliament
is the best forum we can trust to enforce integrity in the office of the PM.
• Include PM in clause 2(1) (i) with certain caveats.
• It is necessary to include PM within the purview of Lokpal otherwise, corrupt
Ministers/Officers will get away by pleading that they had acted with the approval/
knowledge of PM.
• At present, any criminal investigation into allegations made against Prime Minister are
required to be investigated by CBI. Therefore, there is no problem if Lokpal
investigates, instead of CBI.
• Proceedings concerning Prime Minister to be in camera.
• Lokpal may investigate into complaints against PM signed by 50/75/100 MPs; similar
method in States for CM.
• Prime Minister is primus inter pares or ‘first among equals’ in the Council of
Ministers. Hence viewed from the Constitutional position, the Prime Minister gets the
position of ‘keystone of the Cabinet arc’ only because he is the Head of the Council
of Ministers and nothing else. There is nothing inherent in the position of Prime
Minister because of which he should be given any special status, especially in matters
relating to  investigation of corruption.
17

18
• Some qualification like ‘clearance from the Supreme Court’ may be introduced in the
Bill to  put a wall to prevent black mailing of the Prime Minister.
• Proviso may be added to  clause 2(1) (i) of the Bill which may read: “Personnel of
Prime Minister’s Office, including Minister-in-charge shall be included within this
clause.”
• Any complaint against Prime Minister to be evaluated by a Full Bench of Lokpal for
prima facie  evidence. Once the Bench finds prima facie evidence in the complaint, it
may be referred to  Full Bench of the apex Court for their opinion. On positive opinion
from the apex Court, Lokpal notifies the ruling dispensation of imminent inquiry
proceedings with a notice of few days giving them time to re-elect a new Prime
Minister.
• No special treatment is needed for  Chief Minister since there is provision of President’s
rule at State Government level and no power vacuum is created if Chief Minister has
to resign. Article 356 exists for  the States, not for the Centre.
• Office of PM, including the PM should be under Lokpal. However, acts regarding to
national interest and public order should be excluded from the purview of  Lokpal.
Upon indictment, any reference for prosecution action against the PM can be taken
only if the decision is endorsed by simple majority of Joint Session of Parliament.
• Bill should include in its ambit, the PM in office; but with certain safeguards like
enquiry only after deliberations by the Full Bench of Lokpal, in consultation with the
CJI.
• Complaints against PM – all such investigations shall be made in a confidential manner
and in camera; if any information about material aspects is leaked out, the Investigation
Officer shall be prima facie  held responsible for such leakage.
• If the Lokpal finds a prima facie  case against the PM in any complaint against him,
he shall send a detailed report to the CJI, along with all material evidence, to seek
appropriate directions in the matter, and shall not proceed further to file a charge
sheet against the PM, until appropriate direction to do so is given to the Lokpal by
the CJI, or until the expiry of six months from the date of submission of report by
the Lokpal to the CJI, in case the Lokpal does not receive any appropriate direction
from the CJI.
• Proviso to Clause 17(1)(a) may be added providing for inclusion of serving Prime
Minister if two thirds of members of Lokpal make reference to a sanctioning
Committee comprising of Vice-President, Speaker and the Leader of Opposition, Lok
Sabha and if that Committee sanctions an inquiry into the conduct of the Prime
Minister; and also that no such sanction of inquiry be sought or given against the
Prime Minister in respect of allegations on matter to sovereignty and integrity of India
and the security of the State.
• Definition of “Minister” should include “Personnel of PMO, including Minister-
in-charge” – All important policy matters are laid before the PM for its approval; they
pass through PMO with valuable views. Exclusion of PM may protect all those persons
who are privy to such decision.
• The personal immunity of PM will cease after he demits office, but if inquiry/
investigation into the facts is postponed till then, valuable evidence may be lost and
immediate adverse impact on the nation may not be prevented.

19
Short Global Survey*
• Afghanistan  – The President heads the executive and His Office is not under the law
on anti-corruption, nor is the judiciary; Bhutan –  Every individual residing in Bhutan,
including the Prime Minister, judges and lower bureaucracy, are within ACC Bhutan’s
jurisdiction; Indonesia –  all included; USA –  President Clinton was issued a subpoena
to testify before a grand jury that was investigating him for possible federal crimes;
the court ruled that President Nixon had to turn over the incriminating White House
tapes, rejecting his claim of executive privilege; UK –  Prime Minister is the head of
Government, Prime Minister is subject to the law in the same manner as any member
of the public; Korea –  President is both the head of State & Head of Govt. President
is subject to the Anti-corruption Act, the Public Service Ethics Act & relevant
corruption provisions under the Criminal Act. However, under the constitution, the
President is entitled to criminal immunity during his tenure of office except for
insurrection or; Australia - All MPs, judges, magistrates, holders of judicial office are
public officials within the meaning of ICAC Act. It extends to public sector agencies
also except Police Force - whose corruption is investigated by the Police Integrity
Commission.
• Usually, the criminal investigations against Heads of Department/State would be closely
linked to parliamentary investigations and legal procedures for impeachment of a sitting
Head of State.
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY WITNESSES
5.3 The written comments furnished by the Department of Personnel and Training on this issue
are as follows:–
“…In the context of the Indian polity, the Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in the
Government’ s set up. To ensure that Prime Minister is able to discharge his functions
without any interference from any quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister may be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister has demitted the
office, he will come within the purview of the Lokpal…”
5.4 Justice M.N. Venkatachalaiah, while placing his considered views, before the Committee, on
this subject matter, opined :–
“…1 have made it clear in the Constitution Review Commission Report that the Prime
Minister’ s Office must be kept out of it. You have no idea of what the Prime Minister’ s
Office is in a parliamentary democracy …”
5.5 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while articulating his Party’s view on this topic, stated:–
“…the Prime Minister in our Westminster model is no longer merely first among equals; the
Prime Minister of the country is the leader of the nation. A very large complex federal
polity like India cannot afford to have the Prime Minister go before a non-Parliamentary
body and present himself or defend himself…It does not mean that the Prime Minister
should not be accountable. The Prime Minister should be accountable to the Lok Sabha.
That is what the Constitution envisages. Certainly, if the Lok Sabha feels that there is
something seriously wrong, even the parties in power will not allow the Prime Minister to
continue because it is politically not feasible and, constitutionally, the Lok Sabha must be
supreme in dealing with the accountability of the Government…it also will lead to a
* As extracted from written memoranda submitted by UNDP India to the Committee.

20
potential situation where there will be roving inquiries without any substance and even if
subsequently it is proved that the Prime Minister’ s conduct is totally honourable, the
damage will be done to the country because if the country is destabilized, if a Government
is weakened, the damage is irreversible …”
5.6 He further stated:–
“…Mr. Chairman, to ensure that there are very, very strong safeguards and, in those
safeguards, we do not believe that judiciary should be the safeguard in protecting the Prime
Minister’ s institution. We believe it must be a Parliamentary body and, therefore, what we
propose is that in case the Prime Minister is sought to be brought within the purview of
the Lokpal’ s jurisdiction, then, after Lokpal, on the basis of the prima facie evidence or
the material before it, at least, two-thirds majority asks a Parliamentary Committee to
sanction permission to inquire. Our humble suggestion is that committee should be a three-
member committee — we could actually have a variant of that — headed by the Vice-
President of India with the Speaker of the Lok Sabha as a Member and the third member
being the Leader of the Opposition. Nobody can accuse this body of partisanship because,
after all, these are the two high Chairs of the two Houses of the Parliament. The Leader
of the Opposition cannot be accused of being partisan in favour of the Government. If
anything, the Leader of the Opposition would probably be harshly critical. Perhaps, we can
trust these three members to protect the dignity of the Parliament and the nation’ s
institutions and the privileges of the Executive branch. So, if, indeed, it is found necessary
to include the Prime Minister under the jurisdiction of the Lokpal, a safeguard of that kind
would probably be practical and would probably protect the interests of the country…the
Prime Minister...is not merely first among equals, but he occupies a very pivotal position.
There is no equivalent of Article 356 in the Government of India and the Prime Minister
is not somebody who can be chosen just like that ,…”
5.7 The representative of NCPRI, while advocating their views on this issue, stated that:–
“…So, we have suggested three or four type of safeguards. Number one, we have said that
only a full Bench of the Lokpal could recommend investigation against the Prime Minister.
Number two that Bench will have to refer the matter to a full Bench of the Supreme Court.
This is like a mandatory appeal to the Supreme Court which will also examine if there is
sufficient evidence. Number three, the Prime Minister cannot be investigated under
vicarious responsibility what somebody else has done, but only what the Prime Minister
allegedly himself or herself has done. Number four, that there are certain security and other
issues which would be exempt from. This …”
5.8 The views of the Bar Council of India, were expressed by its Chairman, in the following
words:-
“…So we want the Prime Minister out of the Lokpal. Now what we suggest is if the Prime
Minister is required to be included and if there is an inquiry against the Prime Minister,
let it be investigated in-camera by a bench of five-judges of the hon. Supreme Court
presided by the hon. Chief Justice and five senior judges. These proceedings will be in-
camera till a definite conclusion is arrived at …”
5.9 The President, Center for Policy Research while tendering oral evidence before the
Committee, put forth his suggestions as under:–
“…the manner in which the Prime Minister should be brought under the Lok Pal is  of some
importance. My own view is that I think the Lok Pal Bill, as it currently stands, gets it mostly
right. It asserts the principle that the Prime Minister is not above the law, therefore, he can

21
be investigated after he demits office. But he makes due allowance for the fact that the Prime
Minister is not just an expression of the sovereignty of the people, the risks of needless
investigations, frivolous investigations against the Prime Minister as it were holding
Government to ransom, keeping the country’s interests are not inconsiderable and, therefore,
the Prime Minister should  be out of the purview of the Lok Pal while he is in office…”
5.10 During his deposition before the Committee, he further observed thus:–
“…Sir, I would submit, there are two models which you can look at. The UK has excessive
exclusions, but it has list of exclusions. Foreign affairs and the affairs relating to the
security of the State are two dear examples where, obviously, the Lokpal can have no look-
in. The Hong Kong law is far narrower in its exclusions. One can debate individual items,
whether they should or should not go; may be the functioning of the Prime Minister’ s
Office in  the economic Ministries needs to be put under the Lokpal. But, outside the
economic Ministries, I would suggest it would be hazardous to generally subject the Prime
Minister to the jurisdiction of the Lokpal. We have to strike a balance somewhere and I
think, that may be a good line to consider on which it can be divided…As far as the
inclusion of the Prime Minister in the ambit of the Bill is concerned, my suggestion was
on the balance in India. We must include the Prime Minister, at least, in the working of
the PMO in the Economic Ministry and that include the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
Mines, Ministry of Telecommunications, the Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of all
natural resources, wherever dealing with the taxpayers’ money, wherever you are dealing with
the finance must come within the purview of the Lokpal Bill …”
5.11 The representative of CII, commented on this issue as follows:–
“…The first issue is the inclusion of the Prime Minister. We believe that the Prime Minister
should be outside the purview of the Lokpal Bill. We also believe that he could be
investigated after he demits office. The rationale for our saying this is that the Prime
Minister is the head of the Government and he needs to run the Government on a day-to-
day basis and anything that hampers his ability to run the Government is something which
is not going to be good for the nation…”
5.12 The advocates of the Jan Lokpal Bill, expressed their views on this matter as under:–
“…If any PM works for Two  consecutive terms, then his works for the first few years
cannot be investigated because no case earlier than seven years could be investigated …”
5.13 Shri Amod K. Kanth, while commenting on this issue, stated that:–
“…Anyone who has knowledge of our Constitution and Indian laws knows that the rule of
law does not exclude the Prime Minister of India at all. Only the President and the
Governors have the constitutional immunity. Even today the Prime Minister can be easily
investigated. In fact, to make a special provision for the Prime Minister will be a wrong
suggestion…”
5.14 It is significant to note that the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, in its Fourth
Report on “Ethics in Governance” had observed that:–
“The Prime Minister’ s unchallenged authority and leadership are critical to ensure cohesion
and sense of purpose in government, and to make our Constitutional scheme function in
letter and spirit. The Prime Minister is accountable to the Parliament, and on his survival,
depends the survival of the Government. If the Prime Minister’ s conduct is open to formal
scrutiny by extra-Parliamentary authorities, then the Government’ s viability is eroded and
Parliament’ s supremacy is in jeopardy...

22
A Prime Minister facing formal enquiry by a Lok Pal would cripple the Government. One
can argue that such an enquiry gives the opportunity to the incumbent to defend himself
against baseless charges and clear his name. But the fact is, one there is a formal enquiry
by a Lok Pal on charges, however baseless they might be, the Prime Minister’s authority
is severely eroded, and the Government will be paralysed. Subsequent exoneration of the
Prime Minister cannot undo the damage done to the country or to the office of the Prime
Minister. If the Prime A1inister is indeed guilty of serious indiscretions, Parliament should
be the judge of the matter, and the Lok Sabha should remove the Prime Minister from
office.”
5.15 During the deliberations of the Committee, one of the Members articulated his point of view
as follows:–
“…
çkbe-fefuLVj dh iwjh  liability rks vicarious gh gSA vxj eaf=eaMy esa 20 ea=h gSa] rks
çkbe-fefuLVj dksbZ foHkkx MkW;jsDVyh ugha ns[k jgs gSaA vki bldks O;kogkfjd rkSj ij
dSls yk,axs\ vxj lapkj ea=ky; esa dqN xM+cM+ gqbZ] vxj isVªksy okys fefuLVj ls dqN
xM+cM+ gqbZ] rks vki ;g tks
 vicarious dh lhy gS] bldks dSls  implement djsaxs\ nwljk tc
vki [kqn dg jgs gSa fd  Anti-corruption Act vkSj Prevention of Corruption Act esa og
covered gS] rks D;k vki ;g eglwl ugha djrs fd ;g sufficient safeguard gS\...”
5.16 Another Member of the Committee raised a pertinent concern on this topic in the following
words:–
“…Second was the inclusion of the Prime Minister within the ambit of the Lokpal. There
are a lot of serious issues which could be national security, public order, foreign policy,
even there are Ministers, for instance, the Ministers of Defence or Foreign Affairs. What
do we do about them? You have your nuclear installations. You have your scientists. You
have important issues. What do we do about them? Do we have them in the ambit of the
Lokpal? Wouldn’t we be compromising on the security and integrity of the country?...”
V. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
5.17 The issue of the Prime Minister’s inclusion or exclusion or partial inclusion or partial
exclusion has been the subject of much debate in the Committee. Indeed, this has occupied
the Committee’s deliberations for at least three different meetings. Broadly, the models/
options which emerged are as follows:
(a) The Prime Minister should be altogether excluded, without exception and without
qualification.
(b) The Prime Minister should altogether be included, without exception and without
qualification (though this view appears to be that of only one or two Members).
(c) The Prime Minister should be fully included, with no exclusionary caveats but he
should be liable to action/prosecution only after demitting office.
(d) The Prime Minister should be included, with subject matter exclusions like national
security, foreign affairs, atomic energy and space. Some variants and additions
suggested included the addition of “national interest” and “public order” to this list of
subject matter exclusions.
(e) One learned Member also suggested that the Prime Minister be included but subject to
the safeguard that the green signal for his prosecution must be first obtained from
either both Houses of Parliament in a joint sitting or some variation thereof.

23
5.18 It may be added that so far as the deferred prosecution model is concerned, the view was
that if that model is adopted, there should be additional provisions limiting such deferment
to one term of the Prime Minister only and not giving the Prime Minister the same benefit
of deferred prosecution in case the Prime Minister is re-elected.
5.19 In a nut shell, as far as the large number of the Members of the Committee are concerned
it was only three models above viz. as specified in paras (a), (c) and (d) in para 5.17 above
which were seriously proposed.
5.20 Since the Committee finds that each of the views as specified in paras (a), (c) and (d) in
para 5.17 above had reasonably broad and diverse support without going into the figures
for or against or into the names of individual Members, the Committee  believes that, in
fairness, all these three options be transmitted by the Committee as options suggested by
the Committee, leaving it to the good sense of Parliament to decide as to which option is
to be adopted.
5.21 It would be, therefore, pointless in debating the diverse arguments in respect of the each
option or against each option. In fairness, each of the above options has a reasonable zone
of merit as also some areas of demerit. The Committee believes that the wisdom of
Parliament in this respect should be deferred to and the Committee, therefore, so opines.
VI. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
5.22 The issue of the Prime Minister’s inclusion or exclusion or partial inclusion or partial
exclusion has been the subject of much debate in the Committee. Indeed, this has
occupied the Committee’s deliberations for at least three different meetings. Broadly,
the models/options which emerged are as follows:–
(a) The Prime Minister should be altogether excluded, without exception and without
qualification.
(b) The Prime Minister should altogether be included, without exception and without
qualification (though this view appears to be that of only one or two Members).
(c) The Prime Minister should be fully included, with no exclusionary caveats but he
should be liable to action/prosecution only after demitting office.
(d) The Prime Minister should be included, with subject matter exclusions like
national security, foreign affairs, atomic energy and space. Some variants and
additions suggested included the addition of “national interest” and “public
order” to this list of subject matter exclusions.
(e) One learned Member also suggested that the Prime Minister be included but
subject to the safeguard that the green signal for his prosecution must be first
obtained from either both Houses of Parliament in a joint sitting or some
variation thereof.
5.23 It may be added that so far as the deferred prosecution model is concerned, the view
was that if that model is adopted, there should be additional provisions limiting such
deferment to one term of the Prime Minister only and not giving the Prime Minister
the same benefit of deferred prosecution in case the Prime Minister is re-elected.
5.24 In a nut shell, as far as the overwhelming number of Members of the Committee
are concerned, it was only three models above viz. as specified in paras (a), (c) and
(d) in para 5.17 above which were seriously proposed.

24
5.25 Since the Committee finds that each of the views as specified in paras (a), (c) and
(d) in para 5.17 above had reasonably broad and diverse support without going into
the figures for or against or into the names of individual Members, the Committee
believes that, in fairness, all these three options be transmitted by the Committee
as options suggested by the Committee, leaving it to the good sense of Parliament
to decide as to which option is to be adopted.
5.26 It would be, therefore, pointless in debating the diverse arguments in respect of each
option or against each option. In fairness, each of the above options has a reasonable
zone of merit as also some areas of demerit. The Committee believes that the
wisdom of Parliament in this respect should be deferred to and the Committee,
therefore, so opines.

25
CHAPTER-6
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT : VOTE, SPEECH AND CONDUCT
WITHIN THE HOUSE
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
6.1 Clause 17(1)(c) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 enables the Lokpal to inquire into any matter
involved in, or arising from, or connected with, any allegation of corruption made in a
complaint in respect of any person who is or has been a Member of either House of
Parliament. However, sub-clause (2) of this clause specifies that Lokpal shall not inquire
into any matter involved in, or arising from, or connected with, any a1legation of
corruption complaint against any Member of either House of Parliament in respect of
anything said or vote given by him in Parliament or any Committee thereof covered under
the provisions contained in clause (2) of Article 105 of the Constitution. In other words,
MPs and ex-MPs fall under the jurisdiction of the Lokpal for their acts of corruption,
except that their acts like speech or voting in the House cannot be inquired into by the
Lokpal to the extent they are covered under Article 105(2) of the Constitution. The
Committee had received detailed inputs on the issue whether the conduct of MPs in the
House (in the form of speech/vote or action) should also be brought under the jurisdiction
of the Lokpal.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
6.2 Any complaint against a member of any House by Lokpal can be sent to the Presiding
Officer of the House, who will, within a limited (well defined) time, either approve the
inquiry to be conducted against the Member or if he wants to reject the inquiry, refer it
to the Bench of SC/HC which should validate the reasons for such rejection.
6.3 To ensure independence of institutions created under the Constitution, only those acts of
MPs in the House where there is a case of undue pecuniary benefit should fall under
purview of Lokpal. Moreover, for prosecution of MPs, the Lokpal Prosecution/Investigative
Committee/Bench should for these specific cases co-opt additional members who are MPs
nominated by the Speaker of Lok Sabha and Chairman of Rajya Sabha.
6.4 Parliamentary privilege does not cover corrupt acts committed by MPs in connection with
their duties in the House or otherwise. Hence, the Bill should include such corrupt practice
of MPs, whether done in or outside the House.
6.5 The speech of an elected MP inside Parliament cannot be subject to the ideological
prejudices of a Lokpal; the vote of an elected Member, if tainted by corruption, must be
tackled by Parliament itself as per its rules and norms.
6.6 Clause 17(2) of the Bill should be deleted since there is already a decision of a Constitution
bench of the Supreme Court supporting what the sub section says and hence it is not
necessary to repeat it in the Bill.
25

26
II. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY WITNESSES
6.7 The Ministry of Personnel (DoPT) in its comments furnished to Committee clarified the
issue in the following terms:–
‘’...It is a matter for examination whether the inquiry by the Lokpal in respect of anything
said or vote given by a Member of Parliament would fall under the category ‘proceedings
before a court of law’. If so, the MPs would certainly have to be kept outside the purview
of the Lokpal …”
6.8 Chairman of Bar Council of India placed the views of the Bar Council over this issue before
the Committee as follows:
“....Now so far as conduct of MPs within the Parliament is concerned, our view is they
should be excluded from the purview of the Lokpal. What we believe is that conduct of
MPs within Parliament should be excluded from the purview of the Lokpal Bill considering
the constitutional provisions in respect of privileges of Members in Parliament. However,
in terms of Article 105 (3)  of the Constitution, the powers, privileges and immunities of
each House of Parliament and of the Members and the Committees of each House should
be defined by Parliament by a separate law dealing with the subject…”
6.9 The President, Centre for Policy Research, while making a presentation before the
Committee, emphasized that Constitutional protection given to MPs need not be changed. He
put forward his views as:–
“...Now, about inclusion of Members of Parliament, my own view is that the protection
provided to the Members of Parliament under article 105  (2)(iii) should be sacrosanct. I
think for what you say on the floor of the House and the votes and so forth, there is a
reason for that constitutional protection and that should remain…”
6.10 Shri Harish Salve while placing his considered views before the Committee, on this subject
matter, opined as follows:–
“...Article 105  is extremely clear. The control over the Parliament must lie within the
Parliament. As much as the control within the Courts lie with the Presiding Officers, as
much as nobody from outside Court can tell me what to say in the Court, nobody from
outside Parliament can tell any parliamentarian how to behave and what to say in the
Parliament, and that is far too precious a virtue for us to sacrifice or compromise. But,
Sir, do take this occasion to clear up one terrible aberration that has come into our law.
Where article 105 applies, there is complete immunity. But, Sir, please clarify that the
immunity of article 105 is not a half-way house; the bribe taker is protected and the bribe
giver is subjected to scrutiny of the law. That judgment needs to be corrected. If it is
established that somebody has taken a bribe to vote in Parliament in a particular way, with
the sanction of the Speaker, because Supreme Court read that in, that can be put on a
statutory basis, and if the Speaker of the House considers it appropriate, it is a matter
which can be put within the domain of the Lokpal for the investigation. And, once the
Speaker of the House, which means once the House, feels that it is a fit case for the
Lokpal, then this artificial divide between the bribe giver and the bribe taker must go…”
6.11 President of CII while apprising the Committee of his views/comments on the issue,
observed as follows:–
“...The next issue is MPs action inside the Parliament. We believe that the existing
arrangement should continue. The Privileges Committee should take care of the MPs’ action
inside the Parliament. If there is any lacuna in the functioning of the Privileges Committee

27
or if the Privileges Committee is lacking any teeth in the manner in which it can act, I
believe that needs to be looked at and that needs to be strengthened…”
6.12 Shri Shekhar Singh of NCPRI while tendering oral evidence before the Committee, put forth
his suggestions as under:–
“...Let the matter stays as it is though we are not in agreement with what we understand
to be the implications of the Supreme Court Order on this matter. We feel that that has gone
beyond what the Constitution envisages. So, we would like a position which is strictly in
keeping with the Constitutional position. But we would like the Parliament to consider
whether it itself wants to review this position especially in the light of some of the past
occurrences and, maybe, relax it in a way in which public feel that there is a greater
answerability of the MPs even when they are in Parliament…”
6.13 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan during his presentation before the Committee, elucidated upon the
issue as follows:–
“As far as Members of Parliament are concerned, article 105(2), the present Bill makes a
specific provision of that; I think, it is section 17 (2),  if I am not mistaken. Sir, protection
of privileges of Members of Parliament for their conduct in the House, what they say, what
they believe, and what documents they furnish, that is absolutely inviolable. That is
sacrosanct, including their vote…Sir until that is undone, for the lower courts of the
Country, the judgment of the Supreme Court is final and binding, and therefore there cannot
be any prosecution of a Member of Parliament on grounds of corruption for an act
committed in the House. Our view is that these two things must be delinked–the act
committed in the House and the corruption, i.e., receiving illegal gratification in order to
do a certain thing or not to do in Parliament, in the interest of the Parliament and its
dignity. That has to happen only through the Supreme Court pronouncement because
Supreme Court has already held; or, it can happen by a law.
Parliament and institutions of Constitution are increasingly under attack and now if the
Parliament takes this stand, it will actually undermine Parliamentary democracy and the
Constitution. Therefore, very humbly, we submit that this must be delinked and section 17
(2) must be deleted…”
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
6.14 From the constitutional perspective, it is quite clear that irrespective of demands, personal
preferences, opinions or public perception, it is not possible to prosecute MPs for
corruption related acts or omissions so long as such conduct is relatable either to their vote
in the House and/or to their speech in the House and/or to publication thereof. The bar of
Article 105 is complete and absolute and unless there is a constitutional amendment, the
issue cannot be considered further.
6.15 As regards conduct of MPs, both sitting and former, in respect of allegations of corruption
not related to their vote/speech/conduct in the House, the Lokpal Bill already mandates
coverage under section 17(1)(c).
6.16 There appears to be no consensus among the Committee Members or, indeed among
political parties to the effect that Article 105 be deleted or substantially or marginally
modified to erode or deprive MPs of this immunity. Such an enterprise would lead to
avoidable confusion and certain and inordinate delay involving a constitutional amendment
without even minimal consensus. Thus as far as Article 105 is concerned, there being united
opposition regarding protecting the privilege of MPs and preservation of the essence of

28
Article 105, it is recommended that the exception or clarification contained in section 17
(2) of the Lokpal Bill be retained.
6.17 There is a perception that conduct of MPs in the House is not subject to any monitoring
or sanction. In this context it is critical to underscore that Article 105 does not provide MPs
immunity or protection from disciplinary proceedings or sanctions initiated and conducted
by the Parliament itself. As an illustration the cash for questions scam in this year led to
the expulsion of 11 Members from different political parties. Their appeal to the Supreme
Court challenging their expulsion was also rejected by the Supreme Court
1. There is a
weighty body of opinion in our country which thinks that this is the way it should be and
that for vote, speech or action within Parliament, accountability must be demanded from
and owed to Parliament itself and not to external policing bodies like Lokpal.
6.18 Even the Jan Lokpal Bill as presented by the team headed by Shri Anna Hazare proposed
that investigations into affairs of the Members of Parliament should be permissible, subject
to Article 105 of the Constitution. They, however, contend that Article 105 of the Indian
Constitution does not seek to immunize corrupt vote, corrupt speech and corrupt action
within the House. Alternatively, they contend that if Article 105 is read to granting immunity
to vote, speech or conduct involving corruption, then Article 105 must necessarily be
amended.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
6.19 The Committee strongly feels that constitutional safeguards given to MPs under
Article 105 are sacrosanct and time-tested and in view of the near unanimity in the
Committee and among political parties on their retention, there is no scope for
interfering with these provisions of the Constitution. Vote, conduct or speech within
the House is intended to promote independent thought and action, without fetters,
within Parliament. Its origin, lineage and continuance is ancient and time-tested.
Even an investigation as to whether vote, speech or conduct in a particular case
involves or does not involve corrupt practices, would whittle such unfettered
autonomy and independence within the Houses of Parliament down to vanishing
point. Such immunity for vote, speech or conduct within the Houses of Parliament
does not in any manner leave culpable MPs blameless or free from sanction. They
are liable to and, have, in the recent past, suffered severe parliamentary punishment
including expulsion from the Houses of Parliament, for alleged taking of bribes
amounting to as little as Rs. 10,000/- for asking questions on the floor of the House.
It is only external policing of speech, vote or conduct within the House that Article
105 frowns upon. It leaves such speech, vote and conduct not only subject to severe
intra-parliamentary scrutiny and action, but also does not seek to affect corrupt
practices or any other vote, speech  or conduct outside Parliament. There is absolute
clarity and continued unanimity on the necessity for this limited immunity to be
retained. Hence, speculation on constitutional amendment in this regard is futile and
engenders interminable delay.
6.20 Consequently, the existing structure, mechanism, text and context of clauses 17 (1) (c)
and 17 (2) in the Lokpal Bill 2011 should be retained.
1See the judgement of five judges Constitutional bench headed by Chief Justice Y .K. Sabharwal in Raja Rampal Vs. The
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sahha and Ors. dated l0th January, 2007.

29
CHAPTER-7
LOKPAL AND STATE LOKAYUKTAS :
SINGLE ENACTMENT AND UNFORM STANDARDS
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
7.1 Keeping in mind the federal structure of our country and the need to cover all public
functionaries, either at the Centre or at the States under a corruption watchdog, it has long
been proposed that while there would be a Lokpal for the Centre, there must be Lokayuktas
for each State. The difference in terminology is merely to demarcate the Centre – State
distinction, albeit the roles perfonned by the Lokpal and Lokayukta in their respective
jurisdictions would be similar. Over a period of time some States have enacted legislations
creating the office of the Lokayukta. Their evolution at the State level has been briefly
adverted to in para 3.8 above. While some of these States have institutions which developed
roots in that State, other States have not succeeded in realizing their own legislative
mandate. Still others do not still have Lokayuktas, either on account of absence of
legislation
2 or due to unfulfilled vacancy 3. Currently about 17 States and one Union Territory
have Lokayukta enactments with huge variance in their jurisdiction, powers, scope, function
and mandate. The standards applied to identifying offences, investigations, prosecution and
penalties differ from State to State. Therefore there has been a huge clamor for universal
standards and an omnibus umbrella enactment to cover all States as also the Union.
However, considering the federal structure of the Constitution and the split of powers
between Centre and State, there has been a debate about the constitutional feasibility of
such an omnibus enactment.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
7.2 Lokayuktas needed in States.
7.3 This Bill should also incorporate a separate chapter on Lokayukta in each State and local
ombudsman in each city/district under the Lokayuktas. Lokayuktas may be empowered on
the lines of Lokpal and CVC as in the case of Central Government.
7.4 Set up strong Lokayuktas in the States within the frame work of the Constitution.
7.5 Lokpal needs to be a Constitutional authority, like the ECI or CAG rather than a statutory
body, so that it has higher levels of legitimacy.
7.6 The DoPT, in its written comments on the issue, has stated:–
“...The Bill seeks to provide Lokpal at the Centre and it may constitute Benches which shall
ordinarily sit at New Delhi [Clause 19].  At State level, the concerned State Government has
to consider setting of Lokayuktas.”
29
2Nine States and six UTs do not have institution of Lokayukta
3Presently, post of Lokayukta is vacant in four States which have Lokayukta enactment.

30
7.7 The proponents of the Jan Lokpal Bill, in their written submission, have opined thus:–
“...Similar provisions for Lokayuktas in the States to deal with public servants of respective
State will have to be incorporated in this Bill.
18 States already have Lokayuktas. However, they are all very different from each other in
terms of powers, jurisdictions etc. They have proved ineffective in checking corruption due
to critical deficiencies in most of these legislations. Other States do not have any
Lokayuktas. Therefore, it is urged that through the same Act, a uniform institution of
Lokayukta should be set up in each State on the same lines as Lokpal at the Centre…”
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY WITNESSES
7.8 The representatives of NCPRI placed their views before the Committee as under:–
“...The first comment is that we were disappointed that in the Government Lokpal Bill there
was no mention that there will be a corresponding Lokayuktas at the State level. It is our
belief that the Parliament is competent to legislate despite the fact that there have been
debates to the contrary on a Bill which includes both the Lokpal at the Centre and the
Lokayukta at the State level. We have given our reasoning…”
7.9 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while voicing his opinion on this issue, stated:–
“...I am going to argue that the Lokayukta must be mandatorily created and the law must
be under article 253.”
7.10 The CVC, in its written submission to the Committee, observed that:–
“At present, there are multiple agencies and bureaus in the States and the focus in
addressing anticorruption matter in the States needs to be more organized. The Commission
receives a large number of complaints relating to matters of State Governments and the
Commission has no jurisdiction over the State mechanisms of Lokayuktas in the States on
the lines of Lok Pal should be established within the frame work of our Constitution.”
7.11 Justice J.S. Verma came forward with the following opinion on the issue of going in for
an onmibus federal legislation to set up Lokayuktas in the States. The opinion of Justice
Verma which covers the aspect of the constitutionality of the proposed move also, reads
as follows:–
“…Article 253  of the Constitution confers the legislative competence needed to implement
the UN Convention, which has been signed and ratified by India. It is relevant to highlight
that Article 6  of the convention enshrines a specific obligation for member states to
establish bodies that present corruption…The directive principle of State policy in Article 51
(c), as a principle fundamental in governance is available as an aid. There is, therefore,
no need to look for any additional support for the legislative competence of the Parliament
to legislate on the subject for the whole territory of India. In addition, it would not be out
of place to mention that the failure to take effective steps with respect to the establishment
of such institutions could lead to India being considered to be in breach of its obligations
under international law, which must obviously be avoided at all costs....
...Similarly, for ‘combating corruption’ in a more effective manner a uniform legislation
enacted by the Union Parliament by invoking Article 253  can provide for the Lokpal and
the Lokayuktas.....
... The Parliamentary central enactment made by invoking Article 253 would be
constitutionally valid, such legislative competence in the Union Parliament being expressly

31
provided as a part of the constitutional scheme, consistent with the nature of federalism
created by the Constitution…”
7.12 Justice J.S. Verma, while placing his considered views before the Committee, stated:–
“…But we are trying to say not a single word except to provide a declaration that there
could be a Constitutional body and once this Constitution Amendment Bill is passed so that
it becomes a part of the Constitution. Then, there are several other implications which have
got to be taken note of. This is something which cannot be ordinarily amended like an
ordinary statute by some simple majority. It would be difficult. Secondly, if it becomes a
basic feature and, therefore, a part of the basic structure which personally, I think, my
friend agrees, ultimately it will become a part of the indestructible basic structure of the
Constitution which any kind of change in the political equations or formulations, it would
be beyond amending power even of Parliament.
Article 253  of the Constitution clearly provides that for the purpose of implementing an
international treaty convention, etc., the Parliament is entitled to enact for the whole or any
part of the territory. We have already a precedent. The Protection of Human Rights
Act,1993 was enacted by the Parliament. We deal with not only the Constitution and the
National Human Rights Commission but also the State Human Rights Commission: It is  for
the whole.
My preference would be for a federal legislation because that is something which will
ensure uniformity. The State would be involved only in making the appointment…”
7.13 The deposition of Dr. Jayaparakash Narayan on this issue was as under:–
“…That is the reason why we believe that a Lokayukta institution is absolutely necessary
under Article 253,  not under Article 252 with due respect. And, the Chief Minister must be
brought under the purview of Lokpal, but not under Lokayukta ideally…”
7.14 The Committee takes note of the opinion of Shri Harish Salve in this regard:–
“…We cannot sacrifice federalism because a group of people do not have faith in the State
Governments. If the law is to come in that form, then it cannot, in my respectful opinion,
apply to the States. The States in Entry 41  List-II of the Constitution have the right to
regulate their own services as any employer should. If the States have to govern themselves,
it must be under their own law…”
7.15 In its written memorandum submitted to the Committee, CHRI has opined:
“…So a single law providing for both Lokpal and Lokavuktas can be enacted by
Parliament under multiple fields mentioned in List Ill. As the scheme of division of powers
mentioned in Articles 246  and 254  of the Constitution gives preeminence to laws made by
Parliament [except under certain circumstances spelt out in Article 254(2)] this law will
prevail over all other existing laws relating to the working of Lokayuktas. A law made by
Parliament will ensure uniformity in the systems established for combating corruption
throughout the country…The proposed Lokayukta will have the power to recommend
dismissal or other penalties against corrupt officers of the State Public services only in the
context of a corruption-related matter brought before it. The proposed law does not seek to
empower the Lokayukta to exercise such powers routinely in the manner of State
Governments. Such incidental encroachment on any field contained in list II is permissible
under this rule of interpretation. As the central purpose of the proposed Lokpal/Lokayukta
legislation is not the regulation of the State Public Services but combating corruption, the
courts are no likely to strike it down on the ground of lack of legislative competence.”

32
7.16 On the issue whether the Bill would also be entitled to repeal the existing Lokayukta
enactments, the considered view of Justice J.S. Verma was:–
“...Once the Union Parliament enacts the Central legislation by invoking Article 253  for
the whole territory of India, the existing State legislations relating to the  Lokayuktas being
repugnant to it shall be void, by virtue of Article 254(1) …”
7.17 The Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs) expressed their views in the following
terms, on the issue under examination:–
“It may be stated in this regard that while examining the draft note for the Cabinet
regarding Lokpal Bill, 2011, this Department has already opined that the subject matter of
the Draft Bill is relatable to Entry 1  and 2  of List III i e. Concurrent List of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution, As such the Parliament as well as Legislative Assemblies have
legislative competence over the subject. Further, as the proposed Bill would extend to the
whole of India, the constitution of Investigation wing having powers of Police for the
purpose of investigation of offences punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 (Clauses 12  & 13 of the Draft Bill) and the establishment of Prosecution Wing
(Clause 15  of the Draft Bill) may likely to affect the powers of the States, as “Police”
and “Public Order” are the subjects which find place as Entry 1  and 2  respectively in the
List II i.e. State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. Therefore, an enactment
by the Parliament on the subject to provide for State Lokayuktas in Lok Pal Bill, 2011,
may not only amount to encroachment upon the jurisdiction of the States but would also
affect the federal structure of the Constitution.
Besides the aforesaid, under the proposed Bill, no sanction or approval would be
required under Section 197  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  or Section 19  of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  where prosecution is proposed by Lokpal (Clause 26  of
the Draft Bill). This may also be against the concept of the protection presently available
to the public servants. Under Article 253  of the Constitution the Parliament can enact with
respect to any subject (including State subjects) for the purpose of implementing any treaty
or agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any decision made at
any international conference or body. But the enactment by Parliament, if any, under Article
253 would also be within the ambit of the constitution.
Regarding the Constitutionality of including State Lokayuktas in the Lokpal Bill, 2011, the
Parliament may consider to enact a model law for the States.”
7.18 Shri Rajeev Dhawan, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court  of India while placing his views before
the Committee, stated thus:–
“…Bringing Lokayuktas under the Bill may be unconstitutional. It is certainly anti-federal.
Let the states decide what they want and how their chief Ministers should be toppled …”
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
7.19 There are many advantages to having the Lokayukta provisions in the same federal
enactment. Uniformity is the most important, since there is no reason why a public servant
in one State should be prosecutable on different standards than a public servant in an
adjoining State with the federal Lokpal Act enunciating a possible third standard, all in the
same country.
7.20 However, the main issue which arises is ensuring constitutional validity of such an onmibus
federal enactment. This can be approached from two routes, both cumulative, and not in
the alternative.

33
7.21 Firstly, Article 253 of the Constitution provides a strong constitutional basis for such an
enactment, since the Lokpal Act is admittedly being included pursuant to the UN Convention
on Corruption, now ratified by India. This view has been endorsed by some noted jurists
and witnesses, whose opinion is with the Committee
4 ( Annexure E ). There is also a
precedent in an earlier parliamentary enactment viz. the Protection of Human Rights Act,
1986 which was enacted under Article 253 power to implement the UN Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights. This Act provided for setting up of both the National Human
Rights Commission and for establishment of State Human Rights Commissions.
7.22 Secondly, the Lokpal Act deals with criminal/penal action against public servants including
application of the IPC and the CrPC, both of which are covered under List III, entries 1
& 2. The Lokpal Bill also touches upon the issue of administration of justice specifically
covered under Entry 11 A of List III.
7.23 In view of the above, the Committee is of the view that Parliament is fully empowered
under either Article 253 and/or Entries 1, 2 and 11A of List III to enact an all India
legislation providing for both Lokpal at the Centre and Lokayukta in each State.
7.24 As regards the status of existing State Lokayuktas Acts, Article 254 of the Constitution
provides that State laws shall be void to the extent of repugnancy with Parliamentary law.
States do have the option of over-riding Parliamentary supremacy in List-III by making
State amendments with Presidential assent. The Committee therefore feels that there would
be no constitutional hurdle in providing a comprehensive and single legislation for both the
Lokpal and the Lokayuktas..
7.25 The Lokpal Bill will have to include additional chapters in order to prescribe provisions
applicable for Lokayuctas in the States which will adopt the Lokpal provisions, mutatis
mutandis, for the States.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
7.26 The Committee finds merit in the suggestion for a single comprehensive federal
enactment dealing with Lokpal and State Lokayuktas. The availability of uniform
standards across the country is desirable; the prosecution of public servants based
upon widely divergent standards in neighboring states is an obvious anomaly. The
Committee has given its earnest attention to the constitutional validity of a single
enactment subsuming both the Lokpal and Lokayukta and concludes that such an
enactment would be not only desirable but constitutionally valid, inter alia  because,
(a) The legislation seeks to implement the UN Convention on Corruption ratified by
India.
(b) Such implementing legislation is recognized by Article 253 and is treated as one
in List III of the 7th Schedule.
(c) It gets additional legislative competence, inter-alia, individually or jointly under
Entries 1, 2 and 11A of List-III.
(d) A direct example of provision for National Human Rights Commission and also
for State Human Rights Commissions in the same Act is provided in the
Protection of the Human Rights Act, 1986 seeking to implement the UN
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights.
4See, inter alia , opinion of former Chief Justice of India/Hon’ble Mr. Justice J.S. Verma dated 4th November, 2011.

34
(e) Such Parliamentary legislation under Article 253, if enacted, can provide for
repealing of State Lokayukta Acts; subject, however, to the power of any State
to make State specific amendments to the federal enactments after securing
Presidential assent for such State specific amendments.
7.27 Additionally, it is recommended that the content of the provisions dealing with
State Lokayuktas in the proposed Central/federal enactment must be covered
under a separate chapter in the Lokpal Bill. That may be included in one or more
chapters possibly after Chapter II and before Chapter III as found in the Lokpal
Bill 2011. The entire Lokpal Bill 2011 would have to incorporate necessary
changes and additions, mutatis mutandis , in respect of the State Lokayukta
institutions. To give one out of many examples, the Selection Committee would
be comprised of the State Chief Minister, the Speaker of the Lower House of the
State, the Leader of Opposition in the Lower House, the Chief Justice of the High
Court and a joint nominee of the State Election Commissioner, the State Auditor
General and State PSC Chairman or, where one or more of such institutions is
absent in the State, a joint nominee of comparable institutions having statutory
status within the State.
7.28 All these State enactments shall include the Chief Minister within their purview. The
Committee believes that the position of the State Chief Minister is not identical to
that of the Prime Minister. The arguments for preventing instability and those
relating to national security or the image of the country do not apply in case of a
Chief Minister. Finally, while Article 356 is available to prevent a vacuum for the
post of Chief Minister, there is no counterpart constitutional provision in respect of
the federal Government.
7.29 Article 51 (c) of the Directive Principles of State Policy enjoining the federation to
“foster respect for international law and treaty obligations...” must also be kept in mind
while dealing with implementing legislations pursuant to international treaties, thus
providing an additional validating basis for a single enactment.
7.30 The Committee recommends that the Lokpal Bill, 2011 may be expanded to include
several substantive provisions which would be applicable for Lokayuktas in each
State to deal with issues of corruption of functionaries under the State Government
and employees of those organizations controlled by the State Government, but that,
unlike the Lokpal, the state Lokayuktas would cover all classes of employees.
7.31 The Committee recommends that if the above recommendation is implemented the
Lokpal Bill 2011 may be renamed as “Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill 2011”
7.32 The Committee believes that the recommendations, made herein, are fully consistent
with and implement, in letter and spirit, the conclusions of the Minister of Finance
on the floor of the Houses in respect of establishment of Lokayuktas in the States,
as quoted in para 1.8 above. The Committee is conscious of the fact that the few
States which have responded to the Secretariat’s letter sent to each and every State
seeking to elicit their views, have opposed a uniform Central federal Lokpal and
Lokayukta Bill and, understandably and expectedly, have sought to retain their
powers to enact State level Lokayukta Acts. The Committee repeats and reiterates
the reasons given hereinabove, in support of the desirability of one uniform
enactment for both Lokpal and Lokayuktas. The Committee also reminds itself that
if such a uniform Central enactment is passed, it would not preclude States from
making any number of State specific amendments, subject to prior Presidential

35
assent, as provided in the Indian Constitution. The Committee, therefore, believes
that it has rightly addressed the two issues which arise in this respect viz. the need
and desirability for a uniform single enactment and, secondly, if the latter is
answered in the affirmative, that such a uniform enactment is Constitutionally valid
and permissible.
7.33 Since this report, and especially this chapter, recommends the creation of a uniform
enactment for both Central and State Lokayuktas, it is reiterated that a whole
separate chapter (or, indeed, more than one chapter) would have to be inserted in
the Lokpal Bill of 2011 providing for State specific issues. Secondly, this would have
to be coupled with mutatis mutandis  changes in other parts of the Act to
accommodate the fact that the same Act is addressing the requirement of both the
federal institution and also the State level institution.
7.34 Furthermore, each and every chapter and set of recommendations in this report
should also be made applicable, mutatis mutandis , by appropriate provisions in the
Chapter dealing with State Lokayuktas.
7.35 Although it is not possible for this Committee to specifically list the particularised
version of each and every amendment or adaptation required to the Lokpal Bill, 2011
to subsume State Lokayuktas within the same enactment, it gives below a
representative non-exhaustive list of such amendments/adaptations, which the
Government should suitably implement in the context of one uniform enactment for
both Lokpal and Lokayuktas. These include:
(a) Clause 1 (2) should be retained even for the State Lokayukta provisions since
State level officers could well be serving in parts of India other than the State
concerned as also beyond the shores of India.
(b) The Chief Minister must be included within the State Lokayukta on the same
basis as any other Minister of the Council of Ministers at the State level. Clause
2 of the 2011 Bill must be amended to include Government servants at the State
level. The competent authority in each case would also accordingly change e.g.
for a Minister of the Council of Minister, it would be the Chief Minister; for
MLAs, it would be the presiding officer of the respective House and so on and
so forth. The competent authority for the Chief Minister would be the Governor.
(c) As regards Clause 3, the only change would be in respect of the Chairperson,
which should be as per the recommendation made for the Lokpal.
(d) As regards the Selection Committee, the issue at the Lokayukta level has
already been addressed above.
(e) References in the Lokpal context to the President of India shall naturally have
to be substituted at the Lokayukta level by references to the Governor of the
State.
(f) The demarcation of the criminal justice process into five broad areas from the
initiation of complaint till its adjudication, as provided in Chapter 12, should also
apply at the State Lokayukta level. The investigative agency, like the CEI, shall
be the anti-corruption unit of the State but crucially, it shall be statutorily made
independent by similar declarations of independence as already elaborated in the
discussion in Chapter 12. All other recommendations in Chapter 12 can and
should be applied mutatis mutandis  for the Lokayukta.

36
(g) Similarly, all the recommendations in Chapter 12 in respect of departmental
inquiry shall apply to the Lokayukta with changes made, mutatis mutandis , in
respect of State bodies. The State Vigilance Commission/machinery would, in
such cases, discharge the functions of the CVC. However, wherever wanting,
similar provisions as found in the CVC Act buttressing the independence of the
CVC shall be provided.
(h) The recommendations made in respect of elimination of sanction as also the
other recommendations, especially in Chapter 12, relating to Lokpal, can and
should be applied mutatis mutandis  in respect of Lokayukta.
(i) Although no concrete fact situation exists in respect of a genuine multi- State
or inter-State corruption issue, the Committee opines that in the rare and
unusual case where the same person is sought to be prosecuted by two or more
State machineries of two or more Lokayuktas, there should be a provision
entitling the matter to be referred by either of the States or by the accused to
the Lokpal at the federal level, to ensure uniformity and to eliminate turf wars
between States or jurisdictional skirmishes by the accused.
(j) As already stated above, the coverage of the State Lokayukta, unlike the
Lokpal, would extend to all classes of employees, including employees of state
owned or controlled entities.

37
CHAPTER-8
LOWER BUREAUCRACY : DEGREES OF INCLUSION
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
8.1 The current provisions of the Lokpal Bill 2011 [section 17 (1) (d)] include, inter alia , only
Group A officers or equivalent, (serving or has served) from amongst the Public Servants
defined in section 2 (c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988. The central bureaucracy
is broadly classified into Groups A, B, C and D – such categories being drawn on the lines
of decision making power and remuneration. While Group A includes almost all officers from
the rank of Section Officer and above, Group C and D form the very lower rungs of the
bureaucracy including posts of attendants, clerks, senior clerks, stenos, peons, drivers et al.
On a broad estimate, as of 2010, Group A officers comprise about 80,000 in number and
Group B officers comprise about 1.75 Lakhs. Group C and D on the other hand are about
28 Lakhs in number. This classification and categorization may be different from State to
State and will therefore have to be addressed separately in respect of the State bureaucracy.
The debate revolved around the extent of inclusion of the bureaucracy within the ambit of
the Lokpal particularly in the context of the humongous numbers which the Lokpal may have
to handle as well as the speed, efficiency and workability of the Lokpal institution. It is
important to emphasize at this stage that the aforesaid Group A and B numbers of
approximately 2.56 1akhs excludes the substantial numbers of Group A and B or equivalent
officers in all public sectors or all entities owned or controlled by the Central Government
and, more significantly, the entire Railways and P&T departments, for which the figures are
not readily available. However, all such categories are subsumed under the Lokpal.
SUMMARY OF SUGGESTION/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
8.2 The major points raised in the memoranda received by the Committee, on this topic are:
• Include lower level of public and private functionaries in the Bill.
• The word Group “A” service and equivalent needs wider definition.
(i) CVC to be strengthened
(ii) CVC to cover Public Servants other than Group “A” Officers; and
(iii) S tate Vigilance Commissions to be created in each State.
• All the big cases of corruption involve various ranks simultaneously. So, dividing public
servants into two categories will frustrate the investigations and help the corrupt.
• Single directive that protected JS and seniors have scuttled investigations.
• Lokpal’s direct jurisdiction be limited to those as provided in the present Bill.
• Strengthen CVC making it part of Lokpal with specific jurisdiction to deal with
officials below Joint Secretary rank but above a certain rank.
• Vigilance Organisations in each agencies will deal with all the Ministerial staff.
37

38
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY THE WITNESSES
8.3 The Chairman, Bar Council of India opined thus:–
“...One, confine the Lokpal to investigate into allegations of corruption against Central
Ministers and higher officers in the Government, not below the rank of Joint Secretaries.
Limit it at that so far as the Lokpal is concerned. In the alternative, have different benches
to hear different kinds of cases …”
8.4 One of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee, stated as under:–
“...My view is that the lower bureaucracy should not come under the ambit of the Lokpal,
one for very practical reason which is that then the Lokpal itself will become a gigantic
bureaucracy and a gigantic bureaucracy superintending another gigantic bureaucracy is not
a recipe for efficiency You need a separate mechanism for local bureaucracy....”
8.5 Shri B. Muthuraman, while placing the views of CII before the Committee, stated:–
“...We believe that all bureaucracy should be included under the Lokpal, but we also think
it may become an unworkable proposition from the point of view of numbers. So, if for
the first few years, let us say 3  to 5  years, Lokpal should restrict itself only to higher
bureaucracy and after it settles down and starts functioning well, then you can add lower
level bureaucracy ....”
8.6 The DoPT, in its written comments, has stated :–
“...The provisions made in clause 17  of the Bill appear to be adequate. If lower
bureaucracy and other institutions suggested by the author are also brought within the
purview of the Lokpal, it will over burden the Lokpal …”
8.7 Shri Shekhar Singh (NCPRl) stated as follows :–
“…Therefore, we have argued that for ‘B’ and ‘C’ and ‘D’ officers complaints under the
Prevention of Corruption Act must first be to the police or Anti-Corruption Bureaus which
are under the elected Governments…So, it is a system similar to the High Court system
where there is going to be territorial jurisdiction and any Central Government officer
wherever he or she is posted a complaint will rest with the local police there. They would
be prepared in keeping with, for example, the CBI manual, a protocol of investigation and
if that protocol is violated, then, a complainant or anybody can move the Up- Lokayukta
or the Up-Lokpal where the complainant is located and then they can examine it and take
over the investigation. After they have accepted and taken over the investigation they are
not only obliged to complete that investigation but they are also obliged to fix the
responsibility and if need be take action against that Investigating Officer who did not
perform his or her job and, therefore, the matter had to be taken over. So what we are
thinking of is an interlocking responsibility so that pressure builds up on the State
Governments to make sure that they do their job and everything does not come to this
independent body.
…we were also disappointed that there were many categories of public servants who were
left out from the Government Lokpal Bill. First of all, the Judges or higher judiciary was
left out and we are of the view that whereas the higher judiciary should not be part of the
Lokpal, but simultaneously there should be a strengthened Judicial Accountability Bill which
covers this…”
8.8 Shri P.S. Bawa, Transparency International India placed before the Committee, their views
as:–

39
“…Our contention is that Grade ‘A’ is not defined in any law. It is a sort of a financial
categorization of Grade ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ officers. This criterion, based on the salary, is not
a correct criterion. Therefore, this defies the equality clause in the Constitution where justice
is to be delivered to everybody and everybody is equal before law. We feel that the Bill
should cover all public servants irrespective of their being category a, b, c, or whatever
it is…”
8.9 One of the Members of the Committee, opined in this regard as:–
“…
,d QksFkZDykl dk deZpkjh gS] QksFkZ Dykl dk rks djI”ku ls dksbZ ysuk -nsuk gh ugha
gSA Who are the people covered under fourth class? It includes the Peon and the lady tks
ikuh fiykus okyh ckbZ gS ;k fQj lQkbZ deZpkjh gSa] ,sls yksx QksFkZ Dykl esa vkrs gSaA
What kind of scope he is getting in his life to get involved in corruption?  ysfdu mls Hkh
yksdk;qDr esa j[kus ds fy, dgk tk jgk gSA eku yhft, esjh dkyksuh esa lQkbZ deZpkjh
lQkbZ djus ugha vk;k] pwafd eSa vij Dykl dk gwa] blfy, eSaus ,Iyhds”ku dj nh fd
;g vkneh dke djus ds fy, ugha vk;k] blfy, bls fudkyk tk,A blesa nks&rhu ckrsa
gSa] viuh bTtr cukus esa vkSj bZekunkjh ls dke djus esa ljdkjh deZpkfj;ksa dks lkyksa
yx tkrs gSaA
…”
8.10 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while speaking on this issue, stated thus:–
“We believe the LokPal should not cover everybody; it must cover only the high
functionaries, both political and bureaucratic. The CVC, directly or indirectly, takes charge
of others. In fact, that addresses the problem of lower bureaucracy. There is no single body
that can deal with 20 million employees in this country at the State and national levels.
Even at the national level alone, there are about 6 million plus employees. If you include
the public sector undertakings, maybe it is actually a million more or so. You will have tens
of thousands of petitions everyday...”
8.11 The Central Vigilance Commissioner, while deposing before the Committee, stated thus:–
“…There is a basic difference. This is a question why disciplinary action has been taken
against Government servants. In my presentation, 1 tried to explain why all other people are
covered only under the Prevention of Corruption Act whereas only Government servants they
are there. They are covered under the departmental disciplinary rules. Under the departmental
disciplinary rules, under lower standards of proof also they get dismissed. So, basically the
entire bureaucracy is handled under the departmental rules. It is only in selected cases that
Prevention of Corruption Act is done. If you bring the entire people under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, firstly, the courts will get clogged. There will be no action taken; and the
standards of proof that would be required would be much higher…if you follow an
investigation which is there in the courts is not a desirable mechanism for this thing, because
what is important for civil servants is if there is a corruption, action should be swift and fast
and the outcome should be certain. That is only possible in disciplinary inquiries which finish
between one or two years whereas if you put them under the PC Act, this will go on and
on for years and the senior officers will escape the net…”
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
8.12 Any Lokpal would be approximately a 7 or 9 or 11 member body and it would be 
virtually
impossible for any such body to cover all the 30 lakh employees of Central Government
spread over categories ‘A’ to ‘D’. (excluding Railways, PSUs, P&T etc., also covered under
Classes A and B.)

40
8.13 The object is to create a new body i.e. the Lokpal, which, unlike the pre-existing bodies,
is far more efficacious and swift. That objective would obviously be defeated if humungous
numbers are added to this coverage.
8.14 The impression that inclusion of Group ‘A’ plus ‘B’ involves exclusion of large sections of
the bureaucracy must be dispelled. Though in terms of number, the aggregation of Groups
‘C’ and ‘D’ is an overwhelming percentage of total Central Government employees, 
Group
‘A’ and Group ‘B’  include the entire class above the supervisory level. Effectively this
means that virtually all Central Government employees at the Section Officer level and above
would be included. It is vital to emphasize that this demarcation has to be viewed in
functional terms and status, since it gives such categories significant decision making power
in contra-distinction to mere numbers and necessarily subsumes a major chunk of medium
and big ticket corruption.
8.15 The current, contemporary context has been one of 
anger and dissatisfaction mainly with
corruption in the higher echelons, whether of the bureaucracy or of the political class. A
majority of Committee Members expressed the opinion that while inclusion of Class C and
D would unnecessarily overburden the Lokpal as also create a mechanism and avenue for
exploitation of economically weaker sections, inclusion of Group B would not do much
damage or obstruction to the speed, efficiency and functioning of the Lokpal.
8.16 The Committee has therefore considered including Group B officers as well within the ambit
of the Lokpal.
8.17 The Committee would like to clarify that Group C and D officers or government employees
are already within the purview of the Prevention of Corruption Act and therefore not outside
the ambit of investigation and prosecution. In the proposed recommended regime (as is
being suggested by this Committee) the existing fetters of section 19 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act (prior sanction) would be removed for all classes. If this be so, there would
be an equally robust mechanism for addressing complaints against Group C and D officers
as well.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
8.18 The Committee, therefore, recommends:
(a) That for the Lokpal at the federal level, the coverage should be expanded to
include Group A and Group B officers but not to include Group C and Group D.
(b) The provisions for the State Lokayuktas should contain similar counterpart
reference, for purposes of coverage, of all similar categories at the State level
which are the same or equivalent to Group A and Group B for the federal
Lokpal. Though the Committee was tempted to provide only for enabling power
for the States to include the State Lokayuktas to include the lower levels of
bureaucracy like groups ‘C’  and ‘D’ at the State level, the Committee, on
careful consideration, recommends that all the groups, including the lower
bureaucracy at the State level and the groups equivalent with ‘C’ and ‘D’ at the
State level should also be included within the jurisdiction of State Lokayuktas
with no exclusion. Employees of state owned or controlled entities should also be
covered.
(c) The Committee is informed by the DoPT that after the Sixth Pay Commission
Report, Group-D has been/will be transposed and sub-merged fully in Group-C.
In other words, after the implementation of the Sixth Pay Commission Report,

41
which is already under implementation, Group-D will disappear and there will be
only Group-C as far as the Central Government employees are concerned.
(i) Consequently, Group-C, which will shortly include the whole of Group-D will
comprise a total number of approximately 30 lakhs (3 million) employees.
Though the figures are not fully updated, A+B classes recommended for
inclusion by this Committee would comprise just under 3 lakhs employees.
With some degree of approximation, the number of Railway employees from
group A to D inclusive can be pegged at about 13½ lakhs (as on March,
2010).  If Central Government PSUs are added, personnel across all
categories (Group A, B, C and D as existing) would be approximately an
additional 15 lakhs employees. Post and Telegraph across all categories
would further number approximately 4½  lakhs employees. Hence the total,
on the aforesaid basis (which is undoubtedly an approximation and a 2010
figure) for Group A to D (soon, as explained above, to be only Group-C)
+ Railways + Central PSUs + Post and Telegraph would be approximately
63 lakhs, or at 2011 estimates, let us assume 65 lakhs i.e. 6.5 million.
(ii) On a conservative estimate of one policing officer per 200 employees (a
ratio propounded by several witnesses including team Anna), approximately
35000 employees would be required in the Lokpal to police the aforesaid
group of Central Government employees (including, as explained above,
Railways, Central PSUs, P&T etc.). This policing is certainly not possible
by the proposed nine member Lokpal. The Lokpal would have to spawn a
bureaucracy of at least 35000  personnel who would, in turn, be recruited
for a parallel Lokpal bureaucracy. Such a mammoth bureaucracy, till it is
created, would render the Lokpal unworkable. Even after it is created, it
may lead to a huge parallel bureaucracy which would set in train its own
set of consequences, including arbitrariness, harassment and unfair and
illegal action by the same bureaucracy which, in the ultimate analysis
would be nothing but a set of similar employees cutting across the same
A, B and C categories. As some of the Members of the Committee, in a
lighter vein put it, one would then have to initiate a debate on creating a
super Lokpal or a Dharampal for the policing of the new bureaucracy of
the Lokpal institution itself.
(ii-a) The Committee also notes that as far as the Lokpal institution is
concerned; it is proposed as a new body and there is no such preexisting
Lokpal bureaucracy available. In this respect, there is a fundamental
difference between the Lokpal and Lokayuktas, the latter having
functioned, in one form or the other in India for the last several decades,
with a readily available structure and manpower in most parts of India.
(iii) If, from the above approximate figure of 65 lakhs, we exclude C and D
categories (as explained earlier, D will soon become part of C) from
Central Government, Railways, PSUs, Post and Telegraph etc., the number
of A and B categories employees in these departments would aggregate
approximately 7.75 lakhs. In other words, the aggregate of C and D
employees in these classes aggregate approximately 57 or 58 lakhs. The
Committee believes that this figure of 7.75 or 8 lakhs would be a more
manageable, workable and desirable figure for the Lokpal institution, at
least to start with.

42
(iv) The impression that inclusion of Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ alone involves
exclusion of large sections of the bureaucracy, must be dispelled. Though
in terms of number, the aggregation of Groups ‘C’ and ‘D’ is an
overwhelming percentage of total Central Government employees, Groups
‘A’ and ‘B’ include the entire class above the supervisory level. Effectively,
this means that virtually all Central Government employees at the Section
Officer level and above would be included. It is vital to emphasize that this
demarcation has to be viewed in functional terms, since it gives such
categories significant decision making power in contra-distinction to mere
numbers and necessarily subsumes a major chunk of medium and big
ticket corruption.
(v) Another misconception needs to be clarified. There is understandable and
justifiable anger that inclusion of Group C and D would mean exclusion of
a particular class which has tormented the common man in different ways
over the years viz. Tehsildar, Patwari and similarly named or equivalent
officers. Upon checking, the Secretariat has clarified that these posts are
State Government posts under gazette notification notified by the State
Government and hence the earlier recommendation of this Committee will
enable their full inclusion.
(vi) We fur ther recommend that for the hybrid category of Union Territories,
the same power be given as is recommended above in respect of State
Lokayuktas. The Committee also believes that this is the appropriate
approach since a top heavy approach should be avoided and the
inclusionary ambit should be larger and higher at the state level rather
than burdening the Lokpal with all classes of employees.
(vii) As of now, prior to the coming into force of the Lokpal Act or any of the
recommendations of this report, Group C and D officers are not dealt with
by the CVC. Group C & D employees have to be proceeded against
departmentally by the appropriate Department Head, who may either
conduct a departmental enquiry or file a criminal corruption complain
against the relevant employee through the CBI and/or the normal Police
forces. The Committee now recommends that the entire Group C & D,
(later only Group C as explained above) shall be brought specifically under
the jurisdiction of the CVC. In other words, the CVC, which is a high
statutory body of repute and whose selection process includes the Leader
of the Opposition, should be made to exercise powers identical to or at
least largely analogous, in respect of these class C and class D employees
as the Lokpal does for Group A and B employees. The ultimate Lokpal
Bill/Act should thus become a model for the CVC, in so far as Group C
& D employees are concerned. If that requires large scale changes in the
CVC Act, the same should be carried out. This would considerably
strengthen the existing regime of policing, both departmentally and in
terms of anti-corruption criminal prosecutions, all Group C & D employees
and would not in any manner leave them either unpoliced or subject to a
lax or ineffective regime of policing.
(viii) Furthermore, this Committee recommends that there would be broad
supervisory fusion at the apex level by some appropriate changes in the
CVC Act. The CVC should be made to file periodical reports, say every
three months, to the Lokpal in respect of action taken for these class C

43
and D categories. On these reports, the Lokpal shall be entitled to make
comments and suggestions for improvement and strengthening the
functioning of CVC, which in turn, shall file, appropriate action taken
reports with the Lokpal.
(ix) Appropriate increase in the strength of the CVC manpower, in the light of
the foregoing recommendations, would also have to be considered by the
Government.
(x) The Committee also feels that this is the start of the Lokpal institution
and it should not be dogmatic and inflexible on any of the issues. For a
swift and efficient start, the Lokpal should be kept slim, trim, effective
and swift. However, after sometime, once the Lokpal institution has
stabilized and taken root, the issue of possible inclusion of Group C classes
also within the Lokpal may be considered. This phase-wise flexible and
calibrated approach would, in the opinion of this Committee, be more
desirable instead of any blanket inclusion of all classes at this stage.
(xi) Another consideration which the Committee has kept in mind is the fact
that if all the classes of higher, middle and lower bureaucracy are included
within the Lokpal at the first instance itself, in addition to all the
aforesaid reasons, the CVC’s role and functioning would virtually cease
altogether, since the CVC would have no role in respect of any class of
employee and would be reduced, at best, to a vigilance clearance authority.
This would be undesirable in the very first phase of reforms, especially
since the CVC is a high statutory authority in this country which has, over
the last half century, acquired a certain institutional identity and stability
along with conventions and practices which ought not to be uprooted in
this manner.
(d) All provisions for prior sanction/prior permission, whether under the CrPC or
Prevention of Corruption Act or DSPE Act or related legislation must be
repealed in respect of all categories of bureaucrats/government servants,
whether covered by the Lokpal or not, and there should consequently be no
requirement of sanction of any kind in respect of any class or category of
officers at any level in any Lokpal and Lokayukta or, indeed, CVC proceedings
(for non Lokpal covered categories). In other words, the requirement of sanction
must go not only for Lokpal covered personnel but also for non-Lokpal covered
personnel i.e. class ‘C’ and ‘D’ (Class D, as explained elsewhere, will eventually
be submerged into Class ‘C’) . The sanction requirement, originating as a
salutary safeguard against witch hunting has, over the years, as applied by the
bureaucracy itself, degenerated into a refuge for the guilty, engendering either
endless delay or obstructing all meaningful action. Moreover, the strong filtering
mechanism at the stage of preliminary inquiry proposed in respect of the
Lokpal, is a more than adequate safeguard, substituting effectively for the
sanction requirement.
(e) No doubt corruption at all levels is reprehensible and no doubt corruption at the
lowest levels does affect the common man and inflicts pain and injury upon him
but the Committee, on deep consideration and reconsideration of this issue,
concluded that this new initiative is intended to send a clear and unequivocal
message, first and foremost, in respect of medium and big ticket corruption.
Secondly, this Committee is not oblivious to the fact that jurisdiction to cover

44
the smallest Government functionary at the peon and driver level (class C
largely covers peons, assistants, drivers, and so on, though it  does also cover
some other more “powerful” posts) may well provide an excuse and a pretext to
divert the focus from combating medium and big ticket corruption to merely
catching the smaller fry and building up an impressive array of statistical
prosecutions and convictions without really being able to root out the true
malaise of medium and big ticket corruption which has largely escaped scrutiny
and punishment over the last 60 years.
(f) The Committee also believes that the recommendations in respect of scope of
coverage of the lower bureaucracy, made herein, are fully consistent with the
conclusions of the Minister of Finance on the floor of the Houses, as quoted in
para 1.8 above of this Report. Firstly, the lower bureaucracy has been, partly,
brought within the coverage as per the recommendations above and is, thus,
consistent with the essence of the conclusion contained in para 1.8 above.
Secondly, the Committee does not read para 1.8 above to meet an inevitable and
inexorable mandate to necessarily subsume each and every group of civil servant
(like Group ‘C’ or Group ‘D’, etc.). Thirdly, the in principle consensus reflected
in para 1.8 would be properly, and in  true letter and spirit, be implemented in
regard to the recommendations in the present Chapter for scope and coverage
of Lokpal presently. Lastly, it must be kept in mind that several other
recommendations in this Report have suggested substantial improvements and
strengthening of the provisions relating to policing of other categories of
personnel like C and D, inter alia , by the CVC and/or to the extent relevant,
to be dealt with as Citizens’ Charter and Grievance Redressal issues.

45
CHAPTER-9
FALSE COMPLAINTS AND COMPLAINANTS : PUNITIVE MEASURES
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
9.1 There is a genuine fear that the institution of the Lokpal, while empowering the common
citizen, would also create avenues for false and frivolous complaints by persons against
those officials whose decisions are either not palatable or generate cases where complaints
are actuated by animosity or external agenda and ulterior motives. It is for this reason that
provisions relating to false complaints were provided in the Lokpal Bill 2011 (sections 49
and 50). The provision stipulates punishment for not less than 2 years and upto 5 years
and a fine not less than Rs.25,000/- and upto Rs. 2 Lakhs for false, frivolous or vexatious
complainants. This was seen as overbearing and disproportionately high and it was felt that
it may act as a huge deterrent and possibly a virtual de facto  bar to people seeking to make
complaints to the Lokpal. The debate therefore revolved around both defining the scope of
the nature of complaints (false or frivolous or vexatious or malicious) which would be
penalized as also the amount of fine or punishment.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/ OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
9.2 The memoranda received by the Committee carried the following suggestions/observations:–
• Second Proviso to clause (g) of 17 (1) – that a free citizen of this nation would be
subjected to ‘responsibility’ without any power of a Public Servant – ‘liability, without
‘right’ – and to ‘culpability’ without an ‘overt’ act is simply preposterous.
• Punishment in case of “ mala-fide and false complaints with malicious intent” only.
• Fine not less than Rs.5000/-, but which may extend to Rs.1 lakh.
• In case of frivolous/vexations complaint against an SC/ST functionary, relevant clauses
under the SCs and STs (Prevention of Atrocities Act), 1989 also need to be invoked
and needs mention in the Lokpal Bill.
• Monetary penalties to those who make frivolous complaints and such penalties to be
deposited in the PM Relief Fund.
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY THE WITNESSES
9.3 Shri Shekhar Singh (NCPRI), while speaking on this issue, stated:–
“…we are very against, and this I think we have much debated, the penalties’ clause that
has been put into the Bill where somebody who files, what is called, a frivolous or a
vexatious complaint, gets a higher level of punishment than somebody who is judged as
being corrupt. Our problems are two. One is that it is very difficult to define what is
‘frivolous’ and ‘vexatious’ . And secondly, that this is sort of a punishment will deter even
genuine complaint makers. We have suggested, drop ‘frivolous’ and ‘vexatious’; say
‘malicious’ or where you have a malign intent and reduce the punishment to a fine…”
45

46
9.4 One of the Members of the Committee, observed as follows:–
“…When a complaint is made, it is a frivolous complaint or a false complaint, immediately
it will appear in the media. dksbZ xyr daIysaV djrk gS] tSls gh yksdk;qDr ds lkeus og
daIysaV tk,xh] pkgs os pqus gq, yksx gksa ;k ihNs cSBs gq, yksx gksa vFkok ;gka ds igys
iafDr okys yksx gksa] vki lc tkurs gSa fd gekjk lkoZtfud thou rhl&rhl
iSarhl&iSarhl lky dk gksrk gSA ;gka tks yksx cSBs gSa] os Hkh 40] 45 ;k 50 lky iqjkus
yksx gSaA eSa Lo; 36 lky ls yxkrkj pquko thrrk vk;k gwa] esjh ifCyd ykbQ dks Hkh
45 lky gks x,A eku yhft, geus fdlh dk;Z ds fy, ctV ugha fn;k] fdlh us ikuh
dh Vadh ds fy, ctV ekaxk] geus ugha fn;k] cl fQj D;k gS] ,d daIysaV dj nks] iwjs
ehfM;k esa ge Nk tk,axs] gekjh 40&45 lky dh esgur csdkj gks tk,xhA ysfdu vki
dgrs gSa fd ml vkneh dks dqN ltk ugha dh tk,] flQZ 5000 #i;s Qkbu djds NksM+
fn;k tk,] ;g dgka rd mfpr gksxk\
…”
9.5 PRS Legislative Research, in its written memorandum, has opined:–
False and Frivolous Complaint :–
“…Issue: Penalty may act as deterrent
[Clause 49(1)] Any person making false and frivolous or vexatious complaints shall be
penalized with two to five years of jail and fine of Rs.25,000 to Rs.2 lakh.
The penalty amount may act a deterrent for people to complain against a public official.
Other legislations have different penalties for similar offences. For example, in the Public
Interest Disclosure Bill, 2010 (now pending in Parliament), a false complaint carries a
penalty of imprisonment upto 2 years and fine of upto Rs.30,000.4 The Indian Penal Code
states that any person who gives false information shall be punishable with a prison term
of upto six months or a fine of upto Rs.1,000 or bath.5 The Judicial Standards and
Accountability Bill, 2010 (pending in Parliament), on the other hand, prescribes a higher
penalty for frivolous or vexatious complaints. A person making frivolous or vexatious
complaints can be penalized by rigorous imprisonment of up to five years and fine of up
to five lakh rupees.6 The Standing Committee, while examining that Bill, has recommended
that the quantum of punishment should be diluted and “in any case, it should not exceed
the punishment provided under the Contempt of Court Act” (which is six months
imprisonment and a fine of Rs.2,000).
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
9.5A There is no doubt that the penalty for false and frivolous complaints should not be such
a huge deterrent that it stops even genuine complainants from approaching the Lokpal.
There has to be a harmonious balance which needs to be drawn out between prevention
of false complaints and a consequent penalty and that of not prescribing a deterrent so great
that it renders the institution and function of the Lokpal nugatory.
9.5B This Committee discussed in detail similar provisions while dealing with the Judicial
Standards and Accountability Bill in its Report submitted on August 30, 2011. It
deliberated upon the issue as to now to strike this balance and concluded that the
punishment ought not to be more than what is prescribed in the Contempt of Courts Act.
This is an apposite benchmark considering that the Lokpal also effectively deals with
administration of justice.

47
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
9.6 It cannot be gain said that after the enormous productive effort put in by the entire
nation over the last few months for the creation of a new initiative like the Lokpal
Bill, it would not and cannot be assumed to be anyone’s intention to create a remedy
virtually impossible to activate, or worse in consequence than the disease. The
Committee, therefore, starts with the basic principle that it must harmoniously
balance the legitimate but competing demands of prevention of false, frivolous
complaints on the one hand as also the clear necessity of ensuring that no preclusive
bar arises which would act as a deterrent for genuine and bona fide complaints.
9.7 The Committee sees  the existing provisions in this regard as disproportionate, to the
point of being a deterrent.
9.8 The Committee finds a convenient analogous solution and therefore adopts the model
which the same Committee has adopted in its recently submitted report on  Judicial
Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 presented to the Rajya Sabha on August 30, 2011.
9.9 In para 18.8 of  the aforesaid Report, the Committee, in the context of  Judicial
Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 said: “The Committee endorses the rationale
of making a provision for punishment for making frivolous or vexatious complaints.
The Committee, however, expresses its reservation over the prescribed quantum of
punishment both in terms of  imprisonment which is up to 5 years and fine which is
up to 5 lakh rupees. The severe punishment prescribed in the Bill may deter the
prospective complainants from coming forward and defeat the very rationale of  the
Bill. In view of  this, the Committee recommends that Government should
substantially dilute the quantum of  the punishment so as not to discourage people
from taking initiatives against the misbehaviour of  a judge. In any case, it should
not exceed the punishment provided under the Contempt of  Court Act. The
Government may also consider specifically providing in the Bill a proviso to protect
those complainants from punishment/penalty who for some genuine reasons fail to
prove their complaints. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Bill should
specifically provide for protection in case of complaints made ‘in good faith’ in line
with the defence of  good faith available under the Indian Penal Code.”
9.10 Consequently, in respect of the Lokpal Bill, the Committee recommends that, in
respect of  false and frivolous complaints:–
(a) The punishment should include simple imprisonment not exceeding six months;
(b) The fine should not exceed Rs.25000; and
(c) The Bill should specifically provide for protection in case of  complaints made in
good faith in line with the defence of good faith available under the Indian Penal
Code under Section 52 IPC.

48
CHAPTER-10
THE JUDICIARY : TO INCLUDE OR EXCLUDE
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
10.1 There has been public clamor for laying down standards for the Judiciary and creating an
efficient, workable and effective mechanism for ensuring accountability of Judiciary
including, in particular, effective and efficient mechanisms for criminal prosecution for
corruption practiced by judicial officers and the higher judiciary. Currently the process of
removal of any Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court involves a tedious and
virtually unimplementable procedure of impeachment as per the Constitution. This has been
widely seen as being, by itself, an ineffective deterrent for capricious or corrupt conduct
by any member of the judiciary. The debate around this issue was centered on whether the
Judiciary should be made accountable to an institution like the Lokpal or whether it should,
as one of the three wings of the country enjoy virtual immunity in respect of criminal
prosecution for corrupt practices.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
10.2 Judges of higher judi ciary not to be under Lokpal jurisdiction.
10.3 The jurisdiction of Lokpal should be limited to cover only the following:-
(i) All MPs, including PM and Ministers;
(ii) All other Constitutional and top statutory office holders (excluding President, VP and
those of judiciary) under Gol; and
(iii) Officers of the rank of JS and above in the GoI and its PSUs and other organisations.
(iv) The existing institutions and laws should continue to deal with the corruption in GoI
at other levels.
10.4 A National Judicial Commission headed by the Vice President, and with Prime Minister,
Speaker, Law Minister, Leaders of Opposition in both Houses, and Chief Justice (Chief
Minister and Chief Justice of concerned High Court in case of High Court judges) should
be constituted for judicial appointments and oversight; and the Judicial Standards and
Accountability Bill should be enacted into law. Both together will address issues relating to
higher judiciary.
10.5 Subordinate Judiciary is under the control of the High Court under Article 235, and that
should remain so.
10.6 Functional independence of judiciary should be ensured; but criminal legislation, conflicts of
interest regulations, income and asset disclosure laws and ethical codes should apply to the
judiciary as well as other public officials.
10.7 Amending the Judicial Accountability and Standards Bill, that is currently before the
Parliament, to ensure that the judiciary is also made effectively and appropriately
48

49
accountable, without compromising its independence from the executive or the integrity of
its functions.
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY THE WITNESSES
10.8 Justice J.S. Verma, in his presentation before the Committee, very categorically expressed
his views over the issue in the following words:
“…That is my view for consideration. Now, so far as Judiciary is concerned, well, as I see
it, the Constitution itself, as initially framed, treats the Judiciary separately and not only
the higher judiciary but even the subordinate judiciary …”
10.9 Shri Jayaprakash Narayan expressed his detailed views on all related aspects to the issue
of inclusion of the judiciary within the ambit of Lokapl. He put forward his views as:
“…Firstly, we believe that judiciary cannot be a part of Lokpal’ s jurisdiction for a variety
of reasons. Eminent jurist like you and many other members with deep experience and
insights know too well the reasons. The Supreme Court and the High courts not only have
the Constitutional authority but they are also held in high esteem in this country. Whenever
there is a crisis in this country, we always depend on these High Courts. For instance, Babri
Masjid demolition issue, or, the reservation issue, or, contentious issues like reservation, etc.
which are fragmenting our country. We, ultimately, depend on the Courts to bring some
sense and some balance. And, if that Court’ s authority is in any way undermined, that will
do immense damage to the country…
…The Government’ s draft Bill which is now before the Parliament has envisaged that
inquiry into misconduct or allegations against the members of the Lokpal will be
entrusted to a Bench of the Supreme Court. If in turn, the Lokpal institution is to inquire
into the misconduct, if any, or the corruption of the judges, it will certainly not be a  very
healthy thing. Of course, finally, already because of a variety of pronouncements in
judiciary, the Constitution, to some extent, has been diluted. The Constitution-makers
never envisaged that judiciary will be completely away from the purview of the
Parliament and the Executive of the country. Unfortunately, after the judges’ case
judgment, the judiciary has taken over more or less and, now, if you further dilute it and
make an extra-Parliamentary statutory institution control the way the judiciary functions,
at least, to this extent, that will undermine the constitutional structure even further. It is
not desirable at all …
…Now, it does not mean that judiciary must be unaccountable. Judiciary must be held to
account. Right now before the Parliament there is a Bill pending, the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill which, as we all know, now creates a permanent mechanism for
inquiry into judges’ conduct, not an ad hoc mechanism, and also codifies the judicial code
of conduct and makes any violation of that a matter of an inquiry and, if that law is
enacted and with that a National Judicial Commission comes into place amending articles
124 (2)  and 124(5),  in effect, it will be a constitutional amendment, then, together, they
will take care of the problem of judicial accountability in the higher judiciary because both
appointments and removals as we envisage, if the Parliament approves, will be with the
National Judicial Commission headed by the Vice-President of India, with the Prime
Minister, with the Leader of the Opposition and the Judiciary...
10.10 Shri Jayaprakash Narayan also elaborated upon the issue of inclusion of subordinate
judiciary within the ambit of the Lokpal. He refuted the idea and expressed his views as
follows:–

50
“…About the lower judiciary, Mr. Chairman, article 235  is very clear; the High Court has
complete authority and, time and again, in States like Maharashtra, and if I am not
mistaken, Rajasthan, West Bengal, High Courts have exercised the jurisdiction very
effectively, weeded out the corrupt lower judiciary members and that must be retained as
it is. Therefore, there is no case for an extra-judicial body, apart from the National Judicial
Commission, to go into matters of judicial accountability …”
10.11 The advocates of the Jan Lokpal Bill, while appearing before the Committee, expressed their
views on this issue as follows:
“…The judiciary may be brought under the purview of anti-corruption system through a
separate Bill to be introduced simultaneously, provided the Judicial Conduct Commission so
set up is also independent of the Government as well as the judiciary and has the power
of investigating and prosecuting judges for corruption The Judicial Standards and
Accountability Bill of the Government does not deal with criminal investigation of judges,
nor does it set up an independent committee.....
10.12 Shri Harish Salve, Senior Advocate, in his presentation before the Committee, floated a
unique idea to create a collegium which would deal with the appointment of the Members
of the Lokpal along with the selection of judges in higher judiciary. He made his point as
follows:
“…There is a crying need for accountability in the judiciary. They cannot be put under the
Lokpal but, at the same time, there has to be some machinery. One very important area is
the appointment of judges; and, I submit, Sir, this is a golden opportunity for this
Committee to set up a collegium, which today may appoint a Lokpal but tomorrow can be
extended to appointment of Judges. Why should we not have one collegium for appointment
to these offices? You don’t need separate collegium. Whether it has the Prime Minister —
as it possibly must, whether it has the Leader of Opposition – as it possibly must, whether
it has the Speaker of the House – may be or may not be; whether it has the Chief Justice
– as it possibly must; you add these people, and, you add a few people and say how they
are to be selected. If they are good people to appoint a Lokpal, tomorrow, you will have
a strong case to say that they are good enough to appoint of Supreme Court judges. So,
I submit, Sir, when you are drafting this bit of the law, please have in mind that you are
creating somebody as important or depending on the structure of the law more important
than a Supreme Court judge. Please create a collegium, which is appropriate for that
appointment, and, you would have killed two birds with one stone. You would have laid
the foundation and solved half the problem of the judicial accountability…”
10.13 Representatives of the Business Associations who appeared before the Committee also did
not favour the idea to include the judiciary under the purview of Lokpal. They put forward
their views over the issue as under:
10.14 The President, CII said:–
“…We believe that Lokpal should not cover Judiciary. We believe that we should strengthen
the existing Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 in the Parliament. I
understand that there is a Bill in the Parliament and we believe that that Bill needs to be
re-looked and strengthened. We also believe that the Judiciary needs to be helped to perform
better through setting up more courts, more infrastructure, more application of technology
and also promote arbitration. The rationale for all this is that we believe that independence
of the Judiciary should be maintained. The Judiciary needs to be kept separate because if
the linkage between the Judiciary and the Lokpal, cases will be going there. If it covers
the Judiciary, the Lokpal will become entirely unwieldy. We don’t see any need for it…”

51
10.15 The President, ASSOCHAM opined:–
“…judiciary should be kept out of this Bill because the independence of judiciary is very
important and it is very important that this independence be maintained, and, today, lj]
gekjk tks lafo/kku gS] daLVhV~;w”ku gS]  it provides for checks and balances. So, I  think, we
have to ensure that those checks and balances remain…”
10.16 The Vice-President, FICCI stated:–
“…Judicial Accountability Bill should be independent of the Lokpal Bill. We believe that
the judiciary’ s independence should be undermined, but, at the same time, it is very
necessary to have a Judicial Accountability Bill and we believe that it should be a parallel
legislation to the Lokpal Bill and again I am going into a fundamental principal that
justice delayed is justice denied. So, whenever we talk about judicial accountability,
simultaneously we must also be talking about judicial reforms to ensure that the time aspect
of handling cases is addressed.....”
10.17 Shri Jayaprakash Narayan, while making his presentation before the Committee, dwelt at
length on this aspect. He stated as follows:–
“…as you know the 1973  judgment of the Supreme Court in the Kesavananda Bharati case
held that the basic features of the Constitution are inviolable and the court has the ultimate
power to decide what the basic features are. There is a real danger that the Supreme Court
may hold that any inclusion of higher courts’ judges in the jurisdiction of the Lokpal or
Lokayukta is violative of the basic features of the Constitution. It mayor may not be
violative but once the court says so, you know the implications, Mr. Chairman. I don’t think
India at this point of time should have a confrontation between the Parliament and the
higher judiciary. We as a country cannot afford that…”
10.18 Likewise, Justice J.S. Verma while appearing before the Committee, opined that the issue
of inclusion of  judiciary within the ambit of  Lokpal needs to be examined in the light of
the scheme of  the Constitution. He was of  the view that not only the higher judiciary but
even the subordinate judiciary need not be brought under the Lokpal, the issue of
accountability of  these institutions should be determined in accordance with the spirit of  the
Constitution. He put forward his expert opinion thus:–
“…Article 50 clearly provides and mandates separation of Judiciary from the Executive.
Article 235...  But I  am speaking from my own experience as a Judge and the former CJI.
Article 235  gives control over subordinate judiciary and also the High Courts, there is no
one else. In the case of the higher judiciary, the Parliament comes in as the ultimate
authority. And according to the law which was made in 1968 or any other law, you will
have a body but the final word would be of the Parliament, not of a few individuals as
such. Then, you cannot discuss the conduct of any High Court or Supreme Court Judge,
those are articles 121  and 211  in the State Legislature or  Parliament except on a motion
for removal…”
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
10.19 The opinions received by this Committee were almost unanimous in recommending that the
Judiciary be kept out of the ambit of  the Lokpal. However, it was equally strongly opined
that the judiciary must be regulated and made accountable by a separate mechanism.
10.20 Previously in this year, such a mechanism was mooted by the Government through the
Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010  which was also referred to  this very

52
Committee. This Committee has already submitted a report on that Bill and suggested
various modifications. However, it is a common ground that the said Judicial Accountability
Bill does not seek to address judicial corruption at all and an independent mechanism for
appointment of Judges also needs to be created. The Committee takes serious note and
cognizance of these sentiments and wishes to place its recommendations as below.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
10.21 The Committee recommends:
(i) The Judiciary, comprising 31 odd judges of the Apex Court, 800 odd judges of
the High Courts, and 20,000 odd judges of the subordinate judiciary are a part
of a separate and distinct organ of the State. Such separation of judicial power
is vitally necessary for an independent judiciary in any system and has been
recognized specifically in Article 50 of the Indian Constitution. It is interesting
that while the British Parliamentary democratic system, which India adopted,
has never followed the absolute separation of powers doctrine between the
Legislature and the Executive, as, for example, found in the US system, India
has specifically mandated under its Constitution itself that such separation must
necessarily be maintained between the Executive and the Legislature on the one
hand and the Judiciary on the other.
(ii) Such separation, autonomy and necessary isolation is vital for ensuring an
independent judicial system. India is justifiably proud of a vigorous (indeed
sometimes over vigorous) adjudicatory judicial organ. Subjecting that organ to
the normal process of criminal prosecution or punishment through the normal
courts of the land would not be conducive to the preservation of judicial
independence in the long run.
(iii) If the Judiciary were included simpliciter as suggested in certain quarters, the
end result would be the possible and potential direct prosecution of even an
apex Court Judge before the relevant magistrate exercising the relevant
jurisdiction. The same would apply to High Court Judges. This would lead to an
extraordinarily piquant and an untenable situation and would undermine judicial
independence at its very root.
(iv) Not including the Judiciary under the present Lokpal dispensation does not in
any manner mean that this organ should be left unpoliced in respect of
corruption issues. This Committee has already proposed and recommended a
comprehensive Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill which provides a
complete in-house departmental mechanism, to deal with errant judicial
behavior by way of censure, warning, suspension, recommendation or removal
and so on within the judicial fold itself. The Committee deprecates the criticism
of the Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill as excluding issues of
corruption for the simple reason that they were never intended to be addressed
by that Bill and were consciously excluded.
(v) As stated in para 21 of the report of this Committee on the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, the Committee again recommends, in the present
context of the Lokpal Bill, that the entire appointment process of the higher
judiciary needs to be revamped and reformed. The appointment process cannot
be allowed and should not be allowed to continue in the hands of a self-
appointed common law mechanism created by judicial order operating since the

53
early 1990s. A National Judicial Commission must be set up to create a broad-
based and comprehensive model for judicial appointments, including, if
necessary, by way of amendment of Articles 124 and 217 of the Indian
Constitution. Without such a fundamental revamp of the appointment process
at source and at the inception, all other measures remain purely ex-post facto
and curative. Preventive measures to ensure high quality judicial recruitment at
the entrance point is vital.
(vi) It is the same National Judicial Commission which has to be entrusted with
powers of both transfer and criminal prosecution of judges for corruption. If
desired, by amending the provisions of the Constitution as they stand today,
such proposed National Judicial Commission may also be given the power of
dismissal/removal. In any event, this mechanism of the National Judicial
Commission is essential since it would obviate allegations and challenges to the
validity of any enactment dealing with judges on the ground of erosion or
impairment of judicial independence. Such judicial independence has been held
to be part of the basic structure of the Indian Constitution and is therefore
unamendable even by way of an amendment of the Indian Constitution. It is for
this reason that while this Committee is very categorically and strongly of the
view that there should be a comprehensive mechanism for dealing with the
trinity of judicial appointments, judicial transfers and criminal prosecution of
judges, it is resisting the temptation of including them in the present Lokpal
Bill. The Committee, however, exhorts the appropriate departments, with all the
power at its command, to expeditiously bring a Constitutional Amendment Bill
to address the aforesaid trinity of core issues directly impinging on the judicial
system today viz. appointment of high quality and high caliber judges at the
inception, non-discriminatory and effective transfers and fair and vigorous
criminal prosecution of corrupt judges without impairing or affecting judicial
independence.
(vii) The Committee finds no reason to exclude from the conclusions on this subject,
the burgeoning number of quasi-judicial authorities including tribunals as also
other statutory and non-statutory bodies which, where not covered under
category ‘A’ and ‘B’ bureaucrats, exercise quasi-judicial powers of any kind.
Arbitrations and other modes of alternative dispute resolution should also be
specifically covered in this proposed mechanism. They should be covered in any
eventual legislation dealing with corruption in the higher judiciary. The
Committee notes that a large mass of full judicial functions, especially from the
High Courts has, for the last 30 to 40 years, been progressively hived off to
diverse tribunals exercising diverse powers under diverse statutory enactments.
The Committee also notes that apart from and in addition to such tribunals, a
plethora of Government officials or other persona designata  exercise quasi
judicial powers in diverse situations and diverse contexts. Whatever has been
said in respect of the judiciary in this chapter should, in the considered opinion
of this Committee, be made applicable, with appropriate modifications in respect
of quasi-judicial bodies, tribunals and persons as well.

54
CHAPTER-11
THE LOKPAL : SEARCH AND SELECTION
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
11.1 The institution of the Lokpal is being mooted and created for ensuring that the scourge of
corruption is punitively attacked and that honesty, transparency and probity imbue public
and private life to the highest extent and degree possible. The selection of the Lokpal,
therefore, has to be at the highest levels and has to achieve the selection of the best and
the brightest at the entry point. Section 4 (1) of the Lokpal Bill prescribes a Selection
Committee while section 4 (3) provides that the Selection Committee may, if it considers
necessary for the purpose of preparing a Panel to be considered for such appointment,
constitute a Search Committee. There have been many permutations and combinations
suggested by the witnesses for the Selection and/or the Search Committee.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
11.2 The major points raised in the memoranda received by the Committee, on this topic are:
• Strength of Government in Lokpal should not exceed half the total strength.
• Membership of Lokpal – 50% for women, 25% from SC/ST, 20% from minorities
proposed.
• Need for representation for women, minority community, SC/ST/OBC in Lokpal.
• The representation of SC/ST/OBCs/DTs/NTs and religious minorities in Lokpal and
Lokayuktas suggested.
• Representation for SCs, STs, BCs including BCs of religious minorities need in Lokpal.
• Need to avoid ex-politicians and MPs as members of Lokpal and specific exclusion to
be added in Chapter-II Clause 4.
• Need to add exclusions for individuals who have any charge-sheet or investigation
pending against them or who have been prosecuted for any offence/malpractice.
• There should be a minimum age criterion for membership of Lokpal – 45 years.
• Selection should have at least four independent members from public life, but who are
not serving any function of Government/judiciary but can be retired SC judges,
Magsasay award winners, Directors or IIT, IIM, ISI, IIS or Bharat Ratna awardees.
No need for MPLOP in the Selection Committee
• Persons in active politics must not be appointed as Lokpal.
• Lokpal may be appointed as per norms applicable to HC judges and CVC.
• There is no justification for the provision which states that all previous Chairpersons
of Lokpal will be members of the Selection Committee. Over time, this will give undue
54

55
weight age to retired Lokpals and create an exclusive club of Lokpals accountable only
to themselves. In no other constitutional office, is there provision to select the
successor.
• Any person who has received an award, recognition/monetary purse from a foreign
Govt./institution/foundation, should not be appointed to Lokpal office.
• Any person who has been associated with an international body that interferes in the
internal affairs of other nations, such as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch
etc. should not be appointed to Lokpal office.
• Any person/NGO that has received funds from a foreign organization/person to do
advocacy in his/her home country, such as promoting GM seeds, should not be
appointed to Lokpal office.
• NRIs should not be appointed to Lokpal Office.
• A person of Indian origin, who is no longer a citizen of India, should not be appointed
to Lokpal office.
• Out of the Members as provided in Section 4, two nominees i.e. one prominent jurist
and one person of prominence in public life may be chosen by the Members of Lokpal
collectively and not by Central Government.
• Clause 3(2)(c) be inserted to provide the CVC and two Vigilance Commissioners to
function as Ex-officio Members of the Lokpal.
• CVC Chairman and Members be made Ex-officio Members of Lokpal and they may
be appointed or removed in the manner of Members of Lokpal.
• CVC should be made an Ex-officio Member of the Lokpal as recommended by second
ARC.
• The concept of ‘person of eminence in public life’ is a vague and ambiguous
expression which may lead to avoidable controversies.
• Those in the age group of 55-70/65 years should be considered for appointment as
Chairpersons/Members of Lokpal in view of maturity and experience required.
• Lower age limit should be fixed as 60 years.
• Chairperson of Lokpal – male and female for alternate terms; Members – 50% women.
• Tenure – 6 years; 1/3
rd to retire every two years.
• In order to provide stability to the institution of Lokpal, “no person who does not have
less than two years to serve as Chairman or Member of Lokpal, shall be considered
for appointment to the post of such Chairman/Member.”
• Selection Committee should have representation from disadvantaged sections of the
society – Chairperson of National Womens’ Commission, Chairperson of SC/ST
Commission and Chairperson of National Commission of Minorities.
• There must be a balance between the Government, the opposition and the judiciary in
the Selection Committee.
• Selection process should be aired live.
• NRIs may also be made members of the Selection Committee.

56
• Has recommended public participation in appointment process.
• Undue weightage to Govt. in Selection Committee; Cabinet Minister and person of
eminence can be done away with ‘eminent jurist’ at (h) may better be nominated by
CJI. The remaining 7 Members should be enough to propose a suitable panel and
governmental influence be reduced to minimum.
• There must be a Search Committee for recommending names of Chairperson and
Members of Lokpal.
• Search Committee should be mandatory for appointment of Chairperson and Members
of Lokpal.
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY THE WITNESSES
11.3 Shri Shekhar Singh (NCPRI) stated as follows:–
“...the selection process and selection committee of the Government Lokpal Bill. It
prescribes 11 members in the selection committee. A majority of them are either from the
Government or, from the ruling party, or, nominated by the Government. So, we feel that
is not fair.
We are suggesting a very simple selection committee of three members the Prime Minister, the
Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha and a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by
the Chief Justice of India. Why a Judge and mot the Chief Justices? This is being done so
that there is no complication when an appeal or a writ petition goes to the Supreme Court.
It could be another composition, but it must be a composition which is not biased towards
either the Government or any other party, the ruling party etcetera etcetera…”
He further stated:–
“…It is our experience that these high-powered Selection Committees of Prime Ministers
and Leaders of Opposition do not have the time to actually go out and search who could
be a good candidate. In effect, what happens in such situations, and we have seen it in
other cases, which I  will not mention, but you are familiar, is that the dealing Department
of the Government actually decides who is going to become the Chief Lokpal, who is, going
to become the Lokpal, by the names that they nominate. Therefore, we feel that the Search
Committee is very critical and the Search Committee should be mandatory…”
11.4 Shri Barish Salve opined thus:–
“…I completely share the perception that unless there is perceptible inclusiveness, the
institution will not enjoy the kind of public respect and public support which needs to enjoy
and that is one of the major problems with our judiciary…”
11.5 Shri Udit Raj, while appearing before the Committee, said :–
“…In this context, we request that the representation of the SCs/STs. Backwards and
minorities should be ensured not only at the committee level but also at the level of the
search and selection process. Of course, ‘probable I  candidates will be selected by the search
and selection committee. But whatever may be the final decision, eventually, out of those
probable candidates there would be members and the Chairman of the Committee …”
11.6 The DoPT, in its written comments, has stated:–
“…In the light of the duties and responsibilities of the Lokpal, it is felt that a person with
judicial background would be more suitable to hold the position of Chairman of Lokpal…”

57
IV ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
11.7 The central principle which should dictate the composition of the Selection Committee is
that the Committee should, in logistics and deliberations, be manageable; compact and
representative without being unwieldy.
11.8 The Lokpal Bill, 2011 contemplates a very large Selection Committee  which mayor may not
appoint a Search Committee. The Jan Lokpal Bill also contemplates a large Selection
Committee and an even larger Search Committee.
11.9 The Selection Committee  should be kept reasonably compact to enable swift functioning. It
should also be representative. Consequently, a Selection Committee comprising of all the
three organs of State viz. the Prime Minister (as head of the Executive), the Speaker of
Lok Sabha (as Head of the Lower House) and the Chief Justice of India (as head of the
Judiciary), as also the Leader of the Opposition in the Lower House would be a good
starting point. The fifth Member of the Selection Committee should be an eminent Indian
qualified by all adjectives in clause 4(1)(i) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 but should be a single
nominee, collectively and conjointly, of the following/designated constitutional bodies, viz.
CAG , CEC, UPSC Chairman with such nominee having a term of a maximum of five years.
This would be a compact five-member body and would have inputs and representations
from all relevant sections of the society and Government.
11.10 There should, however, be a proviso in Clause 4(3) to the effect that a Search Committee
shall comprise at least seven Members and shall ensure representation 50 per cent to
Members of SC’s and/or STs and/or Other Backward Classes and/or Minorities and/or
Women or any category or combination thereof. Though there is some merit in the
suggestion that the Search Committee should not be mandatory since, firstly, the Selection
Committee may not need to conduct any search and secondly, since this gives a higher
degree of flexibility and speed to the Selection Committee, the Committee, on deep
consideration, finally opines that the Search Committee should be made mandatory. The
Committee does so, in particular, in view of the high desirability of providing representation
in the Search Committee as stated above which, this Committee believes, cannot be
effectively ensured without the mandatory requirement to have a Search Committee. It
should, however, be clarified that the person/s selected by the Search Committee shall not
be binding on the Selection Committee and secondly, that, where the Selection Committee
rejects the recommendations of the Search Committee in respect of any particular post, the
Selection Committee shall not be obliged to go back to the Search Committee for the same
post but would be entitled to proceed directly by itself.
11.11 Over the years, there has been growing concern in India that the entire mass of statutory
quasi judicial and other similar tribunal bodies or entities have been operated by judicial
personnel i.e. retired judges, mainly of the higher judiciary viz. the High Courts and the
Supreme Court.
11.12 There is no doubt that judicial training and experience imparts not only a certain objectivity
but a certain technique of adjudication which, intrinsically and by training, is likely to lead
to greater care and caution in preserving principles like fair play, natural justice, burden of
proof and so on and so forth. Familiarity with case law and knowledge of sometimes
intricate legal principles is naturally available in retired judicial personnel of the higher
judiciary.
11.13 However, when new and nascent structures are being contemplated it is necessary not to
fetter or circumscribe the discretion of the appointing authority. The latter is certainly
entitled to appoint judges, and specific exclusion of judges is neither contemplated nor being

58
provided. However, to consider, as the Lokpal Bill 2011 does, only former Chief Justices
of India or former judges of the Supreme Court as the Chairperson of the Lokpal would
be a totally uncalled for and unnecessary fetter. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
clause 3(2) be suitably modified not to restrict the Selection Committee to selecting only
a sitting or former Chief Justice of India or judge of the Supreme Court as Chairperson
of the Lokpal.
11.14 A similar change is not suggested in respect of Members of the Lokpal and the existing
provision in clause 3 (2) (b) read with clause 19 may continue. Although the Committee
does believe that it is time to consider tribunals staffed by outstanding and eminent Indians,
not necessarily only from a pool of retired members of the higher judiciary, the Committee
feels hamstrung by the Apex Court decision in L. Chandra Kumar Vs. Union of India 1997
(3) SCC 261 which has held and has been interpreted to hold that statutory tribunals
involving adjudicatory functions must not sit singly but must sit in benches of two and that
at least one of the two members must be a judicial member. Hence, unless the aforesaid
judgment of the Apex Court in L. Chandra Kumar Vs. Union of India is reconsidered, the
Committee refrains from suggesting corresponding changes in, clause 3 (2) (b) read with
clause 19, though it has been tempted to do so.
11.15 There is merit in the suggestion that clause 3 (4) of the Lokpal 2011 be further amended
to clarify that a person shall not be eligible to become Chairperson or Member of Lokpal
if:
(a) He/she is a person convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude;
(b) He/she is a person less than 45 years of age, on date of assuming office as
Chairperson or Member of Lokpal;
(c) He/she has been in the service of any Central or State Government or any entity
owned or controlled by the Central or State Government and has vacated office either
by way of resignation, removal or retirement within the period of 12 months prior to
the date of appointment as Chairperson or Member of Lokpal.
11.16 In clause 9 (2), the existing provision should be retained but it should be added at the end
of that clause, for the purpose of clarification, that no one shall be eligible for
re-appointment as Chairperson or Member of the Lokpal if he has already enjoyed a term
of five years.
11.17 The Committee has already recommended in para 11.10 above appropriate representation on
the Search Committee of certain sections of society who have been historically
marginalized. The Committee also believes that although the institution of Lokpal is a
relatively small body of nine members and specific reservation cannot and ought not to be
provided in the Lokpal institution itself, there should be a provision added after clause 4 (5)
to the effect that the selection committee and the search committee shall make every
endeavour to reflect the diversity of India by including the representation, as far as
practicable, of historically marginalized sections of the society on the Lokpal Bill like SCs/
STs, OBCs/minorities and women.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
11.18 To ensure flexibility, speed and efficiency on the one hand and representation to all
organs of State on the other, the Committee recommends a Selection Committee
comprising:–

59
(a) The Prime Minister of India- as Head of the Executive.
(b) The Speaker Lok Sabha, as Head of the Legislature.
(c) The Chief Justice of India-as Head of the Judiciary.
(d) The Leader of the Opposition of the Lower House.
(e) An eminent Indian, selected as elaborated in the next paragraph.
N.B.: functionaries like the Chairman and Leader of the Opposition of the Upper
House have not been included in the interests of compactness and flexibility. The
Prime Minister would preside over the Selection Committee.
11.19 The 5
th Member of the Selection Committee in (e) above should be a joint nominee
selected jointly by the three designated Constitutional bodies viz., the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India, the Chief Election Commissioner and the UPSC
Chairman. This ensures a reasonably wide and representative degree of inputs from
eminent Constitutional bodies, without making the exercise too cumbersome. Since
the other Members of the Selection Committee are all ex-officio , this 5
th nominee of
the aforesaid Constitutional bodies shall be nominated for a fixed term of five years.
Additionally, it should be clarified that he should be an eminent Indian and all the
diverse criteria, individually, jointly or severally, applicable as specified in Clause 4
(1) (i) of the Lokpal Bill 2011 should be kept in mind by the aforesaid three
designated Constitutional nominators.
11.20 There should, however, be a proviso in Clause 4(3) to the effect that a Search
Committee shall comprise at least seven Members and shall ensure representation 50
per cent to Members of SC’s and/or STs and/or Other Backward Classes and/or
Minorities and/or Women or any category or combination thereof. Though there is
some merit in the suggestion that the Search Committee should not be mandatory
since, firstly, the Selection Committee may not need to conduct any search and
secondly, since this gives a higher degree of flexibility and speed to the Selection
Committee, the Committee, on deep consideration, finally opines that the Search
Committee should be made mandatory. The Committee does so, in particular, in view
of the high desirability of providing representation in the Search Committee as
stated above which, this Committee believes, cannot be effectively ensured without
the mandatory requirement to have a Search Committee. It should, however, be
clarified that the person/s selected by the Search Committee shall not be binding on
the Selection Committee and secondly, that, where the Selection Committee rejects
the recommendations of the Search Committee in respect of any particular post, the
Selection Committee shall not be obliged to go back to the Search Committee for the
same post but would be entitled to proceed directly by itself.
11.20(A)Over the years, there has been growing concern in India that the entire mass of
statutory quasi judicial and other similar tribunals; bodies or entities have been
operated by judicial personnel i.e. retired judges, mainly of the higher judiciary viz.
the High Courts and the Supreme Court.
11.20(B)There is no doubt that judicial training and experience imparts not only a certain
objectivity but a certain technique of adjudication which, intrinsically and by training,
is likely to lead to greater care and caution in preserving principles like fair play,
natural justice, burden of proof and so on and so forth. Familiarity with case law and
knowledge of intricate legal principles, is naturally available in retired judicial
personnel of the higher judiciary.

60
11.20(C)However, when a new and nascent structur e like Lokpal is being contemplated, it is
necessary not to fetter or circumscribe the discretion of the appointing authority. The
latter is certainly entitled to appoint judges to the Lokpal, and specific exclusion of
judges is neither contemplated nor being provided. However, to consider, as the
Lokpal Bill 2011 does, only former Chief Justices of India or former judges of the
Supreme Court as the Chairperson of the Lokpal would be a totally uncalled for and
unnecessary fetter. The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 3(2) be
suitably modified not to restrict the Selection Committee to selecting only a sitting
or former Chief Justice of India or judge of the Supreme Court as Chairperson of
the Lokpal.
11.20(D)A similar change is not suggested in respect of Members of the, Lokpal and the
existing provision in clause 3 (2) (b) read with clause 19 may continue. Although the
Committee does believe that it is time to consider tribunals staffed by outstanding
and eminent Indians, not necessarily only from a pool of retired members of the
higher judiciary, the Committee feels hamstrung by the Apex Court decision in L.
Chandra Kumar Vs. Union of India 1997 (3) SCC 261 which has held and has been
interpreted to hold that statutory tribunals involving adjudicatory functions must not
sit singly but must sit in benches of two and that at least one of the two members
must be a judicial member. Hence, unless the aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court
in L. Chandra Kumar Vs. Union of India is reconsidered, the Committee refrains
from suggesting corresponding changes in clause 3 (2) (b) read with clause 19,
though it has been tempted to do so.
11.20(E)There is merit in the suggestion that clause 3 (4) of the Lokpal 2011 be further
amended to clarify that a person shall not be eligible to become Chairperson or
Member of Lokpal if:
(a) He/she is a person convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude;
(b) He/she is a person less than 45 years of age, on date of assuming office as
Chairperson or Member of Lokpal;
(c) He/she has been in the service of any Central or State Government or any
entity owned or controlled by the Central or State Government and has vacated
office either by way of resignation, removal or retirement within the period of
12 months prior to the date of appointment as Chairperson or Member of
Lokpal.
11.20(F)In clause 9 (2), the existing provision should be retained but it should be added at
the end of that clause, for the purpose of clarification, that no one shall be eligible
for re-appointment as Chairperson or Member of the Lokpal if he has already
enjoyed a term of five years.
11.20(G)The Committee has already recommended appropriate representation on the Search
Committee, to certain sections of society who have been historically marginalized.
The Committee also believes that although the institution of Lokpal is a relatively
small body of nine members and specific reservation cannot and ought not to be
provided in the Lokpal institution itself, there should be a provision added after
clause 4 (5) to the effect that the Selection Committee and the Search Committee
shall make every endeavour to reflect, on the Lokpal institution, the diversity of
India by including the representation, as far as practicable, of historically
marginalized sections of the society like SCs/STs, OBCs, minorities and women.

61
CHAPTER-12
THE TRINITY OF THE LOKPAL, CBI AND CVC :
IN SEARCH OF AN EQUILIBRIUM
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
12.1 The large body of opinion as available through the witnesses and the memoranda received,
clearly suggested that existing institutions, including CBI and CVC should be strengthened.
They also said that merely creating fresh ones without eradicating the ills which plagued
existing structures, would not have the desired effect. The proposed concept of the Lokpal
is, in essence, a monitoring body (with or without investigative/prosecuting powers, as the
case may be) for offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The substantive
law of POCA is largely not under change: what is desirable is a powerful and efficacious
body to go after corruption. Therefore it is appropriate to reassess the roles played by the
existing institutions i.e. CBI and CVC which already have investigative/prosecuting powers
under the 1988 Act. The major thorn which seems to have created years of dissatisfaction
with the system relates to the monitoring of the CBI by the government and the fetters
imposed by section 6 A (single directive) of the DSPE Act and section 19 of the POCA Act,
in addition to S. 197 IPC. Their effect on independent and autonomous investigation and
prosecution has been felt to be adverse and counter productive. Absent such and other
weaknesses, there would perhaps be no objection to retaining these institutions and in fact
strengthening them to a point where they work in tandem with the new Lokpal – creating
a powerful Trinity, with mutual checks and balances to increase the quality and efficacy of
both investigation and prosecution, while avoiding excessive fusion of power in one body
alone. The opinions received relating to the roles of CBI and CVC, as well as the overall
proposed structure of the Lokpal, are discussed below.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
12.2 The major points raised in the memoranda received by the Committee, on this topic are:
• It would not be prudent to take over the entire anti-corruption division of CBI. Instead,
the Lokpal should set up its own investigation and prosecution wing, taking senior
officers on deputation basis to get rid of those who fail to deliver.
• Investigation and Prosecution Wing should consist of officers who have never faced
any departmental enquiry or charged of any offence.
• I&P Wing should consist of persons representing communities of Muslim, Hindu,
Christians and Dalits.
• Officers of I&P should declare their assets on joining and every year, till
relinquishment of office and discrepancy ought to be dealt in accordance with law.
• Economic Offences Wing of CBI cannot be separated from the Anti-Corruption Wing
as the two are inter woven. Therefore, they should not be split; rather, there is need
to bring the Enforcement Directorate also under the same umbrella.
61

62
• It should be made binding on CBI to register and investigate a case if recommended
by the Lokpal.
• With regard to placing of CBI and other investigating agencies under Lokpal, it is
suggested that once the persons from such agencies are affiliated to Lokpal, they
should not be posted back to their parent organizations as a measure to safeguard their
service interests/career.
• Bring CVC and Anti-Corruption Wing of CBI under Lokpal.
• The personnel for the departmental anti-corruption/vigilance wings must be selected by
Lokpal on inter-departmental basis and not intra-departmental basis. They must
function under Lokpal only, with duty to report details to Lokpal monthly.
• The anti-corruption division should be merged as a administrative arm of Lokpal and
suitable amendments should be made to exclude these from the direct control of the
Government which has been the consistent criticism of the DSPE.
• Section 6A of DSPE Act, 1946 may be repealed.
• Appoint independent prosecutors to prosecute all corruption, money laundering and
benami cases.
• Strengthening of anti-corruption agencies and their infrastructure and manpower, taking
into account the best international practices.
• DSPE Act be so amended that no sanction for inquiry or investigation or prosecution
is needed.
• Confer more administrative and functional autonomy to the CBI.
• Since the anti-corruption agencies oversee Government operations and provide
oversight over the offences of corruption, there is an emerging consensus that the anti-
corruption body/bodies should report to the Parliament (through parliamentary
committees). However, experience also shows that to be effective, legislatures require
such resources as a technically competent staff, strong committees, budgetary
independence and significant bureaucratic oversight powers.
• There hardly exist any anti-corruption institutions in the world that report to the
Supreme Court.
• Experiences show that it may not matter much whether an anti-corruption agency is
reporting to the executive or Parliament or the SC so long as it’s operational
independence is guaranteed.
• Amend Section 197 of CrPC and Section 19 of PCA so as to provide for ordering of
prosecution by CVC/Lokpal and not by the Government.
• CBI be split in two separate agencies; for cases relating to corruption, money
laundering and Benami properties, CBI may be accountable to CVC only.
• Bring Enforcement Directorate under CVC.
• All prosecutors with respect to anti-corruption cases should be under the Lokpal.
• Regarding confiscation of properties of corrupt public servants, a law needs to be
enacted at the earliest on the lines of Corrupt Public Servants (Forfeitures of Property)
Bill drafted by the Law Commission.

63
• Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 needs to be enacted/amended immediately
to ensure action against corrupt public servants.
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY THE WITNESSES
12.3 The Committee takes note of the submission made by Justice J.S. Verma, while tendering
his considered advice before the Committee:– -
“…When CBI and CVC are mentioned, they could be appointed by the same law as members
of the body. You could consider the same process for their appointment,’…it is over time
you gain experience, If you are going to have a more effective procedure for appointment
of Lokpal, then the same should apply also for the CBI Director and CVC. Why not
consider they to  be ex-officio members of the Lokpal just as in the case of National Human
Rights Commission you have Chairman and others as ex-officio members. You could think
of that system…”
12.4 Dr. Jayaparakash Narayan, during his deposition before the Committee, stated :–
“…my humble appeal is, the Central Vigilance Commission and the CVC Act must be
retained with certain modifications. One, the CVC members, including the Chairperson
should be made, in addition to their functions under the CVC Act, ex-officio members of
the Lok Pal institution so that they have the institutional authority and there will be total
seamless integration of functioning. But, in addition to being members of the Lok Pal, the
CVC must function under the CVC Act, and exercise all the functions of the CVC Act. It
has three advantages.
Therefore, the autonomy that we seek, the independence and the insulation of the crime
investigation, particularly in respect of matters of corruption on economic offences from the
political executive and partisan politics, that will be achieved by merely retaining that but
strengthening and giving autonomy to the Vigilance Commission. Therefore, the autonomy
that we seek, the independence and the insulation of the crime investigation, particularly
in respect of matters of corruption on economic offences from the political executive and
partisan politics, that will be achieved by merely retaining that but strengthening and giving
autonomy to the Vigilance Commission. Therefore, destruction of the Vigilance Commission
or blind merger or repeal of the CVC Act would be retrogressive steps because we have to
achieve many more things, apart from merely creating an institution called Lok Pal or
Lokayukta.
Mr. Chairman, Sir, we must go all the way. We must ensure a real and full autonomy but
with accountability to all anti-corruption investigative agencies in all matters of corruption.
Even as we ensure that there is no need for a roving enquiry, there is no under-mining of
the morale of those in the Government. That should be accomplished, if (a) Section 6(a)
of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act is repealed; (b) the executive orders, if any,
in the States, in respect of the ACB, similar orders but by an executive order, they apply
in State also, they all must go by a specific statutory provision,(c) that sanction of
prosecution, probably, there is a case for prior vetting before prosecuting. In such a case,
we urge two safeguards. One is, let the CVC be the sanctioning authority because that is
envisaged to be an independent authority; that is an authority with deep administrative
experience and institutional strength, we can trust that authority. However, before
sanctioning prosecution against high officials, the CVC can be asked to write to the
Government, indicating what they are going to do. In case the Government of the day, at
the State level, in the case of  the Lokayukta, and at the national level, in the case of the
CVC, has very compelling reasons why a prosecution should not be sanctioned, sometimes,

64
there may be national security considerations that the authorities may not be aware of;
sometimes, there may be some other compelling national interest issues, in which case, the
Government will have to then record the reasons in writing and communicate to the CVC,
and the CVC will take a final decision on the basis of the Government’ s inputs…but there
may be instances where the actions of an individual, even if they are seemed to be corrupt
in the ordinary law of the land, they are, in a specific context of the national security,
necessary and, therefore, the Government believes that the balance of convenience lies not
in prosecuting but in denying prosecution. But the CVC must be the final authority. With
such safeguards, if the CVC is given the power to sanction prosecution at the national
level, in case of the States, the Lokayukta is given the power to sanction prosecution that
will suffice. Lokpal or CVC must be empowered to appoint independent prosecutors because
prosecution after all is really a quasi judicial function. It is not something to be trifled with
through political interference or partisanship. Investigation, evidence gathering is really an
independent thing of the politics of the day. It is entirely based on evidence. It has
importance as judicial functioning…the Lokpal should have a team of investigators, that
eventually can be decided but that must be more to go into some of the cases that Lokpal
will directly go into because of the sensitivity and complexity of the cases or for a
preliminary examination before CBI takes over investigation and prosecution in the large
measure…”
12.5 The Chairman of the Bar Council of India, while placing their views before the Committee,
said:–
“…The Anti-corruption Wing of the CBI should be separated and made completely
autonomous. Now, accountability mechanisms can be evolved through a Committee. Like the
Lokpal, the CAG , the CVC and the CBI should have its own prosecution wing. The Director
of CBI and other key officials should be appointed by a Committee, a broad Committee,
similar to the one which almost appoints the Lokpal …”
12.6 Dr. Bhanu Pratap Mehta, while deposing before the Committee, said:–
“…What to matter for institutions is who writes your confidential report, who determines the
structure of promotion and so forth by bringing it under the Lokpal, you actually change
that entire culture which currently exists in the CBI. So, my own submission is that to peg
the CBI to report to this. The CVC, as I said, the CVC Act could be amended to make
it a kind of supervisory body for the lower bureaucracy…”
12.7 The views of the representatives of CII were as follows:–
“…We also believe, as a recommendation, that the Director of the CBI and the Director of
the CVC should be made members of the Lokpal in order to promote a collaborative
behaviour in terms of ensuring that investigations are done quickly and one agency helps
the other agency and so on…”
12.8 Shri Amod K. Kanth, while placing his views before the Committee, said:–
“…Sir, according to our suggestion, the CBI will remain accountable only to Lokpal. The
accountability of the CBI, so far as its anti-corruption wing is concerned, can remain only
with the Lokpal. Accountability in other matters can remain with the Government also
because there are different kinds of matters…”
12.9 The views of NCPRI in this regard were that:–
“…we have said specifically, in the medium to long term, we would much prefer an
independent prosecution body along the lines, for example, which is  in the UK and it is

65
keeping with a Supreme Court order to the effect. We would also much prefer in the long
term, medium to long term not having both prosecution and investigation both in the same
body…”
12.10 The Central Vigilance Commissioner, while elucidating upon the role played by CVC, stated
thus:–-
“…We cannot build a society on distrust and fear alone 
lhohlh ;g dke djrk gSA
ikWfyfVdy djI”ku ds vanj tks flfoy los±V~l muds lkFk fyIr gSa] mudks ns[kus ds fy,
dksvkWMhZus”ku edSfuTe gksuk pkfg,A mlesa vxj lhohlh dks vki fgLlk cukuk pkgrs gSa
rks yksdiky dk ,Dl vkWfQf”k;ks dj nsaA vxj ugha Hkh cukuk pkgrs rks gesa dksbZ ,srjkt
ugha gSA eSa le>rk gwa fd fl)kar :i ls lhchvkbZ dks yksdiky dk lnL; ugha cukuk
pkfg,A
If you want a definitive recommendation, I would suggest that we should go by the
recommendations of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission which says that CVC
should be made an ex-officio member of the Lokpal.
CVC is not an investigating agency. It is an integrity institution responsible for coordinating
the superintendence of vigilance administration. It does not do investigation. So, this
misperception that the CVC does the investigation itself is  not there …”.
12.11 The Committee also takes into account the arguments put forth by the Director, CBI on this
issue:–
“…The Government Lokpal Bill says, give the Lokpal a fresh or a new anti-corruption
investigating agency. Our thinking is that we are an anti-corruption body. We have always
been an anti-corruption body right from its inception. The primary focus of the CBI has
always been anti-corruption work. That is our forte and that is our expertise. So, why
should the anti-corruption work be taken out of the CBI?...
…Sir, because it being an investigating agency, there has to be a proper command and
control system.. And it can only be the Director; you cannot have ten members of the
Lokpal giving directions...
...Sir, CVC also is general superintendence. Therefore, we are saying that if you have a
Lokpal, the general superintendence can transfer to the Lokpal.. You can’t have so many
bodies for superintendence. It is a choice...
…I would also like to point out that it is  not so simple to create a separate agency. People
say to create a separate agency. It is not so  simple to create a separate agency. To create
an agency it is going to, take you ten or fifteen years. What would happen then is that
there would be nobody looking after anti-corruption. The CBI would be out of anti-
corruption and you will be trying to set up a new agency which will be equally ineffective.
So, your basic anti-corruption movement would be a non--starter unless you have the CBI
in its complete present structure totally involved in whatever architecture you would be
proposing…”
12.12 The Committee notes that the opinion of Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan placed before the
Committee on this matter, is quite similar:–
“…It cannot be a separate parallel body fully dealing with all cases of investigation. That
simply is not possible. For 64 years we could not build a CBI which has more than 2000
investigative officers. To think that tomorrow overnight you can build an agency with some

66
50000 investigators, it is not realistic. We must utilize the existing strength and expand it
and bring more expertise and more technology and more manpower, more resources to CBI
and make it strong, effective and accountable rather than deplete existing institutions…So,
some kind of a provision in the law also will be helpful subject to the caveat in States
Lokayuktas but at the national level as we submitted earlier the CVC is fully capable of
handling it with the changes that we proposed. But the CBI must be strengthened and
Section 6A of the Delhi Police Establishment Act must go and the relaxation given to
Lokpal institution in respect of prosecution must apply to all cases…”
12.13 The considered view of Shri Harish Salve was that:–
“…Sir, I have, with great respect, strong views about subjecting the working of the CBI in
its investigative area to any kind of interference. The Code of Criminal Procedure confers
sole jurisdiction on the judicial system, principally the Magistracy, to oversee investigations
and that is where, Sir, in my respectful submission, this power must continue to lie...
…As for the decision whether or not to prosecute, we must follow the system; we have two
mistakes in our law. In America, as you know, it is the District Attorney’ s Office or the State
Attorney General’ s office, or, at the federal level, it is the Attorney Level or the Solicitor
General’s office, which takes a final call on whether or not to press charges. In India, some
judgements have taken the view that the police cannot even consult the Public Prosecutor
which, according to me, is wrong. Many times, especially, in complex corporate crimes or in
Prevention of Corruption crimes, you may end up filing charge sheets which fail because you
got the law wrong. Now, the CBI must have a powerful Public Prosecutorial Wing…”
12.14 The Chairman of the Committee, while voicing his opinion on this issue, stated:–
“…The CBI for all its faults has expertise in investigation. If you are going to give
investigation to Lokpal without investigative wing, so you will have to have existing wing.
However the CEI without its anti-corruption wing is left with nothing and their stature goes…”
12.15 One of the Members of the Committee highlighted a problem area in this regard as:–
“…The problem arises when CVC wants sanction against higher bureaucracy but the
sanction is not granted normally. Even when it is granted, the time taken is far too long
as a result the accused bureaucrat continues to exercise the authority…”
12.16 The Committee, while examining the crucial role played by CBI, gave serious thought and
consideration to the written submission made by CBI that:
“…Since the Government has introduced Lokpal Bill  and has proposed creating a separate
investigation Wing for the Lokpal, CBI is of the view that rather than creating new
investigation Wing, CBI should be utilized for investigation of cases referred by Lokpal…
However, the relationship between CBI and Lokpal should be similar to the superintendence
over CBI presently exercised by the CVC in the manner as laid down under Sec. 8  (1) (b)
of the CVC Act… The CBI would like to work in close associationship with the Lokpal with
Director CBI as Ex-officio member of Lokpal…CBI will continue to exercise the police
powers to take final decision after completion of investigation of a case and file police
report in the competent court and intimate Lokpal as well in the matters referred by it. The
relationship between CBI and Lokpal should be similar to the superintendence over CBI
presently exercised by the CVC in the manner as laid down under Sec. 8  (1) (b) of the CVC
Act...CBI is of the view  that it is capable to take care of all the matters referred for
investigation by the Lokpal and there is no need for a separate Investigation Wing of
Lokpal. However, the manpower and other resources will need to be augmented to cater to
this additional workload…CBI is of the view that it should not be bifurcated and should

67
be granted full functional autonomy... Keeping in view the Lokpal Bill, already introduced
by the Government in the Parliament, which inter alia envisages creation of a separate
Investigation Wing for looking into corruption cases, it was proposed by CBI that as
investigation of Anti-corruption cases is the primary activity of CBI and CBI has evolved
itself into a premier investigation agency of the country over 70  years of its existence, there
is no need for creation of a new agency in Lokpal for investigation of anti-corruption
cases. The CBI is capable of taking care of all the matters referred for investigation by
the Lokpal, if it is created. Looking into professional competence, credibility of CBI, it
should be made an integral though independent component of any Anti-corruption apparatus
to fight corruption. To ensure full functional autonomy, it has been proposed to make
Director CBI, an Ex-officio member of the Lokpal. However, the Lokpal may exercise
general superintendence over CBI for PC Act cases referred by it through Director CBI as
its Ex-officio member in a similar manner as being done by the CVC under the CVC Act…”
12.17 W ith regard to the Prosecution Wing, CBI has submitted that:
“…A proposal for creation of 907 posts has been sent in 2008 to Department of Personnel
Training to strengthen the Prosecution Wing of CBI…Director of Prosecution of CBI is the
officer borne on the cadre of Ministry of Law, Justice & Legal Affairs. He is the head of
Prosecution Wing of CBI. In addition to this, three Additional Legal Advisors who are also
on the strength of department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice & Legal Affairs,
work for CBI…LA of CBI does not have veto power. Director, CBI seeks his legal opinion
in important cases. However, the same is not binding on the Director, CBI.”
12.18 The Committee also took into account the opinion of CVC in this matter, the major points
of which are as under:
• CVC should remain the Premier Integrity Institution to address the corruption and it
should have jurisdiction over the higher bureaucracy.
• Lokpal and CVC should work in close cooperation. Mechanism need to be developed
for effective coordination.
• Amend suitably Section 6(a) of DSPE Act for according prior approvals to CBI under
PC Act.
• CVC should be empowered to grant sanction for prosecution in cases of Government
Servants.
• CVC’s advice should be binding on the appointing authorities in respect of cases of
lower officials under PC Act.
• Adequate autonomy to CVC on the lines of UPSC and C&AG.
• Amend CVC Act providing for the Government Departments to explain the reasons to
the Parliament for non-acceptance of CVC advice.
• Lokpal should focus on political corruptions involving Ministers, MPs and Higher Civil
Servants who have connived in the grand political corruption which is difficult to curb
with existing mechanism.
• The existing structure of vigilance administration should not be disturbed.
12.19 The CVC has further stated that:
“…The Committee while exercising its superintendence over DSPE (CBI) holds regular
review monthly meetings with Director, CBI The following matters are reviewed during the
meetings:–

68
• Complaints referred by Commission to CBI for investigation and reports
• Review of cases of requests made for sanction of prosecution by CBI and pending
with concerned administrative authorities.
• Matters relating to proposals of vigilance clearance referred to CBI for record check
etc.
• Cases registered during the month under PC Act.
• Pendency of cases under investigation and trial under PC Act.
• Long delayed cases of PC Act under investigations.
• Administrative issues and manpower position and steps of address the same.
• Specific issues of concern, if any, in discharging its functions under DSPE Act.
12.20 Besides above, the appointments, promotions, extension of tenure or otherwise, for posts
of Superintendent of Police and above in CBI are recommended to the Government in the
meeting of the Committee headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner as and when
required.
12.21 A separ ate chapter covering the superintendence over the functioning of the CBI is also
included in the Commission’s Annual report...
“…Prime-facie complaints containing serious allegations received by the Commission are
forwarded to concerned CVOs of the CBI for in depth investigation and submission of
reports. In addition, the CVO of the various organizations also investigate allegations
contained in complaints received at their end. CBI also registers cases for investigation
based on their source information. On receipt of investigation reports from the CVOs or the
CBI recommending further course of action, the Commission examines the reports and
thereafter tenders its first stage advice. As per information, around 60% of such
investigation reports have ended in closure of the cases as the allegations were not found
substantiated and also not found serious enough to proceed further for any departmental
action. Further, there are cases where the allegations leveled turn out to be baseless,
motivated and vexatious which may also be the reason for closure of cases after
investigation. In a significant number of complaints relating to grievances, the issues get
redressed.
As regards reasons for the rate of around 60% closure of the allegations at first stage
advice it may be mentioned that evidence gathering of corruption issues generally being a
post-mortem exercise is a difficult task. Once incidents of corrupt practice are committed,
the investigations basically focus on the documents and files only…”
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
12.22 The basic objective of a new Lokpal initiative is or at least should be to create an
autonomous, independent investigative and prosecution wing for corruption in bureaucracy
and the political class.
12.23 The basic elements of policing corruption are:
• Receiving and screening of complaints
• Preliminary investigation of complaint
• Full/final further investigation

69
• Prosecution
• Adjudication and punishment
• Departmental action
12.24 Presently, all these functions and powers (except departmental action) are centered with the
CBI subject to ministerial intervention at some levels. For States where there is no CBI the
State police (frequently called Anti-corruption Bureau) does the job.
12.25 As far as departmental action is concerned, the CBI has no role and the CVC exercises full
power but can only make non-binding recommendations for departmental action which is
to be ultimately taken by the concerned department.
12.26 The aforesaid summary of  the system shows an undesirable, inefficient and conflicted
fusion of  investigative and prosecutorial powers. It has also attenuated independence and
autonomy in practice. If a new mechanism like the Lokpal is being created for  a large part
of bureaucratic and political class, the undesirable features of  the existing system must be
necessarily addressed.
12.27
The proposed solution
(i) Make Lokpal, for  the subjects it covers, in-charge of  receiving complaints and doing
a detailed preliminary inquiry through its own internal inquiry wing.
(ii) Referring to  the CBI (a separate statutory body) for detailed investigation must remain,
as today, if the preliminary inquiry stage has been crossed as per the Lokpal.
(iii) Have the CBI be subjected only to the general superintendence of  the Lokpal, similar
to that to which it is subjected today under the CVC Act. During the actual detailed
investigation by CBI, the merits of  the investigation cannot be gone into by either the
Lokpal or the administrative Ministry. The analogy here would be the same as applied
to the present Court monitored criminal investigations (courts can also exercise only
supervisory power but they cannot interfere in the contents or merits of  the
investigation).
(iv) After investigation by the CBI for the Lokpal covered persons/offences is over, the
matter would revert to a special prosecutorial wing of  the Lokpal which would conduct
the entire prosecution in an appropriate Court presently called the CBI Special Judge
but could then be called the Lokpal Special Judge.
(v) Adjudication, punishment and appellate recourse would continue to be covered by the
normal existing law except that the numbers of  the Special Judges would have to be
increased dramatically to achieve quick results.
(vi) For all the non-Lokpal covered persons/offences, the existing CBI controlled
investigation and prosecution system would continue with logistical infrastructural
strengthening.
(vii) There can be no question of sanction for the Lokpal covered persons. In practise, the
provisions of single directive and sanction have worked as a huge delaying tactic by
vested interests over the years and have frustrated prosecutions.
(viii) For the Lokpal covered persons/offences, the entire power of recommendation for
departmental action would be taken ayvay from the CVC and entrusted to the Lokpal
whose recommendations shall be binding (the Lokpal Bill, 2011 already so provides).
At worst, an alternative check can be provided by saying that the department is bound

70
by the Lokpal recommendations unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing by a
person of the rank of not less than Minister of State, the conclusions of the Lokpal
are rejected.
(ix) For those persons not covered by the Lokpal, the CVC would retain jurisdiction
(though this Committee does recommend that the CVC’s recommendations should be
binding unlike the present situation where very few departmental actions actually take
place on the recommendations of the CVC).
12.28 The aforesaid would also obviate the current criticism of both the Lokpal Bill and the Jan
Lokpal Bill which appear to fuse investigation, prosecution, superintendence and
departmental recommendation into one body, though the Jan Lokpal Bill does it to a far
higher and unacceptable degree than the Lokpal Bill.
12.29 Indeed, since India has been talking of an independent structure for a fairly long time, the
proposed structure herein would commence a culture of Chinese wall demarcations between
investigation and prosecution, the former with the CBI and the latter with the Lokpal in so
far as the Lokpal covered persons are concerned. It is true that there would be teething
problems for some time due to lack of coordination between investigative and prosecution
wings. But this insulation of investigation and prosecution has been considered desirable for
many years and we have frequently lamented the absence of this demarcation in India, as
operationally present in the USA and UK. Over a short period of time, an independent
Directorate of Public Prosecution (DPP) culture is hoped to emerge and considerably
strengthen the quality of investigation and impart far greater objectivity to the prosecution
process.
12.30 Lastly, the advantage of this model would be that:
(i) The CBI’ s apprehension, not entirely baseless, that it would then become a Hamlet
without a Prince of Denmark if its Anti-Corruption Wing was hived off to the Lokpal
would be taken care of.
(ii) It would be unnecessary to make CBI or CVC a Member of the Lokpal body itself.
(iii) The CBI would not be subordinate to the Lokpal nor its espirit de corps be adversely
affected; it would only be subject to general superintendence of Lokpal. It must be
kept in mind that the CBI is an over 60  year old body, which has developed a certain
morale and espirit de corps, a particular culture and set of practices, which should be
strengthened and improved, rather than merely subsumed within a new or nascent
institution, which is yet to take roots. Equally, the CEI, while enhancing its autonomy
and independence, cannot be left on auto pilot.
(iv) The CVC would retain a large part of its disciplinary and functional role for non
Lokpal personnel and misconduct and would also not be subordinate to the Lokpal.
12.31 Consequently, it is suggested that the aforesaid structure reasonably harmonizes and creates
the necessary equilibrium for the insependence and harmonised functioning of the so-called
Trinity viz. Lokpal, CBI and CVC, with neither obliterating, superseding or weakening the
other. It also advocates the strengthening of existing institutions, the creation of a new
culture of professional investigation insulated from inception and a distinctly professional
prosecution department.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
12.32 (A) Whatever is stated hereinafter in these recommendations is obviously applicable

71
only to Lokpal and Lokayukta covered personnel and offences/misconduct, as already
delineated in this Report earlier, inter alia , in Chapter 8 and elsewhere.
(B) For those outside (A) above, the existing law, except to the extent changed, would
continue to apply.
12.33 This Chapter, in the opinion of the Committee, raises an important issue of the
quality of both investigation and prosecution; the correct balance and an apposite
equilibrium of 3 entities ( viz. Lokpal, CBI and CVC) after creation of the new entity
called Lokpal; harmonious functioning and real life operational efficacy of procedural
and substantive safeguards; the correct balance between initiation of complaint, its
preliminary screening/inquiry, its further investigation, prosecution, adjudication and
punishment; and the correct harmonization of diverse provisions of law arising from
the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, the CVC Act, the proposed Lokpal Act,
the IPC, CrPC and the Prevention of Corruption Act. It is, therefore, a somewhat
delicate and technical task.
12.34 The stages of criminal prosecution of the Lokpal and Lokayukta covered persons and
officers can be divided broadly into 5 stages, viz. (a) The stage of complaint, whether
by a complainant or suo motu , (b) the preliminary screening of such a complaint, (c)
the full investigation of the complaint and the report in that respect, (d) prosecution,
if any, on the basis of the investigation and (e) adjudication, including punishment,
if any.
12.35 The Committee recommends that the complaint should be allowed to be made either
by any complainant or initiated suo motu  by the Lokpal. Since, presently, the CBI
also has full powers of suo motu  initiation of investigation, a power which is
frequently exercised, it is felt that the same power of suo motu  proceedings should
also be preserved for both the CBI and the Lokpal, subject, however, to overall
supervisory jurisdiction of the Lokpal over the CBI, including simultaneous
intimation and continued disclosure of progress of any inquiry or investigation by the
CBI to the Lokpal, subject to what has been elaborated in the next paragraph.
12.36 Once the complaint, through any party or suo motu  has arisen, it must be subject
to a careful and comprehensive preliminary screening to rule out false, frivolous and
vexatious complaints. This power of preliminary inquiry must necessarily vest in the
Lokpal. However, in this respect, the recommendations of the Committee in para
12.36(1) should be read with this para. This is largely covered in clause 23 (1) of the
Lokpal Bill, 2011. However, in this respect, the Lokpal would have to be provided, at
the inception, with a sufficiently large internal inquiry machinery. The Lokpal Bill,
2011 has an existing set of provisions (Clauses 13 and 14 in Chapter III) which
refers to a full-fledged investigation wing. In view of the structure proposed in this
Chapter, there need not be such an investigation wing but an efficacious inquiry
division for holding the preliminary inquiry in respect of the complaint at the
threshold. Preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal also semantically distinguishes itself
from the actual investigation by the CBI after it is referred by the Lokpal to the
CBI. The pattern for provision of such an inquiry wing may be similar to the existing
structure as provided in Chapter III of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 but with suitable
changes made, mutatis mutandis , and possible merger of the provisions of Chapter
VII with Chapter III.
12.36 (A)The Committee is concerned at the overlap of terminology used and procedures
proposed, between preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal as opposed to investigation by

72
the investigating agency, presently provided in Clause 23 of the Lokpal Bill. The
Committee, therefore, recommends:
(a) that only two terms be used to demarcate and differentiate between the
preliminary inquiry to be conducted by the Lokpal, inter alia , under Chapters VI
and VII read with Clause 2(1)(e) as opposed to an investigation by the
investigating agency which has been proposed to be the CBI in the present
report. Appropriate changes should make it clear that the investigation (by the
CBI as recommended in this report), shall have the same meaning as provided
in Clause 2 (h) of the Cr.P.C whereas the terms “inquiry” or “preliminary
investigation” should be eschewed and the only two terms used should be
“preliminary inquiry” (by the Lokpal) on the one hand and “investigation” (by
the CBI), on the other.
(b) the term preliminary inquiry should be used instead of the term inquiry in
clause 2(1)(e) and it should be clarified therein that it refers to preliminary
inquiry done by the Lokpal in terms of Chapters VI and VII of the Lokpal Bill,
2011 and does not mean or refer to the inquiry mentioned in Section 2(g) of the
Cr.P.C.
(c) the term “investigation” alone should be used while eschewing terms like
“preliminary investigation” and a similar definitional provision may be inserted
after Clause 2(1)(e) to state that the term investigation shall have the same
meaning as defined in Clause 2(h) of the Cr.P.c.
(d) Similar changes would have to be made in all other clauses in the Lokpal Bill,
2011, one example of which includes Clause-14.
12.36 (B) There are several parts of Clause 23 of the 2011 Bill, including Clauses 23(4),
23(5), 23(6), 23(9) and 23(11) which require an opportunity of being heard to be given
to the public servant during the course of the preliminary inquiry i.e. the threshold
proceedings before the Lokpal in the sense discussed above. After deep consideration,
the Committee concludes that it is unknown to criminal law to provide for hearing
to the accused at the stage of preliminary inquiry by the appropriate authority i.e.
Lokpal or Lokayukta in this case. Secondly, the preliminary inquiry is the stage of
verification of basic facts regarding the complaint, the process of filtering out false,
frivolous, fictitious and vexatious complaints and the general process of seeing that
there is sufficient material to indicate the commission of cognizable offences to
justify investigation by the appropriate investigating agency. If the material available
in the complaint at the stage of its verification through the preliminary inquiry is
fully disclosed to the accused, a large part of the entire preliminary inquiry, later
investigation, prosecution and so on, may stand frustrated or irreversibly prejudiced
at the threshold. Thirdly, and most importantly, the preliminary inquiry is being
provided as a threshold filter in favour of the accused and is being entrusted to an
extremely high authority like the Lokpal, created after a rigorous selection
procedure. Other agencies like the CBI also presently conduct preliminary inquiries
but do not hear or afford natural justice to the accused during that process.
Consequently the Committee recommends that all references in Clause 23 or
elsewhere in the Lokpal Bill, 2011 to hearing of the accused at the preliminary
inquiry stage should be deleted.
12.36 (BB) Since the Committee has recommended abolition of the personal hearing
process before the Lokpal during the preliminary inquiry, the Committee deems it

73
fit and proper to provide for the additional safeguard that the decision of the Lokpal
at the conclusion of the preliminary inquiry to refer the matter further for
investigation to the CBI, shall be taken by a Bench of the Lokpal consisting of not
less than 3 Members which shall decide the issue regarding reference to
investigation, by a majority out of these three.
12.36 (C) Naturally, it should also be made clear that the accused is entitled to a full
hearing before charges are framed. Some stylistic additions like referring to the
charge sheet “if any” (since there may or may not be a chargesheet) may also be
added to Clause 23(6). Consequently, Clauses like 23(7) and other similar clauses
contemplating proceedings open to public hearing must also be deleted.
12.36 (D) Clause 23(8) would have to be suitably modified to provide that the appropriate
investigation period for the appropriate investigating agency i.e. CBI in the present
case, should normally be within six months with only one extension of a further six
months, for special reasons. Reference in Clause 23(8) to “inquiry” creates highly
avoidable confusion and it should be specified that the meanings assigned to inquire
and investigate should be as explained above.
12.36 (E) The Committee also believes that there may be several exigencies during the
course of both preliminary inquiry and investigation which may lead to a violation of
the 30 days or six months periods respectively specified in Clause 27(2) and 23(8).
The Committee believes that it cannot be the intention of the law that where acts
and omissions by the accused create an inordinate delay in the preliminary inquiry
and/or other factors arise which are entirely beyond the control of the Lokpal, the
accused should get the benefit or that the criminal trial should terminate. For that
purpose it is necessary to insert a separate and distinct provision which states that
Clauses 23(2), 23(8) or other similar time limit clauses elsewhere in the Lokpal Bill,
2011, shall not automatically give any benefit or undue advantage to the accused and
shall not automatically thwart or terminate the trial.
12.36 (F) Clause 23(10) also needs to be modified. Presently, it states in general terms the
discretion to hold or not to hold preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal for reasons to be
recorded in writing. However, this may lead to allegations of pick and choose and of
arbitrariness and selectivity. The Committee believes that Clause 23(10) should be
amended to provide for only one definition viz., that preliminary inquiry may be
dispensed with only  in trap cases and must be held in all other cases. Even under
the present established practice, the CBI dispenses with preliminary inquiry only in
a trap case for the simple reason that the context of the trap case itself constitutes
preliminary verification of the offence and no further preliminary inquiry is
necessary. Indeed, for the trap cases, Section 6 A (ii) of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946 also dispenses with the provision of preliminary inquiries.
For all cases other than the trap cases, the preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal must
be a non-dispensable necessity.
12.36 (G) Clause 23(11) also needs to be modified/deleted since, in this Report, it is
proposed that it is the CBI which conducts the investigation which covers and
includes the process of filing the charge sheet and closure report.
12.36 (H) Similarly, Clause 23 (12) (b) would have to be deleted, in view of the conclusion
hereinabove regarding the absence of any need to provide natural justice to the
accused at the stage of preliminary inquiry. Clause 23(14) is also unusually widely
worded. It does not indicate as to whom the Lokpal withhold records from.

74
Consequently that cannot be a general blanket power given to the Lokpal to withhold
records from the accused or from the investigating agency. Indeed, that would be
unfair, illegal and unconstitutional since it would permit selectivity as also suppress
relevant information. The clause, therefore, needs to be amended.
12.36 (I) The case of the Lokpal initiating action suo motu , requires separate comment. In
a sense, the preliminary inquiry in the case of a Lokpal suo motu  action becomes
superfluous since the same body ( i.e.  Lokpal) which initiates the complaint, is
supposed to do a preliminary inquiry. This may, however, not be as anomalous as it
sounds since even under the present structure, the CBI, or indeed the local police,
does both activities i.e. suo motu  action as also preliminary screening/inquiry. The
Committee was tempted to provide for another body to do preliminary inquiry in
cases where the Lokpal initiates suo motu action, but in fact no such body exists and
it would create great multiplicity and logistical difficulty in creating and managing so
many bodies. Hence the Committee concludes that in cases of suo motu  action by
Lokpal, a specific provision must provide that that part of the Lokpal which initiates
the suo motu  proposal, should be scrupulously kept insulated from any part of the
preliminary inquiry process following upon such suo motu  initiation. It must be
further provided that the preliminary inquiry in cases of suo motu  initiation must be
done by a Lokpal Bench of not less than five Members and these should be
unconnected with those who do the suo motu  initiation.
12.37 These recommendations also prevent the Lokpal from becoming a single institution
fusing unto itself the functions of complainant, preliminary inquirer, full
investigator and prosecutor. It increases objectivity and impartiality in the criminal
investigative process and precludes the charge of creating an unmanageable
behemoth like Lokpal, while diminishing the possibility of abuse of power by the
Lokpal itself.
12.38 These recommendations also have the following advantages:
(i) The CBI’s apprehension, not entirely baseless, that it would become a Hamlet
without a Prince of Denmark if its Anti-Corruption Wing was hived off to the
Lokpal, would be taken care of.
(ii) It would be unnecessary to make CBI or CVC a Member of the Lokpal body
itself.
(iii) The CBI would not be subordinate to the Lokpal nor its espirit de corps  be
adversely affected; it would only be subject to general superintendence of
Lokpal. It must be kept in mind that the CBI is an over 60 year old body, which
has developed a certain morale and espirit de corps , a particular culture and set
of practices, which should be strengthened and improved, rather than merely
subsumed or submerged within a new or nascent institution, which is yet to take
root. Equally, the CBI, while enhancing its autonomy and independence, cannot
be left on auto pilot.
(iv) The CVC would retain a large part of its disciplinary and functional role for non
Lokpal personnel and regarding misconduct while not being subordinate to the
LokpaI. However, for Lokpal covered personnel and issues, including the role of
the CBI, the CVC would have no role.
(v) Mutatis mutandis  statutory changes in the Lokpal Bill, the CVC and the CBI
Acts and in related legislation, is accordingly recommended.

75
12.39 After the Lokpal has cleared the stage for further investigation, the matter should
proceed to the CBI. This stage of the investigation must operate with the following
specific enumerated statutory principles and provisions:
(A) On the merits of the investigation in any case, the CBI shall not be answerable
or liable to be monitored either by the Administrative Ministry or by the Lokpal.
This is also fully consistent with the established jurisprudence on the subject
which makes it clear that the merits of the criminal investigation cannot be
gone into or dealt with even by the superior courts. However, since in practise
it has been observed in the breach, it needs to be unequivocally reiterated as a
statutory provision, in the proposed Lokpal Act, a first in India.
(B) The CBI shall, however, continue to be subject to the general supervisory
superintendence of the Lokpal. This shall be done by adding a provision as exists
today in the CVC Act which shall now apply to the Lokpal in respect of the CBI.
Consequently, the whole of the Section 8 (1) (not Section 8 (2) ) of the CVC Act
should be included in the Lokpal Bill to provide for the superintendence power
of the Lokpal over the CBI.
12.40 Correspondingly, reference in Section 4 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act
to the  CVC would have to be altered to refer to the Lokpal.
12.41 At this stage, the powers of the CBI would further be strengthened and enhanced by
clarifying explicitly in the Lokpal Bill that all types of prior sanctions/terms or
authorizations, by whatever name called, shall not be applicable to Lokpal covered
persons or prosecutions. Consequently, the provisions of Section 6 (A) of the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and
Section 197 of the IPC or any other pr ovision of the law, wherever applicable, fully
or partially, will stand repealed and rendered inoperative in respect of Lokpal and
Lokayukta prosecutions, another first in India. Clause 27 of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 is
largely consistent with this but the Committee recommends that it should further
clarify that Section 6 A of the DSPE Act shall also not apply in any manner to
proceedings under the proposed Act. The sanction requirement, originating as a
salutary safeguard against witch hunting has, over the years, as applied by the
bureaucracy itself, degenerated into a refuge for the guilty, engendering either
endless delay or obstructing all meaningful action. Moreover, the strong filtering
mechanism at the stage of preliminary inquiry proposed in respect of the Lokpal, is
a more than adequate safeguard, substituting effectively for the sanction
requirement. Elsewhere, this Report recommends that all sanction requirements
should be eliminated even in respect of non Lokpal covered personnel.
12.42 The previous two paragraphs if implemented, would achieve genuine and declared
statutory independence of investigation for the first time for the CBI.
12.43 The main investigation, discussed in the previous few paragraphs, to be conducted by
the CBI, necessarily means the stage from which it is handed over to the CBI by
the Lokpal, till the stage that the CBI files either a chargesheet or a closure report
under Section 173 of the CrPC. However, one caveat needs to be added at this stage.
The CBI’s chargesheet or closure report must be filed after the approval by the
Lokpal and, if necessary, suitable changes may have to be made in this regard to
Section 173 Cr PC and other related provisions.
12.44 The aforesaid independence of the CBI is reasonable and harmonizes well with the
supervisory superintendence of the Lokpal in the proposed Lokpal Bill, which is now

76
exercised by CVC under Section 8 (1) of the CVC Act. The Committee recommends
the above provision, suitably adapted to be applicable in the relationship between the
Lokpal and the CBI.
12.45 The next stage of the criminal process would go back to the Lokpal with full powers
of prosecution on the basis of the investigation by the CBI. The following points in
this respect are noteworthy:
• Clause 15 in Chapter IV of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 already contains adequate
provisions in this regard and they can, with some modifications, be retained and
applied.
• The Committee’s recommendations create, again for the first time, a fair
demarcation between independent investigation and independent prosecution by
two distinct bodies, which would considerably enhance impartiality, objectivity
and the quality of the entire criminal process.
• It creates, for the first time in India, an independent prosecution wing, under
the general control and superintendence of the Lokpal, which, hopefully will
eventually develop into a premium, independent autonomous Directorate of
Public Prosecution with an independent prosecution service (under the Lokpal
institution). The Committee also believes that this structure would not in any
manner diminish or dilute the cooperative and harmonious interface between
the investigation and prosecution processes since the former, though conducted
by the CBI, comes under the supervisory jurisdiction of the Lokpal.
12.46 The next stage is that of adjudication and punishment, if any, which shall, as before,
be done by a special Judge. The Committee considers that it would be desirable to
use the nomenclature of ‘Lokpal Judge’ (or Lokayukta Judge in respect of states)
under the new dispensation. However, this is largely a matter of nomenclature and
existing provisions in the Lokpal Bill, 2011 in Chapter IX are adequate, though they
need to be applied, with modifications.
12.47 The aforesaid integrates all the stages of a criminal prosecution for an offence of
corruption but still leaves open the issue of departmental proceedings in respect of
the same accused.
12.48 The Committee agrees that for the Lokpal covered personnel and issues, it would be
counter-productive, superfluous and unnecessary to have the CVC to play any role
in departmental proceedings. Such a role would be needlessly duplicative and
superfluous. For such matters, the Lokpal should be largely empowered to do all
those things which the CVC presently does, but with some significant changes,
elaborated below.
12.49 Clauses 28 and 29 of the Lokpal Bill are adequate in this regard but the following
changes are recommended:
(i) The Lokpal or Lokayukta would be the authority to recommend disciplinary
proceedings for all Lokpal or Lokayukta covered persons.
(ii) The CVC would exercise jurisdiction for all non Lokpal covered persons in
respect of disciplinary proceedings.
(iii) The CBI would similarly continue to exercise its existing powers under the
CVC’s superintendence for all non Lokpal personnel and proceedings.

77
(iv) Departmental action must, as the law today stands, comply with the over arching
mandate of Article 311 of the Indian Constitution. Dissatisfaction or objection to
the practical operation of Article 311, fully understandable and indeed justifiable,
does not permit or impel us to ignore the existence of Article 311, until altered.
If there is consensus outside the Committee on amending Article 311, it must
be amended as elaborated and recommended by the Committee in paragraph
12.49. However, absent such a consensus, the passage of the Lokpal Bill need
not be held up on that account and hence the present report makes
recommendations on the basis of the continuance of Article 311. If, however, it
is amended as per paragraph 12.49, the proposed Lokpal Act can easily be
modified to reflect such changes.
(v) It may also be remembered that the Lokpal itself does not conduct the
departmental proceedings. For the law to provide for Lokpal to conduct the
entire departmental proceedings itself, would be to put a humungous and
unworkable burden on the institution.
(vi) Therefore, the power to take departmental action whether in the case of
bureaucrats or in the case of Ministers as provided in Clauses 28 and 29 of the
Lokpal Bill 2011, are largely appropriate.
(vii) The Committee is informed that suspension of a delinquent officer during his
criminal prosecution is virtually automatic in practice. However, the Committee
feels the need to emphasize that a specific provision be added in Chapter VII
making it clear that once any bureaucrat ( viz. group A or group B officer) as
covered in the proposed Lokpal Bill is under investigation and the Lokpal makes
a recommendation that such a person be suspended, such suspension should
mandatorily be carried out unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing by a
majority out of a group of 3 persons not below the rank of Ministers of State
belonging to the Ministries of Home, Personnel and the relevant administrative
Ministry of the delinquent officer, opine to the contrary. 
Such suspension on
Lokpal recommendation does not violate Article 311 in any manner. Refusal by
the aforesaid Committee of three provides a check and balance qua possibly
unreasonable Lokpal recommendations. The reference is to three high
functionaries of three Ministries and not to the Administrative Ministry alone
since it is frequently found in practice that the Administrative Ministry’s
responses alone may seek to preserve the status quo on account of vested
interests arising from the presence of the delinquent officer in that
Administrative Ministry.
(viii) There cannot be a counterpart suspension provision in respect of MPs or
Ministers or the like, but an explicit clause may be added to the existing Clause
29 that the Presiding Officer of the relevant House in the case of MPs and
Prime Minister in the case of a member of the Council of Ministers shall record
a note in writing indicating the action being taken in regard to the Lokpal’s
recommendations or the reasons for not taking such action.
(ix) Wherever otherwise applicable, in respect of the details of the departmental
inquiry, the provisions of Article 311 would, unless altered and subject to Paras
D above and 12.49 below, continue to apply.
12.50 The Committee strongly pleads and recommends that the provisions of Article 311
require a close and careful re-look to ensure that reasonable protection is given to

78
bureaucrats for the independent and fair discharge of their functions but that the
enormous paraphernalia of procedural rules and regulations which have become a
major obstacle in the taking of genuine and legitimate departmental action against
delinquent officers, be eliminated. The Committee notes with concern and with
growing apprehension that serious and high level/big ticket corruption has
increased exponentially since independence at all levels in the Lokpal proposed
categories of personnel. In particular, bureaucratic corruption has been relatively
ignored or underplayed in the context of the excessive media and civil society focus
on political corruption, coupled with the doctrine of civil service anonymity, which
this country imported from our former colonial masters. Hence, the substantial
modification of Article 311 or, indeed, its replacement by a much lesser statutory
(not constitutional counterpart) should be taken up and implemented at the
earliest. It may be added that what requires to be looked into is not the mere text
of Article 311 but the context which has grown around it, through an undesirably
large number of statutory and non-statutory rules, procedures and regulations
coupled with huge common law jurisprudence over the last 6 decades. It is
universally believed that the aforesaid has, in practice, converted Article 311, from
a reasonable and salutary safeguard to a haven for those indulging in mal-
administration and/corruption with no fear of consequences and the certainty of
endless delay. The fact that Article 311 had been given constitutional and not mere
statutory status is also responsible for its largely unchanged character over the last
six plus decades.
12.51 Though not strictly within the purview of the Lokpal Bill 2011 itself, the Committee
also recommends that CVC’s advice in respect of departmental action to be taken by
the relevant department in case of 
non-Lokpal covered personnel must, by a suitable
amendment to the CVC Act, be made binding to the extent that, unless for reasons
to be recorded by a majority out of the same joint group as aforesaid, comprising 3
persons not below the rank of Ministers of State belonging respectively to the
Ministries of Home Affairs, Personnel and the Administrative Ministry to which the
delinquent officer belongs, states that CVC advice be not followed, such CVC advice
shall be binding.
12.52 The Committee has deliberated long and hard on whether it can or should go to the
extent of suggesting changes in the selection procedure of the CBI chief. Presently,
the CBI chief is appointed by the Government on the recommendation of a
Committee consisting of the CVC as Chairperson, Vigilance Commissioner,
Secretary, Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs and Secretary of the
Administrative Ministry (in this case the Ministry of Personnel) [see Section 4A of
the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946]. Section 8 (2) of the 1946 Act
further provides for a mandatory input in the selection of a new. Director to be made
by the outgoing Director and also enjoins upon the Committee, in Section 8 (3), to
make recommendations for a panel of officers on the basis of seniority, integrity and
experience in the investigation of anti-corruption cases, necessarily belonging to the
Indian Police Services.
12.53 Interestingly, Section 4 C of the same 1946 Act provides for the same Committee to
make recommendations for all appointments as also extension or curtailment of
tenure of all officers above the level of Superintendent of Police in the CBI.
12.54 It is thus clear that it is not correct to suggest that the Central Government has
absolute discretion in appointing the CBI Dir ector. After the Vineet Narain vs. Union

79
of India judgment* by the Apex Court, significant changes were brought into the
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. In 2003 (by Act 45 of 2003) providing
for the aforesaid independent and autonomous regime for selection and appointment
of CBI Director. The Central Vigilance Commissioner who heads the selection and
recommendation process is itself a high statutory authority under a separate
enactment called the Central Vigilance Commission Act of 2003 which, in turn in
Section 4, obliges the Government to appoint the CVC on the basis of a
recommendation of a high powered Committee comprising the Prime Minster, the
Home Minister and the leader of opposition in the Lok Sabha. It is, therefore,
erroneous to brush aside the existing system as merely involving absolute power/
discretion to select Government favourites as CBI Director.
12.55 Furthermore, the Committee believes that it would neither be proper nor desirable
for the Committee to go into and suggest fundamental statutory alterations to the
procedure for selection and appointment of CBI Director, which appears, nowhere,
directly or indirectly, to be a subject referred for the consideration of this
Committee. Collateral recommendations of this nature by  a side wind should, in the
opinion of this Committee, be avoided, especially since significant statutory changes
have been brought in with respect to the appointment of the CBI Director less than
8 years ago.
* 1996(2) scc 199.

80
CHAPTER-13
CONSTITUTIONAL STATUS : IF, HOW AND HOW MUCH
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
13.1 On 26th August, 2011, Shri Rahul Gandhi, Member of Parliament, in the course of his
speech in the Lok Sabha, strongly advocated constitutional status to the institution of
Lokpal. He said:–
“An effective Lokpal law is  only one element in the legal framework to combat corruption.
The Lokpal institution alone cannot be a substitute for a comprehensive anti-corruption
code. A set of effective laws is required. Laws that address the following critical issues are
necessary to stand alongside the Lokpal initiative: Government funding of elections and
political parties; transparency in public procurement; proper regulation of sectors that fuel
corruption like land and mining.... We speak of a statutory Lokpal but our discussions cease
at the point of its accountability to the people and the risk that it might itself become
corrupt. Madam Speaker, why not elevate the debate? Let us make it further and fortify
the Lokpal Bill by making it a constitutional body like the Election Commission of India.
I feel the time has come for us to seriously consider this idea. Madam Speaker, laws and
institutions are not enough. A representative, inclusive and accessible democracy is central
to fighting corruption. Individuals have brought our country great gains. They have
galvanized the people in the cause of freedom and development. However, we must not
weaken the democratic process. This process is often lengthy and lumbering. But it is so in
order to be inclusive and fair”.
1
13.2 The suggestion set off  an intense debate on the subject. Many argued that the giving of
constitutional status to the Lokpal would immensely enhance its stature. Doubts and
questions were, however, raised about its feasibility and, more importantly, the possible
inherent details involved in the process of giving constitutional status. The debate was
carried on at several levels and fora including, within Parliament and in the Press, in this
Parliamentary Committee and in diverse sections of civil society. The Committee also
received specific inputs on the subject from diverse sources. This chapter discusses pros
and cons and makes final recommendations in this regard.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
13.3 The major points raised in the memoranda received by the Committee are:-
• Lokpal needs to be a constitutional authority, like the ECI or CAG rather than a
statutory body, so that it has higher stature and increased legitimacy.
• As the ECI has powers to transfer officers which it deems would hinder the conduct
of free and fair elections, the Lokpal should also have complete powers to transfer
officers who would be prejudicial to the case and Government ‘should’ comply with
the same. Hence, Lokpal should be a constitutional authority in these regards.
80
1Statement made by Shri Rahul Gandhi in the Lok Sabha on 26 th August, 2011.

81
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY WITNESSES
13.4 Justice J.S. Verma, while placing his considered views before the Committee, stated:–
“…But we are trying to say not a single word except to provide a declaration that there
could be a constitutional body and once this Constitution Amendment Bill is passed so  that
it becomes a part of the Constitution. Then, there are several other implications which have
got to be taken note of. This is  something which cannot be ordinarily amended like an
ordinary statute by some simple majority. It would be difficult. Secondly, if it becomes a
basic feature and, therefore, a part of the basic structure which personally, I think, my
friend agrees, ultimately it will become a part of the indestructable basic structure of the
Constitution which any kind of change in the political equations or formulations, it would
be beyond amending power even of Parliament.
Article 253  of the Constitution clearly provides that for the purpose of implementing an
international treaty, convention, etc., the Parliament is  entitled to enact for the whole or
any part of the territory. We have already a precedent. The Protection of Human Rights Act,
1993 was enacted by the Parliament, We deal with not only the Constitution and the
National Human Rights Commission but also the State Human Rights Commission. It is  for
the whole …”
13.5 The Chairman, Bar Council of India, while speaking on this topic, observed:–
“…our view is  this should be a constitutional body in line with the Election Commission.
The structure, functions and jurisdictions may be left to be provided by a parliamentary
legislation like the one we have presently. Our first submission would be, please make it
a constitutional body…”
13.6 Shri Shanti Bhushan, while appearing before the Committee, said:–
“…My first point is about the constitutional amendment. We have no objection in this
regard. In fact, we would welcome a constitutional amendment to give a constitutional
status to the Lokpal, subject to two conditions. One, Mr. Seshan had suggested a Bill
which would have involved ratification by fifty per cent of the State Assemblies because
it was altering the legislative list. It is  not required in this case. No alteration in the
legislative list is required. Therefore, it must be ensured –  if that is going to be
constitutional amendment Bill- that it will be passed by the Parliament itself without
the requirement of being sent to the State Legislative Assemblies. Of course, it will have
to be ensured, and I have no doubt, that two-third majority of those present and voting
would be available, particularly after the Uttarakhand experiment. When Uttarakhand,
where all the major parties are present, has already put their seal of approval on all
these provisions, 1 don’t see any difficulty with the political parties, here, at the Centre,
also endorse all these suggestions. One thing more, it should not be a mere skeleton
Bill. If it has to be a constitutional amendment Bill, it should not merely provide that
State Legislatures and the Lok Sabha would be competent to enact a Bill. The
constitutional amendment Bill must itself make all the provisions so that as soon as the
constitutional amendment Bill is adopted all the provisions –  the powers of the Lokpal,
the functions of the Lokpal, the authority of the Lokpal –  get passed by this
constitutional amendment alone. There is  no problem in doing it. It can be done and
it should be done…”
13.7 Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah and Justice J.S. Verma, in the memorandum submitted to the
Committee, has enumerated the advantages of making the Lokpal as a constitutional body,
as follows :–

82
1. “The demand is  for a “strong” body against corruption. The strongest body that can
be created by law is a body established under the Constitution. A purely statutory body
will be weaker than a Constitutional body for the following reasons.
2. The independence of the proposed anti-corruption body (on matters such as its
mandate, powers, appointment and removal, functions and accountability), will be
more secure and tamper proof if entrenched in the Constitution than if placed in an
ordinary legislation. A simple majority can amend ordinary laws. Constitutional
provisions may be amended only by constitutional amendment (2/3rd majority of those
voting plus, in specified cases, approval of 50% of State legislatures).
3. A constitutional body will protected from challenges in a court of law that its mandate,
powers and functions are in conflict with the Constitution or with any other statute-
Constitution provisions establishing a constitutional body may be challenged only on
the ground that it is  in conflict with the “basic structure” of the Constitution.
4. A Constitutional amendment will provide a basis for a unified and comprehensive
national statutory frame-work for combating corruption at the national, state and local
level. This would not be possible in an ordinary legislation become Parliament may
generally enact ordinary legislation only on subjects within the Union and Concurrent
Lists. However, when Parliament amends the Constitution it is not “making law” - it
is exercising “constituent power”; exercise of constituent power is not restricted to the
Union list or barred from matter in the State list.
In this particular case it may be possible for Parliament to make law on matters in
the State list on the basis that it is doing so  to implement India’ s obligations under
the UN Convention Against Corruption. This may, however, be subject to challenge and
will require all provisions to be based on obligations under the UN Convention,
directly or indirectly.
5. As a matter of practical reality, experience shows that constitutional bodies enjoy
greater immunity from extraneous influences than statutory bodies. Courts are more
vigilant in protection the independence of these bodies.
6. Again as a practical matter, Constitutional bodies enjoy higher status than bodies
established under statutes. A proposal to establish a statute against corruption betrays
a lack of the highest level of commitment to the issue.
7. Constitutional provisions set out the most important normative concerns of society. By
establishing a Constitutional body to fight corruption, this country will be establishing
its civilizational commitment to uphold probity in public life.”
13.8 The written note submitted by Justice J.S. Verma states as under:–
“…a constitutional amendment would not attract the Proviso to Sub-Article (2)  of Article
368 of the Constitution, and, therefore, it would not require ratification by the States …
As would be evident on a plain reading of Article 368(2),  the only requirement is for it
to be passed by the majority of total membership of each House and by a majority of not
less than two-thirds of members present and voting.
With the unanimous demand in the people supported by unanimity of all political parties
in the Parliament to constitute a strong Lokpal/Lokayuktas, there can be no doubt of
unanimous support for a constitutional body, which would obviously be the strongest
visualized in the constitutional scheme. Once the constitutional amendment is made, it

83
would become a part of the indestructible ‘basic structure’, immune from any future attempt
to erode its status. The exercise for the accompanying consequent legislation providing the
details dealing with the contentious issues can continue simultaneously, since it must follow
to complete the process.
There is no occasion to doubt the sincerity of the commitment and resolve of the people
and the political will in this behalf Therefore, there can be no risk of any delay in this
method .
The directive principle of State policy in Article 51  (c), as a principle fundamental in
governance is available as an aid. (Article 51 states: “The State shall endeavour to... (c)
foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised
peoples with one another...“.)  There is, therefore, no need to look for any additional
support for the legislative competence of the Parliament to legislate on the subject for the
whole territory of India.”
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
13.9 Two former Chief Justices of India gave detailed evidence and submitted drafts of the
proposed constitutional amendments. The obvious advantage of giving constitutional status
to the Lokpal institution would be, firstly, that its status would be immeasurably enhanced;
secondly, existence or essence of the institution would not be liable to be tinkered with as
a mere statutory enactment would be liable to be dealt with; thirdly, it would entrench
certain basic principles and ideas and protect them from the vicissitudes of transient
majorities, thereby making them more sacrosanct and; fourthly, the moral and legal effect
of the Lokpal decisions would carry considerable enhanced legitimacy and moral and legal
authority as a constitutional body.
13.10 The argument regarding possibility of delay was not real or, in, any case, not substantial.
Those desirous of having an effective Lokpal institution could hardly complain that it was
being given constitutional status. The constitutional amendment could be introduced not only
in theory but in practice on the very same day as the Lokpal (Statutory Bill) is introduced
in Parliament and there was no reason to suppose that the Constitutional Amendment Bill
would not be passed on the same day and the same time as the statute. Indeed, it would
be difficult to conceive of a situation as to any political party opposing the constitutional
amendment while supporting; in principle, the creation of Lokpal through a statute.
13.11 Shri Shanti Bhushan’s suggestion that if there has to be constitutional amendment, virtually
the entire Bill must be put within the Constitution, was felt both unnecessary and
impracticable. The constitutional provisions are supposed to contain immutable principles or
deals with basic principles not intended to be subject to frequent change. It will be self-
defeating to transpose the entire Lokpal as a constitutional amendment to the Constitution
itself, and that would considerably diminish its flexibility, apart from being impractical and
totally unnecessary.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
13.12 The Committee, therefore, recommends:–
(a) The institution of Lokpal must be given constitutional status by inserting into
the Constitution by way of constitutional amendment certain basic principles
about the Lokpal and leaving the details in the new proposed statute on which
this Committee is opining.

84
(b) One practical, reasonable and legally valid model would be for the Government
to consider the model and set of provisions asked for by the Committee and
presented in the evidence to the Committee as a draft constitutional amendment
by two former Chief Justices of India. That draft is enclosed herewith as
Annexure ‘F’ and is self-explanatory.
(c) This constitutional amendment does not require ratification by not less than half
of the State Legislatures since it does not seek to make any change in any of
the provisions listed in the second proviso to Article 368 (2) of the Indian
Constitution.
(d) The constitutional amendment should, as reflected in the enclosed Annexure ‘F’
be a set of basic principles for the Lokpal as also provide for the basic set up
of the Lokayuktas. Both these provisions, proposed in the enclosed draft,
propose Part XV A and Articles 329(C) and 329(D), as enabling, empowering and
permissive provisions and authorize and empower the appropriate legislature to
make proper laws, mutatis mutandis , for Lokpal at the Centre and for
Lokayuktas at the State.
(e) Such a constitutional status would not only considerably enhance the stature,
legal and moral authority of the Lokpal institution but would make interference
and tinkering in these basic principles not subject to the vicissitudes of ordinary
or transient majorities. Over a period of time, it is likely that these principles
would develop into a set of immutable principles and, possibly, even become part
of basic structure of the Constitution rendering the existence of the Lokpal and
its basic features un-amendable even by a constitutional amendment.
(f) Apprehensions regarding delay are misplaced. The constitutional amendment bill
would be much shorter than the statutory bill for the new proposed Lokpal and
can be passed on the same day and at the same time as the latter, though by
a different majority. It is inconceivable that while parties are in favour of the
institution of Lokpal in principle, as a statutory body, parties would not agree
with equal alacrity for the passage of a constitutional amendment bill.
(g) The suggestion that the entire statutory bill should be transposed as a
constitutional amendment into the Constitution is untenable and impracticable.
That would eliminate flexibility and would require a constitutional amendment
for the smallest future change. Moreover, the Constitution does not and is not
intended to provide for nitty gritty operational details. It should be and is
intended to be a declaration of general and basic principles which, in turn,
enable and empower formal Legislation, which in turn would take care of the
details.
(h) An easy or casual repeal or the entire Lokpal scheme would not be possible once
it is constitutionally entrenched.
(i) Similarly, there would be no option for the federal or State Legislatures not to
have a Lokpal or a Lokayukta at all since the constitutional mandate would be
to the contrary.
(j) Contextually, the issues and some of the suggestions in this Chapter may
overlap with and should, therefore, be read in conjunction with Chapter 7 of this
report. Though the Committee has already opined in Chapter 4 of this Report
here that the issues of  grievance redressal should be dealt with in a separate

85
legislation, the Committee hereby also strongly recommends that there should
be a similar declaration either in the same Chapter of the Lokpal or in a
separate Chapter proposed to be added in the Indian Constitution, giving the
same’ constitutional status to the citizens grievances and redressal machinery.
(k) This recommendation also reflects the genuine and deep concern of this
Committee about the need, urgency, status and importance of a citizen’s charter/
grievance machinery and the Committee believes that the giving of the aforesaid
constitutional status to this machinery would go a long way in enhancing its
efficacy and in providing a healing touch to the commonman.
(l) Furthermore, the Committee believes that this recommendation herein is also
fully consistent with the letter and spirit of para 1.8 above viz. the conclusions
of the Minister of Finance in the Lower House recorded in para 1.8 above.

86
CHAPTER-14
THE JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS OF LOKPAL :
PRIVATE NGOs, CORPORATES AND MEDIA
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
14.1 There was an intense debate in the Committee on whether to include purely private NGOs,
corporations, corporate entities and media under the institution of Lokpal being proposed in
this Report and, if so, to what extent and, if not, why not.
14.2 A large number of Members, cutting across party lines, felt that the proposed Bill on the
Lokpal pending before this Committee would, at best, be a partial and incomplete measure
since it did not police and regulate in respect of corruption, large segments of society,
especially private NGOs, corporate entities and media. It was felt that for the last six
decades, the focus had been only on policing and regulating the political classes and, to a
lesser extent, the bureaucracy, in respect of issues relating to corruption. It was strongly
believed that a substantial slice of society should not be excluded from such regulatory
purview and that the entire gamut of ‘private’ corruption (in the sense of corruption not
involving the political class or bureaucrats) with all its attendant features and facets, is also
required to be dealt with by an effective legal regime.
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
14.3 The memoranda received by the Committee carried the following suggestions/observations:–
• Since media is the fourth pillar of democracy, it should be brought under the purview
of Lokpal.
• The aspect of paid news should also be covered under the Lokpal Bill.
• Office bearers of NGOs and movements that do not receive any Government funds
cannot be treated as “public servants”.
• Jurisdiction of Lokpal should be extended to societies/associations/trusts that are
constituted for religious purposes.
• Large corporate houses & activities of corporate lobbyists should be brought under the
scanner of Lokpal.
• PSUs should be brought under the ambit of Lokpal.
• Only Government supported NGOs to be brought under Lokpal.
• Consequent tangible & intangible losses to the nation should also be included under the
Bill.
• Powerful media houses, NGOs, corporate bodies, organizations & institutions, because
of their clout and their ability to manipulate public opinion in a way that suits their
86

87
interests need to be dealt separately & effectively when an individual complaints
against them for the corrupt practices employed by them. By including them in the
ambit of a legislation like Lokpal, a common man will be provided with a level playing
field to take on the might of these bodies engaged in corrupt practices, just as it would
provide people the same to take on the might of the State.
• Only NGOs and firms that are funded by Govt. should be brought within the purview
of Lokpal.
• All NGOs, with which any public servant is associated in their management, should be
brought under the ambit of Lokpal Bill and “acts of corruption” in the definition clause
should include the acts of omissions and omissions of public servants, in relation to
management of any society/trust/any other institution, with which such public servant
may be associated in its management.
• The fundamental right to establish an independent association should not be curbed;
otherwise a lot of useful activity of the citizen for social benefit would be curtailed.
Further, ‘annual income’ criterion is arbitrary and violates Article 14 of the constitution.
• Second proviso to clause (g) of S.17 (1) is repugnant to good conscience and
morality. A free citizen would be subjected to ‘responsibility’ without any ‘power’ of
a public servant – ‘liability’ without rights and ‘culpability’ without an overt act is
prepositions. The proviso should be deleted.
• On the matter of covering the private sector, proposal is that PCA may be amended
appropriately to include ‘Where any private body, corporation or profit seeking entity
receives from any public authority any concession or dispensation, including but not
restricted to licences, subsidies, contracts, orders, quotas, allocations, clearances,
grants, etc, that is in violation of the law or of any prevailing rules, it would be
deemed to have indulged in corrupt practices unless it can show that it was
unreasonable to expect the corporation to know that a law or rule had been violated’.
• Corporate Corruption
(a) Provide for adequate punitive power in Lokpal Bill and the PC Act to address
corporate corruption.
(b) Definition of corruption be enlarged as per the recommendations of Fourth
Report of Second ARC.
(c) Increase the punishment for such offences including collusive bribery on the
lines of recommendations of Fourth Report of the Second ARC.
• Corruption by Private Party and Issue of recovery
(a) Fourth Report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission has a unique
suggestion in the form of a civil recovery law for fraud, which seeks to recover
5 times the amount of loss to the govt. exchequer caused by private parties.
This suggestion models itself on the unique law in the USA, called the false
claims Act/Lincoln Law. Not only does this law make the private party which
has committed the fraudulent act disgorge 3 times the damage to the exchequer,
but also legal costs, and the costs of investigation. In this law, public servants
cannot be tried; only private parties that knowingly over-bill the govt. or deny
revenue to the govt, or make false statements/certification to achieve the same
end. It is not a criminal, but a civil statute, so it does not require mens rea or
quid pro quo; only a ‘preponderance of evidence’, that the defendant acted

88
‘knowingly’ to defraud the government Since the objective of the law is not to
prove criminal guilt, but to make civil recoveries, and deter other fraudulent
actions, this reduction in the burden of proof makes sense. The law was borne
amidst heightened corruption during the American civil war, and due to its
success, has been made stronger today with amendments and supporting
legislation. One of the key aspects of this law is the concept of quit am . This
concept allows private citizens to approach a civil court and file claims on behalf
of the government If the fraud is proven, the citizen/whistleblowers stand to
gain upto 30% of the recoveries.
(b) The five times recovery of loss should be combined with banning of any
business with any aim of the Government of India for a period of five years.
If the company being investigated and tried in a civil court, is co-operative and
admits to wrong-doing as the civil suit is initiated, it should be allowed to settle
for damages not less than three times the loss to the .exchequer and can escape
the ban on business. Such civil recovery procedures become thereby equal to the
civil service/parliamentary disciplinary procedures as an intermediary punishment
whether or not a case is made for criminal offence under the PCA. Furthermore,
any violations of agreements with the government in terms of acquisition of land/
granting of subsidized government land/Government subsidies, such as private
hospitals that have obtained subsidized land and not treated poor patients for free
should also be subject to recoveries/damages under our version of the False
Claims Act.
• Windfall Profits Tax Act:-  In the UK, when North Sea oil was privatized, there was
a windfall profit to the private company because of unexpected rise in global oil prices.
Though the transaction was transparent and not tainted by corruption, a law was
enacted to recover windfall profits from monopoly and use of natural resources, which
are the nation’s asset. A similar law could be enacted to recover windfall profits on
account of monopoly like mines and minerals, or scarce and irreplaceable spectrum.
In such a law, the citizens could be empowered to fight qui-tam suits as in case of
False Claims Act. Such a legal provision, along with mandatory competitive bidding for
allocation of scarce national resources will significantly curb corruption.
14.4 The DoPT’s comments in this regard is :–
“...As regards the corruption by Corporate/MNCs and paid news of both print and electronic
media are concerned, it is stated that the scope of the Lokpal is to enquire into the
complaints of the alleged corruption against certain public functionaries. If MNCs and
Media are also to be covered under the Lokpal, in that case, the definition of the public
servant would be required to be modified to include such entities. In order to tackle
corruption by private parties, which include MNC and media, Ministry of Home Affairs, in
consultation with the States, is already examining amendment to the IPC. However, Clause
17(3) of the Bill provide that the Lokpal may inquire into any act or conduct of any person
other than those referred to in sub-section (1)  of Clause 17,  is such person is associated
with the allegation of corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.  The
Government has also introduced Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International Organisations, Bill, 2011 in the Lok Sabha. As far as the
conduct of MPs on the floor of  the House is concerned, they are already subject to Ethics
Committee of the respective House, and it would be desirable if the matter is left to the
respective House for appropriate action in this regard. For Media and Press, it is felt that
a separate mechanism, perhaps under the Press Council of  India, may be required. The
NGOs receiving Government funds or donations are covered.....

89
…It is  felt that the organisations who are receiving grants etc. from the Government should
be covered. Similarly, the NGOs which are getting donations from the public, are also
getting tax relief thereby, they are also indirectly funded by the Government, it is felt that
those organisations which are set up other than for religious purposes and are receiving
public donations, should come within the ambit of the Lokpal…”
14.5 The comments of CVC this regard are :–
“…While most of our anti-corruption efforts are focused more on the demand side of
corruption i e. punishing the public servants (the receiver of bribes) there is a need to
effectively address the equally culpable supply side (the bribe-givers) of corruption. United
Nationals Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC) and the Anti-corruption laws in most of
the countries focused more on penalising active bribery i.e. payment of bribes, largely
involving the private sector. The U.K.  Bribery Act, 2010 as well as the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Acts of the USA has strong provisions to punish companies who not only involve
in corrupt practices but also companies failing to  prevent corruption. Therefore, there is a
need to introduce strong regulatory frame-work for preventing and punishing corporate
corruption. Lok Pal could be best suited to address such supply side corporate corruption
and suitable amendments to  the Lok Pal Bill and the PC Act should be made
expeditiously…”
14.6 Shri Pratap Bhanu Mehta, in his written memorandum, has stated:–
“…The State has to balance to competing considerations. On the one hand, it has to ensure
that any organization that is funded by the State is subject to proper accountability. On the
other hand, it must not make civil society subject to pervasive State scrutiny and control
in a way that impinges on their autonomy.
In this light while I7(f) seems reasonable. 17(g) gives State a very wide latitude. It would
be advisable to retain 17(f) and drop 17 (g).
17 (g)  is also discriminatory. It allows the State to scrutinize any organization that receives
public donations. But at the same time, it exempts private companies that might “charge”
for conducting the very same activity.
17 (g)  also would apply to political parties. It is not clear if is desirable to treat political
parties as if they are the State.
The sense in which a private citizen or an NGO can be corrupt needs to be defined.
Offences in the Prevention of Corruption Act relate to taking or abetting the taking of
gratification. What counts as an offence for a private citizen of NGO?  Embezzlement etc.
are covered by a variety of laws. For example, there is a real danger that in case of
research organizations for instance, the State could simply rule that a particular  position
taken by a research organization constitutes an act of corruption merely on account of who
funded it. This worry may also apply to institutions covered under 17  (f). So in the absence
of any clear definition of corruption for in the case of private citizens, there is real danger
of the Act posing a threat to valuable freedoms in civil society.
In light of the above —-  and for other practical considerations —-  it will be advisable to
keep NGO’ s out of the purview of the Lokpal. They are subject to other accountability
mechanisms…”
III. SUMMARY OF 
DEPOSITION GIVEN BY THE WITNESSES
14.7 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan stated as under:–

90
“…Then, Mr. Chairman, there are issues relating to corporates and NGOs. We cannot ignore
them altogether. There are, obviously, some philosophical issues and also practical issues.
The philosophical issue being rights cannot exist against non-governmental organizations,
individuals or corporates.
The second class of corruption is “collusive corruption.”  It is broadly defined as collusion
between a public servant and a private entity or an individual to defraud the public
exchequer or the public resources. It may be mines, it may be land or it may be some other
natural resource. Therefore, this distinction must be kept in mind. In those cases, we argued
that penalty must be substantially higher and more importantly, the burden of proof must
be shifted. If there is a prima facie evidence, it is for the party accused to prove that there
was no collusion. In fact, even in case of the Prevention of Corruption Act, the Supreme
Court argued that once a property is accumulated, there is a prima facie evidence. It is for
the corrupt public servant to prove that that was not corruptly acquired. Therefore, the
burden of proof must be shifted. I know that there will be some concern from many jurists
and others because in this country, we have taken the burden of proof issue very seriously.
Therefore, if corporates come under this umbrella of collusive corruption and shifting the
burden of proof, that will take care of the problem ….”
14.8 He further stated:–
“…Then, about NGOs and civil society organizations, I believe, corruption is not limited
to those in Government alone. There are plenty outside who are equally culpable and,
therefore, wherever a civil society organization takes any substantial assistance of the
Government –  Mr. Chairman, I am emphasizing the words ‘substantial assistance from the
Government’ –  then they must be definitely brought under the Prevention of Corruption
Act.
Sir, it is time that the NGOs are made accountable on issues like from where they receive
their money, how do they utilize that money etc. If they want to be a part of India’ s
governance, and, they have become a part of India’s governance, then, they must share the
accountability with other institutions of governance…”
14.9 Shri Shekhar Singh (NCPRI) was of the following view:–
“…Let us retain what is in the Prevention of Corruption Act, which says that any NGO
which gets Government funding comes under the purview. But we have gone further. We
have said it at the end of our note, that we must amend the Prevention of Corruption Act
and bring both the corporate sector and the NGO by doing the following. And what we
have suggested is that section 12  of the Prevention of Corruption Act talks about abetment
to an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act. What we have suggested is that every
time an NGO or a corporate sector gets a licence, an order, a clearance or any sort of
dispensation form the Government, which is in violation of the rules or laws, it would be
assumed that corrupt practices have been indulged in and would, therefore, be considered
an abetment…”
14.10 One of the Members of the Committee stated thus:–
“…
bUgha dks liksVZ djrs gq, eSa ;g dguk pkgrk gwa fd Hkz’Vkpkj dh xaxks=h rc ls c<+h
gS] tc ls çkbosV lSDVj dks lc txgksa ij [kksyk x;k gSA pwafd xouZesaV lSDVj esa tc
rd ekeyk Fkk] rc rd fdlh u fdlh :i esa og daVªksy gksrk jgrk Fkk] ysfdu tc
ls çkbosV lSDVj [kqy x;k gS] rks vkius 
flood gate  [kksy fn;k] vc vki f[kM+dh dks can
djds ugha j[k ldrs gSaA vc /khjs -/khjs xouZesaV lSDVj [kRe gksrk tk jgk gSA tks

91
90 ijlsaV gS] og rks xouZesaV ls ckgj dk gSA eq>s vkt rd vk”p;Z gks jgk gS fd ;s
tks corporate houses  gSa] tgka lcls T;knk djI”ku gS] tgka ,d iSls ds cnys esa gtkj
djksM+ #i, ls de dh ckr ugha gksrh gS] rks vki blesa dkjiksjsV gkmlst dks tksM+us dk
dke D;ksa ugha djrs] ehfM;k dks tksM+us dk dke D;ksa ugha djrs\
…”
14.11 The followi ng observation was made by another Member of the Committee:–
“…The second question is that the entire draft that you have mentioned appears to be that
politicians at all levels, as also the bureaucracy, alone are responsible for corruption. Now,
politicians and the bureaucracy on the one hand and excluding them is the entire civil
society. This is absolutely fallacious for the very simple reason that, after all, wherefrom
is the bureaucracy coming. The bureaucracy is coming from amongst the civil society. Who
are contesting the elections? Wherefrom the Ministers, the Prime Minister are coming? So,
why is there distinction between the civil society and the so-called non civil society, namely,
the bureaucracy and the Parliamentarians or the legislators or the Ministers alone? This is
a kind of trade off. If civil society is not corrupt, wherefrom the Ministers are bringing the
money to get into corruption? If civil society is not involved in corruption, wherefrom the
bureaucracy is bringing the money?...”
14.12 Shri Prashant Bhushan, while appearing before the Committee, stated thus:–
“…
djI”ku dh definition  vxj vki  Prevention of Corruption Act  esa ns[ksa] mlesa dgk x;k
gS fd ;fn blesa dksbZ ljdkjh laLFkk ;k ljdkjh vf/kdkjh involved gS rks mlh dks
corruption ekuk gSA bldk ;g eryc ugha gS fd dksbZ futh laLFkk ;k dksbZ futh vkneh
fraud ugha dj ldrk]  cheating ugha dj ldrk] rks yksx  fraud Hkh djrs gSa]  cheating Hkh
djrs gSa vkSj fØeuy fel -,çksfç,”ku Hkh djrs gSaA mldks  Prevention of Corruption Act  esa
corruption ugha ekuk x;k gS]  unless dh og fdlh ljdkjh laLFkk ;k ljdkjh vf/kdkjh dks
?kwl nsrs gSa ;k Hkz’V djrs gSaA tgka rd ljdkjh vf/kdkjh ftl  corruption esa involved gSa]
;kuh fd vxj dksbZ çkbosV dEiuh ;k dksbZ  NGO fdlh ljdkjh vf/kdkjh ;k laLFkk dks
Hkz’V djrk gS] rks og rks yksdiky ds nk;js esa gh vk,xkA
…vxj dksbZ çkbosV laLFkk ;k ,u-th-vks-] fdlh nwljs vkneh] eku yhft, dh dksbZ çkbosV
laLFkk gS] mldk tks Vªstjj gS ;k eSustj gS] mlus ml laLFkk ds iSls dk xcu dj fy;k
rks bldks djI”ku ugha dgk tkrk] bldks ÝkWM ;k fel
-,çksfç,”ku dgk tkrk gSA D;ksafd
blesa ljdkj buoksYo ugha gS] blfy, blds fy, tks ukWeZy ljdkjh laLFkk gS] iqfyl ;k
vkSj dksbZ tks Hkh laLFkk gS] og mldh rgdhdkr dj ldrh gS
…”
14.13 A Member of the Committee said thus :–
“…tc dksbZ VsaMj çkslsflax esa vkrk gS] rks mlds fy, tks ljdkjh iSlk ysxk] mldks
ltk feysth vkSj VsaMfjax çkslsl esa tks dkWiksZjsV gkml buoksYoM gS] mldks ltk ugha
feysxhA
…”
14.14 Shri J.B. Mohapatra, while deposing before the Committee, said:–
“…Third proviso to clause 17  says that religious trusts, associations of persons, or societies
are not be regarded as public servants for this purpose. Now, proviso below clause 17(1)(g)
says that religious trusts are not be proceeded against under the Lokpal Act. Now, look at
clause 17(3),  it says that any person other than mentioned in clause 17(1)  can be proceeded
against. There is a contradiction and my view is that if religious trusts are exempt from the
Lokpal Bill, tomorrow, other charitable institutions like hospitals, education institutions,

92
etc. will also come. When the CRPC, CPC or the Income Tax Act do not exonerate these
kinds of  religious charities from being proceeded against, why give an exemption in the
Lokpal Bill?...”
14.15 Speaking on this issue, the representative of PRS Legislative Research opined as fol1ows:–
“…I would just like to point out that clause 17 (1)  (g) says that the Bill includes not
only NGOs, it also includes any association of persons. This would include companies;
it would include unregistered groups, etc., which have obtained donations from the
public. The Bill also deems all officers, Directors, etc. or such groups as public
servants. If we look back at certain other laws, the Offences and Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988,  we will find that they are restricted to taking of gratification,
which is bribe, by a public servant in his official capacity. To me, it is not clear, how
an officer of a private trust or a society can be accused of  corruption. He can be
accused of embezzlement; he can be accused of various other crimes, but how does such
a person, who is taking donation from the public, actually, causes loss to the exchequer,
which is what we narrowly define as ‘corruption’. If we look at the IPC, ‘public
servant’ is defined in section 21.  There are 11  different categories of persons which are
included in the definition. If you look at them together, it, essentially, includes any
person who is in the service or pay of the Government or a local authority, a
corporation established by law or a Government company and receives a fee or
commission for the performance of public duties. So, in some sense, if we take the IPC
as a guidance to determine who should be determined a public servant, one could
conclude that anyone who performs the function of the State, directly or indirectly, and
is compensated by the exchequer for performing a public duty is the person that Section
21 of the IPC covers as ‘public servant’; it does not cover anyone else. Under the RTI
Act too, the definition of ‘public authority’ includes the NGOs which receive
Government funding: it does not include other donations…”
14.16 The representatives of ABVP, while tendering oral evidence before the Committee, stated :–
Ckkdh DykWt 17 ¼,Q½ esa VªLV ds ckjs esa ;k ,u-th-vkst- ds ckjs esa fy[kk x;k gSA
ml esa igyk uacj gS ljdkj }kjk lgk;rk çkIr laLFkk,a] ml dk ge leFkZu djrs gSaA
mls j[kk tkuk pkfg, vkSj ml ds ckjs esa tks Hkh 
amount of grant ljdkj r; djsxh]
og mlh le; r; fd;k tk ldrk gSA ge bl esa nks vkSj çdkj ds ,u-th-vkst- dks
tksM+uk pkgrs gSa 
- ,d] tks fons”kksa ls /ku çkIr djrs gSaA nwljs] tks dkWiksZjsV vkSj futh
daifu;ksa donations  ysrs gSaA Hkys gh NksVk donation u j[ksa blfy, eSa lq>ko ds rkSj
ij dg jgk gwa fd tks lkykuk 5 djksM+ ls T;knk  donation ysrs gSaA cM+s&cM+s ,u-th-
vkst- gSa tks ljdkj ds fu.kZ;ksa dks çHkkfor djrs gSaA ;g eqík cgqr egRoiw.kZ gSA
blfy, tc rd ge fu.kZ;ksa dks çHkkfor djus okys 
economic sources dks catch ugha
djsaxs rc rd djI”ku ugha #d ldrk gSA blfy, dkWiksZjsV daifu;ksa o futh {ks= ls
donation ysus okyh laLFkkvksa ds fy, 5 djksM+ ls Åij ysus okyh laLFkkvksa dh fyfeV
j[ksa vkSj mu dks bl esa t:j “kkfey fd;k tkuk pkfg,A ckdh yksdiky fcy esa tks
vU; NksVs&eksVs VªLV vkSj nqfu;k Hkj ds yksxksa dks “kkfey fd;k x;k gS] eq>s yxrk gS
fd ml çko/kku dks gVk nsuk pkfg,Adsoy rhu çdkj ds gh VªLV bl esa j[ks tkus
pkfg, 
- tks ljdkjh donation ysus okys gSa] fons”kksa ls /ku ysus okys gSa vkSj çkbosV
daifu;ksa ls ,d fuf”pr amount ls vf/kd ysus okys gSaA ckdh bl dk nk;jk ugha
c<+kuk pkfg, vU;Fkk fQj ;g dksbZ dke gh ugha dj ik,xk vkSj bl dk misuse gh
gksus dh laHkkouk gSA

93
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
14.16A A large number of Members, cutting across party lines, felt that the proposed Bill on the
Lokpal pending before this Committee would be a partial and incomplete measure since it
did not police and regulate in respect of corruption, large segments of society, especially
private NGOs, corporate entities and media. It was felt that for the last six decades, the
focus had been only on policing and regulating the political classes and, to a lesser extent,
the bureaucracy, in respect of issues relating to corruption, It was strongly believed that
a substantial slice of society should not be excluded from such regulatory purview and that
the entire gamut of “private corruption” in the sense of corruption not involving the political
class or bureaucrats with all its attendant features and facets, is also required to be dealt
with by an effective legal regime.
14.17 There is no doubt that corruption is neither the exclusive preserve nor the special privilege
nor the unique entitlement of only the political or bureaucratic classes. Nor anyone can
justify exclusionary holy cows, supposedly immunized, exempted or put outside the purview
of a new and vigorous anti-corruption monitoring, investigation and prosecution regime as
the proposed new Lokpal Bil1 seeks to create. If corruption is rampant in a country like
India, it permeates and pervades every nook and cranny of society and is certainly not
restricted to the political or bureaucratic classes. Indeed, while no specific statistical data
are available, it may not be at all inconceivable that, in quantification terms, the degree of
corruption in the non-political/non-bureaucratic private sector, in the aggregate, is far higher
than in the realm of political and bureaucratic classes alone. Therefore, in principle, non-
application of the proposed Lokpal Bill to all such classes does not appear to be justifiable.
14.18 In this connection, the very recent UK Bribery Act, 2010, is both interesting and instructive.
Drafted in a completely non-legalistic manner, format and language, this Act seeks to
criminalize corruption everywhere and anywhere, i.e. in the public and private sectors in
UK, in Governmental and non-Governmental sectors, by UK citizens abroad, by non-UK
citizens acting in UK and in the entire gamut of private and individual transactions in
addition to covering dealings in the private sector, intra-private sector, intra-public sector,
in Government and private interface and in every other nook and cranny of society.
14.19 Despite the above and despite the simplicity and attractiveness of an all inclusive approach,
the latter must yield to exigencies of logistics, operational efficacy and pragmatism. Since
this is the nation’s first experiment with a Lokpal institution, it would amount to starry-eyed
idealism to recommend the blanket inclusion of every segment of society under the
jurisdiction of an omnipotent and omniscient Lokpal. Such comprehensive inclusion is
entirely understandable and may be logically more justifiable in principle, but, in the final
opinion of the Committee, must await several years of evolution of the Lokpal institution
and a corpus of experiential and practical lessons as also the wisdom of a future generation
of Parliamentarians.
14.20 As far as the proposed dispensation is concerned, the only available dividing and
demarcating line between the complete inclusion and partial exclusion of entities from the
jurisdiction of the Lokpa1 would have to be some test of Government ownership and/or
control and/or size of the entity concerned. In this regard, clauses 17 (1) (f) and (g) of
the Lokpa1 Bill, 2011 are relevant. Clause 17 (1) (f) applies the Lokpa1 jurisdiction mainly
to office-bearers of every society, A.o.P. or  trust, registered or not, but wholly or partially
financed or aided by the Government, subject to being above some specified annual income
minima. Clause 17 (1) (g), similarly, applies the Lokpal to office-bearers of every society,
A.o.P, or trust, receiving donations from  the public, again subject to an annual income
minima to be specified by the Central Government.

94
14.20A After deep consideration, the Committee believes and recommends that these clauses
should be merged and expanded to provide for the following coverage/jurisdiction of the
Lokpal:
(a) The Lokpal jurisdiction should apply to each and every institution/entity, by whatever
name called, owned or controlled by the Central Government, subject, however, to an
exclusionary minima, where the ownership or control of the Central Government de
minimis. Such minima would have to be specified and the power  of such specification
should be given to the Central Government by notification;
(b) Additionally, all entities/institutions, by whatever name called, receiving donations from
the public above a certain minima, liable to be specified by the Central Government,
should be included, 
as also all entities/institutions receiving donations from foreign
sources in the terms and context of the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA)
in excess of Rs.l0 lakh per year, should be covered, whether or  not, controlled by the
Government. This is largely as per existing clause 17 (1) (g), except for the addition
of the foreign donation recipient facet;
(c) It should be clarified that this coverage shall apply, as also stated above, to every
entity and institution, by whatever name called, be it corporate, society, trust, A.o.P.,
partnership, sole proprietorship, LLP or any other, registered or not. It should also be
made clear that the approach is functional or ownership or size based and not based
on nomenclature;
(d) It is thus clear that corporates, media or NGOs should and would be covered 
only to
the above extent and not otherwise.
14.21 Despite the foregoing elaborations and ‘lament’ regarding exclusion of large slices of society
from the Lokpal regime, it must not be forgotten that all persons, whether private,
individual, and totally non-Governmental, are already necessarily covered as abettors, co-
conspirators, inciters and givers or recipients or bribes in terms of clause 17 (3) of the
Lokpal Bill, 2011. It may, however, be further clarified suitably in inclusive and not
exhaustive terms in clause 17 (3) that the phrase ‘if such person is associated with the
allegation of corruption,” should include abettors, bribe-givers, bribe-takers, conspirators
and all other persons, directly or indirectly, involved in the act or omission relating to
corruption within which all other persons and entities in clause 17 are subsumed. The word
“associated” presently used is too general and vague.
14.21A The Committee further recommends that clause 17 (3) should be explicitly clarified to the
effect that the abettor, conspirator or person associated, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, with the corruption allegation, shall not only be included but be fully liable to
investigation, prosecution and punishment and that the proviso to clause 17 (3) shall be
limited only to proposed action to be taken ‘in case of a person serving in the affairs of
a State’ and not qua anyone else.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
14.22 There is no doubt that corruption is neither the exclusive preserve nor the special
privilege nor the unique entitlement of only the political or bureaucratic classes. Nor
can anyone justify exclusionary holy cows, supposedly immunized, exempted or put
outside the purview of a new and vigorous anti-corruption monitoring, investigation
and prosecution regime as the proposed new Lokpal Bill seeks  to create. If
corruption is rampant in a country like India, it permeates and pervades every nook
and cranny of society and is certainly not restricted to the political or bureaucratic

95
classes. Indeed, while no specific statistical data are available, it may not be at all
inconceivable that, in quantum terms, the degree of corruption in the non-political/
non-bureaucratic private sector, in the aggregate, is far higher than in the realm of
political and bureaucratic classes alone. Therefore, in principle, non-application of the
proposed Lokpal Bill to all such classes does not appear to be justifiable.
14.23 In this connection, the very recent UK Bribery Act, 2010, is both interesting and
instructive. Drafted in a completely non-legalistic manner, format and language, this
Act seeks to criminalize corruption everywhere and anywhere, i.e. in the public and
private sectors in UK, in Governmental and non-Governmental sectors, by UK
citizens abroad, by non-UK citizens acting in UK and in the entire gamut of private
and individual transactions in addition to covering dealings in the private sector,
intra-private sector, intra-public sector, in Government and private interface and in
every other nook and cranny of society.
14.24 Despite the above and despite the simplicity and attractiveness of an all inclusive
approach, the latter must yield to exigencies of logistics, operational efficacy and
pragmatism. Since this is the nation’s first experiment with a central Lokpal
institution, it would amount to starry-eyed idealism to recommend the blanket
inclusion of every segment of society under the jurisdiction of an omnipotent and
omniscient Lokpal. Such comprehensive inclusion is entirely understandable and may
be logically more justifiable in principle, but, in the final opinion of the Committee,
must await several years of evolution of the Lokpal institution and a corpus of
experiential and practical lessons as also the wisdom of a future generation of
Parliamentarians.
14.25 As far as the proposed dispensation is concerned, the only available dividing and
demarcating line between the complete inclusion and partial exclusion of entities
from the jurisdiction of the Lokpal would have to be some test  of Government
ownership and/or control and/or size of the entity concerned. In this regard, clauses
17 (1) (f) and (g) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 are relevant. Clause 17 (1) (f) applies the
Lokpal jurisdiction mainly to office-bearers of every society, A.o.P. or trust,
registered or not, but wholly or partially financed or aided by the Government,
subject to being above some specified annual income minima. Clause 17 (1) (g),
similarly, applies the Lokpal to office-bearers of every society, A.o.P. or trust,
receiving donations from the public, again subject to an annual income minima to be
specified by the Central Government.
14.25A After deep consideration, the Committee believes and recommends that these clauses
should be merged and expanded to provide for the following coverage/jurisdiction of
the Lokpal:
(a) The Lokpal jurisdiction should apply to each and every institution/entity by
whatever name called, owned or controlled by the Central Government, subject,
however, to an exclusionary minima, where the ownership or control of the
Central Government de minimis. Such minima would have to be specified and
the power of such specification should be given to the Central Government by
notification;
(b) Additionally, all entities/institutions, by whatever name called, receiving
donations from the public above a certain minima, liable to be specified by the
Central Government should be included. In addition, 
as also all entities/
institutions receiving donations from foreign sources in the terms and context

96
of the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA) in excess of Rs.10 lakh per
year, should be covered, whether or not, controlled by the Government. This is
largely as per existing clause 17 (1) (g), except for the addition of the foreign
donation recipient facet;
(c) It should be clarified that this coverage shall apply, as also stated above, to
every entity and institution, by whatever name called, be it corporate, society,
trust, A.o.P., partnership, sole proprietorship” LLP or any other, registered or
not. It should also be made clear that the approach is functional or ownership
based or size based and not based on nomenclature;
(d) It is thus clear that corporates, media or NGOs should and would be covered
only to the above extent and not otherwise;
14.26 Despite the foregoing elaborations and ‘lament’ regarding exclusion of large slices of
society from the Lokpal regime, it must not be forgotten that all persons, whether
private, individual, and totally non-Governmental, are already necessarily covered as
abettors, co-conspirators, inciters and givers or recipients or bribes in terms of
clause 17 (3) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011. It may, however, be further clarified suitably
in inclusive and not exhaustive terms in clause 17 (3) that the phrase “if such person
is associated with the allegation of corruption”, should include abettors, bribe-givers,
bribe-takers, conspirators and all other persons, directly or indirectly, involved in the
act or omission relating to corruption within which all other persons and entities in
clause 17 are subsumed. The word “associated” presently used is too general and
vague.
14.26A The Committee further recommends that clause 17 (3) should be explicitly clarified
to the effect that the abettor, conspirator or person associated, in any manner,
directly or indirectly, with the corruption allegation, shall not only be included but
be fully liable to investigation, prosecution and punishment and that the proviso to
clause 17 (3) shall be limited only to proposed action to be taken ‘in case of a person
serving in the affairs of a State’ and not qua anyone else.

97
CHAPTER-15
SUPPORT STRUCTURES FOR LOKPAL : WHISTLE BLOWERS,
PHONE TAPPERS AND LEGAL AID/ASSISTANCE ISSUES
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
15.1 Three issues have been clubbed together in this chapter. Two of them – whistleblower
protection and special phone tapping power for the Lokpal – find no mention in the
Lokpal Bill, 2011. The issue of legal assistance/aid is provided for in clause 56 of the
2011 Bill. Certain quarters, especially T eam Anna have advocated insertion of
whistleblower protection for complainants in respect of Lokpal jurisdiction and for
empowering the Lokpal to tap phones without the need of any prior reference to or prior
authorization from any other entity. Finally, some quarters have also opposed the
provision of what they consider to be automatic legal aid to alleged corrupt accused
under the Lokpal jurisdiction.
15.2 Phone tapping
II . SUMMARY OF SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
• Phone tapping/interceptions etc. shall be done only with the permission of Home
Secretary to safeguard privacy of citizens.
• Presently, almost 32 investigative and intelligence agencies have powers to tap
telephones. However, they need permission from Home Secretary to do that. Lokpal
will be an independent agency. If it were to obtain permission from Home Secretary,
the information would get leaked and the entire operation would become in fructuous.
Moreover, that would also compromise the functional autonomy of the Lokpal.
Therefore, we propose that Lokpal Bench should have powers to allow phone tapping
rather than they having to obtain permission from Home Secretary.
• For the purposes of investigation of offences related to acts of corruption, the
appropriate Bench of the Lokpal shall be deemed to be designated authority under
Section 5 of the Indian Telegraph Act empowered to approve interception and
monitoring of messages of data or voice transmitted through telephones, internet or
any other medium as covered under the Indian Telegraph Act read with Information
and Technology Act 2000 and as per rules and regulations made under the Indian
Telegraph Act 1885.
• Recorded conversion, sting operation etc. should be made admissible.
• No need for special powers to intercept telephones since even Deputy SP can do that
by recording his reason in station diary kept in ACB units.
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY THE WITNESSES
15.2.A While placing his views before the Committee, Shri Prashant Bhushan stated thus:
97

98
“...Today, under the rules made under the Indian Telegraph Act, it is only the Home
Secretary which has the power to grant permission to tap telephone. The power to tap
telephone is an essential power of investigation, particularly investigation for corruption.
Very often, the evidence for detecting that corruption is taking place comes only from tapped
telephone conversations. Unless the Lokpal has independent power, it cannot depend on the
Government or the Home Secretary to allow tapping of telephones. This Lokpal is being
constituted as a very high-level authority. Therefore, of course, the permission to tap should
be given by the bench. Therefore, the amendment that we are suggesting is, not by any
officer of the Lokpal but only by a bench of the Lokpal. The bench can permit the tapping.
This bench is a far safer authority than the Home Secretary apart from being independent.
Therefore, we have said, “For the purpose of investigation of offences related to acts of
corruption, the appropriate bench of the Lokpal shall be deemed to be the designated
authority under section 5 of the Indian Telegraph Act empowered to approve interception and
monitoring of messages of data or voice transmitted through telephones, etc …”
15.2.B Shri Arvind Kejriwal stated as under:–
“...A wrong impression is being created as if  a new power is being sought to be given to
tap telephones, 
tSls fd ge dksbZ u;h ikoj nsus dh ckr dj jgs gksaA yksdiky ds ikl
VsyhQksu dks VSi djus dh ikoj rks gksxh gh under other laws, ysfdu vkt mUgsa gkse
lsØsVªh ls ijfe”ku ysuh iM+sxhA gkse lsØsVªh ls ijfe”ku ysus dk eryc ;g gS fd lkjh
pht+ksa dk [kqyklk gks x;kA 
There is a conflict of interest,  ogk¡ ls information lc dks
divulge gks tk,xhA blfy, ;g independent gksuk pkfg,A ge dksbZ u;h ikoj nsus dh ckr
ugha dj jgs gSa] cfYd ge dsoy ;g suggest dj jgs gSa fd rather than permission being
given by the Home Secretary the permission should be given by the bench of the Lokpal…”
15.3 Protection of whistleblowers
II SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
• Anonymous complaints should be investigated indiscreetly and if found substantial,
should be proceeded further.
• Whistleblowers’ Bill needs to be revamped and made applicable to all institutions.
• In case of anonymous complaints, in case of verifiable & specific information about
misconduct/corruption, the case shall not be rejected.
• Lokpal, being an independent body, should have a duty to provide protection to
whistleblowers against physical and professional victimization.
• False Claims Act :- In the US, an innovative law has been in operation for long. In its
modern from, the False Claims Act is a federal law that empowers any citizen or
whistle-blower to file a suit in a federal court for any loss sustained by the government
in any public procurement or contract or service delivery. The loss could be in terms
of price even if the price was determined by competitive bidding (for instance, the bid
price being higher than that offered to the best customer by the company or supplier),
or quality, or environmental or social damage. Such a qui-tam litigation by those who
are not affiliated with the government to file suits on behalf of the government can be
pursued by the Attorney General, or the litigator himself. The Court is empowered in a
summary civil procedure to compute the loss suffered by the exchequer or the public,
and has the authority to impose a penalty of three times the loss suffered. The qui-tam
litigator receives a portion (usually 15 – 25 per cent) of any recovered damages. Claims

99
under the law have typically involved healthcare, military, or other government spending
programmes. The government has recovered nearly $ 22 billion under the False Claims
Act between 1987 (after significant 1986 amendments) and 2008. Hundreds of citizens
and organizations are thus empowered and incentivized to fight against corruption. Such
a law should be considered for enactment in India with appropriate institutional
mechanisms to make the law operational.
15.4 The proponents of Jan Lokpal Bill, in their written note submitted to the Committee, has
proposed the following amendment in the instant Bill:
(1) “Whistleblower” means any person, who provides information about corruption in a
public authority or is a witness or victim in that case or who faces the threat of
(i) professional harm, including but not limited to illegitimate transfer, denial of
promotion, denial of appropriate perquisites, departmental proceedings,
discrimination or
(ii) physical harm, or
(iii) is actually subjected to any harm;
because of either making a complaint to the Lokpal under this Act, or for
filing an application under the Right to Information Act, 2005 or by any other
legal action aimed at preventing or exposing corruption or mal-governance.
(2) Any public official or any other person having information of any corruption in any
public authority would be encouraged to send the information confidentially to the
Lokpal; and it shall be the duty of the Lokpal to get an inquiry made into such
information and if necessary get an investigation made under the Prevention of
Corruption Act.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Lokpal to provide full protection to whistleblowers from
any physical harm or administrative harassment. Identity of such whistleblowers
shall also be protected if the whistleblower so desires.
(4) For achieving this objective it shall be competent for the Lokpal to give suitable
direction to any security agencies for providing security as well as to any other
authority to ensure that no harassment is caused to such whistleblower.
(5) Orders under this section shall be passed expeditiously and in any case within a
month of receipt of complaint. Immediate action will be taken in cases involving
a threat of physical victimization.
(6) The investigations in complaints by whistleblowers facing physical or professional
victimization shall be fast tracked and completed within three months of receipt of
the same.”
III. SUMMARY OF DEPOSITIONS GIVEN BY THE WITNESSES
15.4A Shrimati Anjali Bhardwaj opined as under:
“...Sir, I will just put forth what NCPRI has proposed on the Whistleblower Protection
Bill because we feel that this is very closely linked to the whole issue of corruption and
people who are blowing whistle on corruption. We have already deposed before the
Standing Committee which was dealing with the whistleblower protection issue. Quite a
few of the suggestions that we had put forth were already included by the Standing
Committee. But there are just two things which I want to flag which have not really been

100
included. The first one is, expanding the definition of a whistleblower. vHkh tks ekStwnk
provisions gSa] vHkh ikfyZ;kesaV ds lkeus tks Whistleblower Protection Bill gS] mlesa dsoy
vkxZukbts”ku ds vanj tkss Whistleblowers gSa] muds çksVsD”ku dh ckr gSA gesa ;g yxrk
gS fd ftl rjg ls RTI users tks djI”ku dks ,Dlikst+ djus ds fy, RTI ,Iyhds”kal
Mky jgs gSa] mudks /kefd;ka feyh gSa vkSj dbZ txgksa ij mu ij geys Hkh gq, gSa rFkk
fiNys 2 lkyksa essa 18 yksxksa ls T;knk yksxksa dh ekSrsa gks pqdh gSaA 
We feel that they
should also be included under the ambit of the Whistleblower Protection Bill. It should,
therefore, not just be  limited to people working in organizations, it  should also extend to
common citizens.
Sir, I will just put forth what NCPRI has proposed on the Whistleblower Protection Bill
because we feel that this is very closely linked to the whole issue of corruption and people
who are blowing whistle on corruption. We have already deposed before the Standing
Committee which was dealing with the whistle blower protection issue. Quite a few of the
suggestions that we had put forth were already included by the Standing Committee. But
there are just two things which I want to flag which have not really been included. The
first one is, expanding the definition of a whistleblower. 
vHkh tks ekStwnk provisions gSa]
vHkh ikfyZ;kesaV ds lkeus tks Whistleblower Protection Bill gS] mlesa dsoy vkxZukbts”ku
ds vanj tks Whistleblowers gSa] muds çksVsD”ku dh ckr gSA gesa ;g yxrk gS fd ftl
rjg ls RTI users tks djI”ku dks ,Dlikst+ djus ds fy, RTI ,Iyhds”kal Mky jgs gSa]
mudks /kefd;ka feyh gSa vkSj dbZ txgksa ij mu ij geys Hkh gq, gSa rFkk fiNys 2
lkyksa esa 18 yksxksa ls T;knk yksxksa dh ekSrsa gks pqdh gSaA 
We feel that they should also
be included under the ambit of the Whistleblower Protection Bill. It should, therefore, not
just be limited to people working in organizations, it should also extend to common
citizens.
The second point is that we feel that wherever a complainant, who is trying to expose
corruption, or is making a complaint on the issue of corruption, is being threatened, that
issue must be dealt with by the Government on a priority basis. In fact, one of the
suggestions that has come up in the Central Information Commission is that wherever an
information seeker is being targeted, then, the Government will take every step possible
to in fact, put out that information immediately in the public domain on its own, and that,
we feel, should be something of a principle that could be adopted in the Whistleblowers’
Protection Bill as well…”
15.4.B. Shri Prashant Bhushan stated as follows:–
“...Then, as regards victimization of a whistleblower or a witness, for example, if a
Government Servant for mala fide reasons deliberately suspends a whistleblower, an officer
who is a whistleblower who makes a complaint to the Lokpal saying that this corruption
is going on in his department and that whistle blower is suspended by the person who is
involved in that corruption, then, that victimization should also be considered to be an act
of corruption.
Then, the next amendment is  about whistleblower protection. This is also very important,
actually. It is said  that whistleblower protection 
ds fy, there is  some Bill in  the offing.
There is a  proposed Bill  on Whistleblower Protection. You see,  what we  feel is  that so far
as the whistleblower protection for corruption is  concerned, where the complaints are being
made to the Lokpal, the power to protect that person,  that whistleblower must vest with
the Lokpal. eryc ;g gS fd vxj ml dks dksbZ complaint vkrh gS]  from some

101
whistleblower, vkSj ml complainant dks] ml  whistleblower dks victimize fd;k tkrk gS]
either by physical threats or by administrative harassment, ml dks suspend dj fn;k tkrk
gS] oxSjg rc mls çksVsDV djus dh ikWoj yksdiky ds ikl gksuh pkfg,A That means,
he should have the power to give him physical protection and to protect hirn from
administrative harassment…”
15.4.C. Shri Arvind Kejriwal opined as follows:
“…eSa bl esa cgqr strongly request d:axk fd tks whistleblower dk nwljk fcy vk
jgk gS] if this Committee can recommend withdrawal of that Bill because ml fcy esa
lh-oh-lh- dks vFkkWfjVh cuk;k gS for whistleblower prote ction. vc lh-oh-lh- ds ikl
fdlh dks çksVsDV djus dh u rks fjlkslsZl gSa] u ikWolZ gSaA The CVC is an advisory
body…”
15.4.D. Shrimati Kiran Bedi was of the following opinion:–
“…vxj ;g whistleblower dks dkuwu esa Mky fn;k tk,] rks blls cgqr djI”ku [kRe
gks tk,xh] D;ksafd fMikVZesaV ds van#uh O;fDr dks ftruk ekywe gksrk gS fd mldk
fMikVZesaV D;k dj jgk gS] bruk ckgj ds vkneh dks ugha ekywe gksrkA 
An insider has
much more information and authentic information and would even have evidence of the
note sheets, of the orders, of the conversations which you never know. Now with this
reward scheme, including the whistleblower and giving them protection under the Lokpal,
would be very effective in prevention, not only in detection, in prevention. This section
reads like that. ‘Any public official or any other person having information of any
corruption in any public authority would be encouraged to send the information
confidentiality to the Lokayukta and it shall be the duty of the Lokayukta to get an
inquiry made into such information and if necessary get investigation made under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.  Lokayukta may issue necessary orders to provide
protection to the whistleblowers from any physical harm or administrative harassment.
Identity of such whistleblowers shall also be  protected if the whistleblower so desires. For
achieving this objective, it shall be  competent for the Lokayukta to give suitable direction
to the Government for providing security as well as to other authorities to ensure no
harassment is caused to  such whistleblowers. Orders under this section shall be passed
expeditiously; it is a  time limit of fifteen days. Investigation complaints by whistleblowers
facing physical or professional victimization…’ underlining the words, ‘professional
victimization’,  ‘shall be fast tracked and completed within three months of the receipt.’
ftl fnu yksdiky esa ;g DykWt vk x;k] vanj ds fMikVZesaV esa djI”ku ml fnu ls
can gks tk,xh] ;k cM+s Mj ds gksxh] ,ohMsal vk tk,xk] çksVsD”ku feysxh vkSj djI”ku
esa fçosa”ku vk,xhA
...”
Legal aid provisions
II. SUMMARY OF  SUGGESTIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH WRITTEN
MEMORANDA
• The provision for giving legal assistance under clause 56 against a person against
whom a complaint has been made and there being no provision for providing defence
assistance to the complainant is arbitrary and will encourage corruption.
• It has been suggested that where the accused is finally found guilty of any of the
charges made against him by the special court provided for in the Act, and subject to

102
further appeals, the accused would be required to refund the total cost of the
assistance so provided. In exceptional circumstances where the Lokpal so determines
that the recovery of such dues might result in unwarranted hardship to the accused
or his family, the amount can be adjusted against confiscation of property as specified
under sections 33 and 34.
IV. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION:–
15.6 The Committee has deliberated upon the so called Whistleblower Bill 2010 (known more
fully as the Public Interest Disclosure and Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures
Bill, 2011) and submitted a detailed report in this regard on August 10, 2011. That report
is under the active consideration of the Government of India for eventual transformation
into appropriate legislation. The Committee believes that the concern for providing
appropriate protection, physical and otherwise, to complainants or whistleblowers, is
reasonable and legitimate, since apprehensions in respect of life, liberty, standard of living,
job safety and security of self and family would constitute the greatest deterrent to free
and frank disclosure of wrong doing.
15.7 However, as explained herein below in the next section, there may be no need to enact
a separate law or to make elaborate provisions in the proposed Lokpal Bill, in view of the
recommendations already made in respect of the pending Bill in respect of whistleblowers.
15.8 The Committee notes that there is an elaborate existing procedure, now operative for many
years, with periodic improvements and refinements, in respect of the power, authorization,
manner and mode of phone tapping. The Committee notes the existing checks and
balances which have been operative for many years since phone tapping has been a power
frequently exercised by diverse authorities for the last several years, well before the Lokpal
regime was contemplated in the contemporary context. Phone tapping has, thus being
used, by agencies as diverse as CBI, Enforcement. Directorate, Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence and host of other agencies. None of them, however, have had a power to
decide to do so on their own, which is now being sought for the new proposed Lokpal.
The Committee’s recommendations in the next section are based on this awareness.
15.9 The Committee notes the language and terms of clause 56 and especially the phrase “legal
assistance”. The Committee’s interpretation of clause 56 is different, from not only that
of Team Anna, but also several interpretations given at various times in the press. The
Committee’s recommendations in this regard in the next section also constitute a
clarification of the interpretative confusion in regard to clause 56.
V. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
15.10 As regards the whistleblower issue, this Committee has made a detailed
recommendation on the subject on August 10,2011 in respect of the Bill referred to
it. That Bill and the Committee’s recommendation are under the active decision
making process of the Government of India for eventual translation into law.
15.11 The Committee recommends that the Whistleblowers Bill (Bill No. 97 of 2010)
referred to the Committee, with the changes already recommended by the
Committee in respect of that Bill (in the Committee’s report dated August 10,
2011), be implemented into law simultaneously and concurrently with the Lokpal
Bill. In that case, only one provision needs to be inserted in the Lokpal Bill to the
effect that safeguards and machinery provided elaborately in the proposed
whistleblowers Bill, as opined upon by the Committee, would be applicable, mutatis

103
mutandis to the Lokpal Bill. In particular, the Committee notes that clauses 10, 11,
12 and 13 of the aforesaid Whistleblowers Bill, provide a fairly comprehensive
fasciculus of provisions providing safeguards against victimization, protection of
witnesses and other persons, protection of identity of complainant and power to pass
interim orders. The Whistleblowers Bill also sets up a competent authority and
provides for several other related provisions to make the functioning of that
authority efficacious and to enhance the efficiency, potency and vigour of the
safeguards intended to be provided to a whistleblower. The proposed provision in the
Lokpal Bill should act as a cross referencing, breach of which should activate the
related/ applicable provisions of the Whistleblower Bill and render them applicable
to all Lokpal proceedings, as if set out in the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
15.12 Naturally, one of the main adaptations of the whistleblowers Bill for Lokpal
proceedings would be that the competent authority in respect of Lokpal covered
persons and offences would be the Lokpal and references in the Whistleblowers Bill
to CVC or other entities would be rendered inoperative for purposes of Lokpal
personnel and officers.
15.13 If, however, the aforesaid Whistleblower Bill, along with the recommendations of
this Committee in that regard, are not enacted into law by the Government of
India, co-terminously and simultaneously with the Lokpal Bill, then this Committee
recommends the creation of some safeguards, in substance and essence, by the
addition of a whole new chapter and certain provisions in the proposed Lokpal Bill.
However, those provisions in the Lokpal Bill would be largely an adaptation of the
same provisions of the whistleblowers Bill, especially clauses 10 to 13 of the
whistleblowers Bill, while, as explained above, making the Lokpal the competent
authority for such whistleblower issues.
15.14 As regards phone tapping, the Committee emphasizes and underlines the basic
reality that phone tapping by regulatory and policing agencies has been prevalent in
India for several years and the rules and regulations in that regard have undergone
periodic refinement and amendment. Currently the regime of phone tapping is
governed by Indian Telegraph Act and Rules read with the judgments of the
Supreme Court inter alia  in People Union for Civil Liberties Vs. Union of India
(1997) 1 SCC 301. The Committee believes that there is no reason, sufficiently
strong, to suggest that this substantive law should be altered in respect of Lokpal
proceedings.
15.15 Phone tapping has been resorted to, inter alia , by agencies as diverse as CBI,
Enforcement Directorate, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence and others, under the
aforesaid regime of the Act., Rules and the Supreme Court mandated principles. In
all such cases, the Committee is not aware of any situation where any of these
agencies are entitled to suo motu , on their own, without separate authorization, and
in secrecy, initiate or continue phone tapping. There is, therefore, no reason as to
why the proposed Lokpal institution should also not be subjected to the same
regime and mechanism. To provide for inherent and separate power in the Lokpal
institution in this regard, would also create an excessive and undesirable
concentration of powers, would frequently involve a conflict of interest between
preliminary inquiry, investigation and prosecution and would disturb the equilibrium
of all investigative agencies for the past several years with established practices in
respect of phone tapping issues. Indeed, the Committee notes that in other parts
of this Report (Chapter 12), the CBI is the principal investigating agency and,
therefore, its powers of phone tapping must continue as they exist today.

104
15.16 As regards legal aid/assistance, the Committee concludes that clause 56 as framed
does not intend to and should not be read to be a mandate for provision of
automatic legal aid for every accused in a Lokpal proceeding. Clause 56, by any fair
reading, and in the opinion of this Committee, is only intended to provide legal
assistance by way of legal representation to the accused in any case before the
Lokpal eg:- a preliminary inquiry. Firstly, the Committee does not read this to
mean automatic monetary or fiscal assistance or by way of lawyers’ fees for the
accused. Secondly, the Committee believes that this was intended to and
recommended so that it should be explicitly clarified that it permits the use of, or
appearance by a legal practitioner, where the accused asks for one in Lokpal
proceedings eg:- a preliminary inquiry. In any event, elsewhere in this Report we
have recommended deletion of the concept of hearing an accused during preliminary
inquiry. If that is done away with, no issue would arise of legal practitioners
appearing. In any case, they are entitled to appear in all later stages including trial.
Finally, it should be clarified that clause 56 does not intend to abrogate or dilute
or attenuate any other provision of law under where, by virtue of those provisions
of law, the accused may be entitled to a monetary/fiscal legal aid or assistance.

105
CHAPTER-16
THE LOKPAL MISCELLANY : RESIDUAL ISSUES
I. INTRODUCTION
16.1. As we come to the end, a number of ostensibly unconnected issues are dealt with in this
Chapter. Neither their lack of connection to each other nor the use of the words
‘miscellany or residual’ should diminish or undermine their significance. However, since
memoranda and witnesses have not spoken with any degree of particularization on many
of these specific issues, this introductory section is followed straightaway by the section
on reasons and recommendations.
16.2 These issues include the necessity of specifying that the special judge adjudicating Lokpal
offences should have powers to deal with and conduct adjudication under all other
statutes; the scope and coverage, if any, in respect of offences done by a former public
servant as opposed to serving public servant; issues relating to form and manner of
removal of Lokpal and the form and manner of initiating suo motu  complaints by the
Lokpal institution and so on and so forth.
II. REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
16.3 Although it is implicit in the Lokpal Bill, 2011, the Committee believes that to
obviate all doubts and to prevent any jeopardy to ongoing trials, the proposed
Lokpal should have a specific provision categorically applying Section 4 (3) of the
POCA to Lokpal proceedings, to enable the special judge or Lokpal judge to try any
other offence, where connected, other than those covered by the Lokpal Act.
16.4 Clause 17 (1) in most of its sub-clauses, including (b), (c), (d) and so on, specifically
refers to a current/serving as also a former public servant ( e.g. “Minister, MP,
bureaucrat, etc. both past and present).
16.5 The Committee has seen the substantive provisions of POCA and it appears to be
clear that the POCA, which shall continue to be the substantive law applicable to
Lokpal trials and proceedings, seeks to render culpable and punish only official acts
done by public servants. Be that as it may, the Committee is of the opinion that
a specific provision should be inserted in Clause 17 clarifying and specifying that
reference to present and former public servants only means that they can be
prosecuted whether in or not in office, but only for acts/omissions done while they
were in office and not for allegedly fresh acts/omissions after ceasing to hold office.
16.6 The Committee finds that clause 8 and especially clause 8 (1) of the Lokpal Bill,
2011 has struck the right balance and does not need any fundamental changes. It
is intended to strengthen the independence and autonomy of the Lokpal by not
making it easy to initiate complaints against Lokpal for the Lokpal’s removal. The
Committee, however, recommends an addition to clause 8 (1)(iii), to allay and
obviate the apprehension expressed in some quarters, that the process to remove
the Lokpal cannot be initiated, under the sub-clause, if the President (which
105

106
essentially means the Central Government) refuses to refer the complaint against
the Lokpal. The Committee feels that this apprehension would be adequately taken
care of by providing in clause 8 (1)(iii) that where the President does not refer a
citizen’s complaint against the Lokpal to the Apex Court, the  President ( i.e. the
Central Government) shall be obliged to  record reasons for the same and to furnish
those reasons to the complainant within a maximum period of 3 months from the
date of receipt of the complaint. The Committee feels that this process, including
the transparency involved in recording these reasons and the attendant judicial
review available to the complainant to challenge such reason/refusal, contains an
adequate check and balance on this subject.
16.6A Additionally, the Committee recommends that Clause 8(1)(iv) be added in the
existing Lokpal Bill, 2011 to provide, specifically, that anyone can directly
approach the apex court in respect of a complaint against the Lokpal (institution
or individual member) and that such complaint would go through the normal
initial hearing and filter as a preliminary matter before the normal bench
strength as prescribed by the Supreme Court Rules but that, if the matter is
admitted and put for final hearing, the same shall be heard by an apex court
bench of not less than 5 members. It is but obvious that other consequential
changes will have to be made in the whole of Section 8 to reflect the addition of
the aforesaid Clause 8(1)(iv).
16.7 Clause 21 of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 needs a re-look. In its present form, it appears
to empower the Lokpal Chairperson to intervene and transfer any pending case
from one Bench to another, which appears to include the power of transfer even
while a case is under consideration of the Lokpal bench on the merits. This un-
circumscribed power would seriously impair the objectivity and autonomy of
Lokpal Benches, especially at the stage of preliminary inquiry which is a crucial
filtering mechanism. It also appears to be inconsistent with normal principles of
jurisprudence which seriously frown upon interference even by the Chief Justice
in a pending judicial matter before another Bench. The way out would be to delete
this provision and to provide for transfer only in exceptional cases where, firstly,
strong credible allegations are brought to the forefront in respect of the
functioning of any particular Lokpal Bench and secondly, the decision to transfer
is taken by not only the entire Lokpal institution sitting together, but also
including the Members of the Bench from which the matter is sought to be
transferred.
16.8 As regards punishment under the Prevention of Corruption Act for a person
convicted of different offences relating to corruption, it is noteworthy that the
Prevention of Corruption Act prescribes, as it now stands, punishment not less than
six months which may extend to five years for various offences involving public
servant taking gratification in Sections 7, 8, 9, 10 and also Section 11 which deals
with public servant obtaining valuable thing without consideration. Section 12 of
POCA dealing with the abetment prescribes the same as six months to five years
range of punishment. On the other hand, for offences of criminal misconduct by
public servant, the prescribed punishment is not less than one year, extendable upto
seven years in Section 13 while Section 14 prescribes punishment of not less than
two years extendable to seven years. Section 15 prescribes the punishment for
offences referred to in clause C or clause D of 5.13(i) which has no lower limit but
a maximum of three years. Additionally, all these provisions empower the
imposition of fine.

107
16.9 Diverse representations from diverse quarters have suggested an enhancement of
punishment, with diverse prescriptions of quantum of sentence, including life
imprisonment. After deep consideration, the Committee finds it prudent to strike a
balanced, reasonable middle ground. A sudden, dramatic and draconian enhancement
is, in the opinion of the Committee, undesirable. The Committee cannot ignore the
inherent fallibility of mankind and if fallibility is inherent in every system,
draconian and extreme punishment, even in a few cases of wrongful conviction,
would be undesirable.
16.9A T aking a holistic view, the Committee is of the opinion that:
(a) In the cases of Sections 7, 8, 9 and the like, the range from six months to
five years should the substituted by imprisonment not less than three years
which may extend to not more than seven years.
(b) In the Sections 13 and 14 category of cases providing for a range to one year
to seven years, the Committee suggests enhancement, in the case of Section
13 offences, to a minimum of four years and a maximum of ten years while
for Section 14, the Committee suggests a minimum of five years and a
maximum of ten years.
(c) For Section 12 which presently prescribes six months to five years, the
aforesaid of minimum three and maximum of seven years shall apply whereas
for Section 15 which presently prescribes zero to three years, the range
should be very minimum from two to maximum five years.
(d) Additionally, wherever applicable, there should be a general provision, cutting
across Sections, creating a power of full confiscation of assets, proceeds,
receipts and benefits, by whatever name called, arising from corruption by
the accused. This provision should be properly drafted in a comprehensive
manner to cover diverse situations of benefit in cash or kind, which, to the
maximum extent possible, should fully be liable to confiscation.
16.10 Although this issue has been discussed in other parts of this Report, for the sake
of clarity, the Committee clarifies that there should be 3 specific and important
time limits in the final enactment viz. firstly, the period of 30 days extendable once
by a further period of 60 days for preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal; secondly, for
completion of investigation by the investigating agency, within 6 months with one
further extension of 3 months and thirdly, for completion of trials, within one year
with one further extension of 6 months.
16.11 The Committee finds no basis for and no reason to retain the last proviso to clause
17(1)(g) which appears to be overbroad and altogether exempts from the Lokpal
Bill, 2011 any entity, simply because it is constituted as a new religious entity or
meant to be constituted as an entity for religious purposes. This proviso should be
deleted, otherwise this exception would virtually swallow up the entire rule found in
the earlier parts of clause 17.
16.12 As regards clause 51 of the Lokpal Bill, 2011, the Committee recommends that the
intent behind the clause be made clear by way of an Explanation to be added to the
effect that the clause is not intended to provide any general exemption and that
“good faith” referred to in clause 52 shall have the same meaning as provided in
section 52 of the IPC.

108
CHAPTER-17
AFTERWORD : REASONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
Committee Proceedings and Timelines
1. In a nutshell, therefore, this Committee could become legally operational only w.e.f.
September 23, 2011 and has completed hearing witnesses on 4th November, 2011. It
had its total deliberations including Report adoption spread over 14 meetings,
together aggregating 40 hours within the space of ten weeks commencing from
September 23, 2011 and ending December 7, 2011. [Para 2.6.]
2. Though not specific to this Committee, it is an established practice that all 24
Parliamentary Standing Committees automatically lapse on completion of their one
year tenure and are freshly constituted thereafter. This results in a legal vacuum,
each year, of approximately two to three weeks and occasionally, as in the present
case, directly affects the urgent and ongoing business of the Committee. The
Committee would respectfully request Parliament to reconsider the system of
automatic lapsing. Instead, continuity in Committees but replacement of Members on
party-wise basis would save time. [Para 2.7.]
The Concept of Lokpal: Evolution and Parliamentary History
3. A proposal in this regard was first initiated in the Lok Sabha on April 3, 1963 by
the Late Dr. L.M. Singhvi, MP
2. While replying to it, the then Law Minister
observed that though the institution seemed full of possibilities, since it involved
a matter of policy, it was for the Prime Minister to decide in that regard
3. Dr. L.M.
Singhvi then personally communicated this idea to the then Prime Minister, Pandit
Jawahar Lal Nehru who in turn, with some initial hesitation, acknowledged that it
was a valuable idea which could be incorporated in our institutional framework. On
3rd November, 1963, Hon’ble Prime Minister made a statement  in respect of the
possibilities of this institution and said that the system of Ombudsman fascinated
him as the Ombudsman had an overall authority to deal with the charges of
corruption, even against the Prime Minister, and commanded the respect and
confidence of a1l
4. [Para 3.3]
108
2Lok Sabha Debates dated 3 rd April, 1963, vol. XVI, P.7556-7558.
3ibid., P .7590-92.
4His initial hesitation to this idea was probably due to the Scandinavian origin of the nomenclature of the institution.
In a lighter vein, he happened to ask Dr. L.M. Singhvi “To what zoo does this animal belong” and asked Shri Singhvi
to indigenize the nomenclature of the institution. Dr. L.M. Singhvi then coined the term Lokpal/Lokayukta to
modify the institution of Ombudsman to the Indian context (as related by Dr. L.M. Singhvi to the Chairman of
this Committee). Also referred to by Mr. Arun Jaitley, M.P. during the Parliament Debate on 27
th August, 2011.
He started the debate in the Upper House thus:- “Now, ‘Ombudsman’ was a Scandinavian concept and, coincidentally,
on 3 rd April, 1 963, then an Independent young Member of the Lok Sabha, Dr. L.M. Singhvi, in  the course of his
participation in a debate for having an Ombudsman in India, attempted to find out what the Indian equivalent could
be, and this word ‘Lokpal’  was added to our vocabulary, the Hindi vocabulary, by Dr. L.M. Singhvi who translated this
word.”

109
4. Thereafter, to give effect to the recommendations of the First Administrative
Reforms Commission, eight Bills were introduced in the Lok Sabha from time to
time. However, all these Bills lapsed consequent upon the dissolution of the
respective Lok Sabhas, except in the case of the 1985 Bill which was subsequently
withdrawn after its introduction. A close analysis of the Bills reflects that there have
been varying approaches and shifting foci in scope and jurisdiction in all these
proposed legislations. The first two Bills viz. of 1968 and of 1971 sought to cover the
entire universe of bureaucrats, Ministers, public sector undertakings, Government
controlled societies for acts and omissions relating to corruption, abuse of position,
improper motives and mal-administration. The 1971 Bill, however, sought to exclude
the Prime Minister from its coverage. The 1977 Bill broadly retained the same
coverage except that corruption was subsequently sought to be defined in terms of
IPC and Prevention  of Corruption Act. Additionally, the 1977 Bill did not cover mal-
administration as a separate category, as also the definition of “public man” against
whom complaints could be filed did not include bureaucrats in general. Thus, while
the first two Bills sought to cover grievance redressal in respect of maladministration
in addition to corruption, the 1977 version did not seek to cover the former and
restricted itself to abuse of office and corruption by Ministers and Members of
Parliament. The 1977 Bill covered the Council of Ministers without specific exclusion
of the Prime Minister.
The 1985 Bill was purely focused on corruption as defined in IPC and POCA and
neither sought to subsume  mal-administration or mis-conduct generally nor
bureaucrats within its ambit. Moreover, the 1985 Bill impliedly included the Prime
Minister since it referred to the office of a Minister in its definition of ‘public
functionary”.
The 1989 Bill restricted itself only to corruption, but corruption only as specified in
the POCA and did not mention IPC. It specifically sought to include the Prime
Minister, both former and incumbent.
Lastly, the last three versions of the Bill in 1996, 1998 and 2001, all largely;
(a) focused only on corruption;
(b) defined corruption only in terms of POCA;
(c) defined “public functionaries” to include Prime Minister, Ministers and MPs;
(d) did not include bureaucrats within their ambit. [Para 3.5]
5. Though the institution of Lokpal is yet to become a reality at the Central level,
similar institutions of Lokayuktas have in fact been set up and are functioning for
many years in several States. In some of the States, the institution of Lokayuktas
was set up as early as in 1970s, the first being Maharashtra in 1972. Thereafter,
State enactments were enacted in the years 1981 (M.P.), 1983 (Andhra Pradesh and
Himachal Pradesh), 1984 (Karnataka), 1985 (Assam), 1986 (Gujarat), 1995 (Delhi),
1999 (Kerala), 2001 (Jharkhand), 2002 (Chhattisgarh) and 2003 (Haryana). At
present, Lokayuktas are in place in 17 States and one Union Territory. However, due
to the difference in structure, scope and jurisdiction, the effectiveness of the State
Lokayuktas vary from State to State. It is noteworthy that some States like Gujarat,
Karnataka, Bihar, Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh have made provisions in their
respective State Lokayuktas Act for suo motu  investigation by the Lokpal. In the
State Lokayukta Acts of some States, the Lokayukta has been given the power for

110
prosecution and also power to ensure compliance of its recommendations. However,
there is a significant difference in the nature of provisions of State Acts and in
powers from State to State. Approximately nine States in India have no Lokayukta
at present. Of the States which have an enactment, four States have no actual
appointee in place for periods varying from two months to eight years. [Para 3.8]
Citizens’ Charter and Grievance Redressal Mechanism
6. The Committee believes that while providing for a comprehensive Grievance
Redressal Mechanism is absolutely critical, it is equally imperative that this
mechanism be placed in a separate framework which ensures speed efficiency and
focus in dealing with citizens’ grievances as per a specified Citizens’ Charter. The
humongous number of administrative complaints and grievance redressal requests
would critically and possibly fatally jeopardize the very existence of a Lokpal
supposed to battle corruption. At the least, it would severally impair its functioning
and efficiency. Qualitatively, corruption and mal-administration fall into reasonably
distinct watertight and largely non-overlapping, mutually exclusive compartments.
The approach to tackling such two essentially distinct issues must necessarily vary
in content, manpower, logistics and structure. The fact that this Committee
recommends that there must be a separate efficacious mechanism to deal with
Grievance Redressal and Citizens’ Charter in a comprehensive legislation other than
the Lokpal Bill does not devalue or undermine the vital importance of that subject.
[Para 4.15]
7. Consequently the Committee strongly recommends the creation of a separate
comprehensive enactment on this subject and such a Bill, if moved through the
Personnel/Law Ministry and if referred to this Standing Committee, would receive
the urgent attention of this Committee. Indeed, this Committee, in its 29th Report
on “Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism”, presented to Parliament in October,
2008 had specifically recommended the enactment of such a mechanism. [Para 4.16]
8. To emphasize the importance of the subject of Citizens’ Charter and to impart it the
necessary weight and momentum, the Committee is of the considered opinion that
any proposed legislation on the subject:
(i) should be urgently undertaken and be comprehensive and all inclusive;
(ii) such enactment should, subject to constitutional validity, also be applicable for
all States as well in one uniform legislation;
(iii) must provide for adequate facilities for proper guidance of the citizens on the
procedural and other requirements while making requests;
(iv) must provide for acknowledgement of citizen’s communications within a fixed
time-frame;
(v) must provide for response within stipulated time-frame;
(vi) must provide for prevention of spurious or lame queries from the department
concerned to illegally/unjustifiably prolong/extend the time limit for response;
(vii) must provide for clearly identifiable name tags for each employee of different
Government departments;
(viii) must provide for all pending grievances to be categorized subject-wise and
notified on a continually updated website for each department;

111
(ix) must provide for a facilitative set of procedures and formats, both for
complaints and for appeals. on this subject – along the lines of the Information
Commissioners system set up under the RTI;
(x) must, in the event that the proposed Central law does not cover states, make
strong recommendations to have similar enactments for grievance redressal/
citizen charter at each State level;
(xi) may prov ide for exclusionary or limited clauses in the legislation to the effect
that Citizen Charter should not include services involving constraints of supply
e.g. power, water, etc. but should include subjects where there is no constraint
involved e.g. birth certificates, decisions, assessment orders. These two are
qualitatively different categories and reflect an important and reasonable
distinction deserving recognition without which Government departments will
be burdened with the legal obligation to perform and provide services or
products in areas beyond their control and suffering from scarcity of supply.
[Para 4.17]
9. The Committee strongly feels that the harmonious synchronization of the RTI Act and
of the Citizens’ Charter and Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism will ensure
greater transparency and accountability in governance and enhance the responsiveness
of the system to the citizens’ needs/expectations/grievances. [Para 4.18]
10. Lastly, the Committee wishes to clarify that the conclusion of the Hon’ble Union
Minister for Finance on the Floor of the House quoted in Para 1.8 above of the
Report does not intend to direct or mandate or bind or oblige this Committee to
provide for a Citizen’s Charter within the present Lokpal Bill alone. The Committee
reads the quoted portion in para 1.8 above to mean and agree 
in principle to provide
for a Citizen’s Charter/Grievance Redressal system but not necessarily and
inexorably in the same Lokpal Bill. Secondly, the reference to ‘appropriate
mechanism’ in para 1.8 above further makes it clear that there must be a
mechanism dealing with the subject but does not require it to be in the same LokpaI
Bill alone. Thirdly, the reference in para 1.8 above to the phrase ‘under Lokpal’ is
not read by the Committee to mean that such a mechanism must exist only within
the present Lokpal Bill. The Committee reads this to mean that there should be an
appropriate institution to deal with the subject of Citizen’s Charter/Grievance
redressal which would be akin to the Lokpal and have its features of independence
and efficacy, but not that it need not be the very same institution i.e.  present
Lokpal. Lastly, the Committee also takes note of the detailed debate and divergent
views of those who spoke on the Floor of both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on this
issue and concludes that no binding consensus or resolution to the effect that the
Grievances Redressal/Citizen’s Charter mechanism 
must be provided in the same
institution in the present Lokpal Bill, has emerged. [Para 4.19]
11. Contextually, the issues and some of the suggestions in this Chapter may overlap
with and should, therefore, be read in conjunction with Chapter 13 of this report.
Though the Committee has already opined that the issue of grievance redressal
should be dealt with in a separate legislation, the Committee hereby also strongly
recommends that there should be a similar declaration either in the same Chapter
of the Lokpal or in a separate Chapter proposed to be added in the Indian
Constitution, giving the same constitutional ‘status to the citizens grievances and
redressal machinery. [Para 4.20]

112
12. This recommendation to provide the proposed Citizen Charter and Grievances
Redressal Machinery the same Constitutional status as the Lokpal also reflects the
genuine and deep concern of this Committee about the need, urgency, status and
importance of a citizen’s charter/grievance machinery. The Committee believes that
the giving of the aforesaid constitutional status to this machinery would go a long
way in enhancing its efficacy and in providing a healing touch to the common man.
Conclusions and recommendations in this regard made in para 13.12 (j) and (k)
should be read in conjunction herein. [Para 4.21]
13. Furthermore, the Committee believes that this recommendation herein is also fully
consistent with the letter and spirit of para 1.8 above viz. the conclusions of the
Minister of Finance in the Lower House recorded in para 1.8 above. [Para 4.22]
The Prime Minister: Full Exlusion Versus Degrees of Inclusion
14. The issue of the Prime Minister’s inclusion or exclusion or partial inclusion or partial
exclusion has been the subject of much debate in the Committee. Indeed, this has
occupied the Committee’s deliberations for at least three different meetings. Broadly,
the models/options which emerged are as follows:
(a) The Prime Minister should be altogether excluded, without exception and without
qualification.
(b) The Prime Minister should altogether be included, without exception and without
qualification (though this view appears to be that of only one or two Members).
(c) The Prime Minister should be fully included, with no exclusionary caveats but he
should be liable to action/prosecution only after demitting office.
(d) The Prime Minister should be included, with subject matter exclusions like
national security, foreign affairs, atomic energy and space. Some variants and
additions suggested included the addition of “national interest” and “public
order” to this list of subject matter exclusions.
(e) One learned Member also suggested that the Prime Minister be included but
subject to the safeguard that the green signal for his prosecution must be first
obtained from either both Houses of Parliament in a joint sitting or some
variation thereof. [Para 5.22]
15. It may be added that so far as the deferred prosecution model is concerned, the view
was that if that model is adopted, there should be additional provisions limiting such
deferment to one term of the Prime Minister only and not giving the Prime Minister
the same benefit of deferred prosecution in case the Prime Minister is re-elected.
[Para 5.23]
16. In a nut shell, as far as the overwhelming number of Members of the Committee
are concerned, it was only three models above viz. as specified in paras (a), (c) and
(d) in para 5.17 above which were seriously proposed. [Para 5.24]
17. Since the Committee finds that each of the views as specified in paras (a), (c) and
(d) in para 5.17 above had reasonably broad and diverse support without going into
the figures for or against or into the names of individual Members, the Committee
believes that, in fairness, all these three options be transmitted by the Committee
as options suggested by the Committee, leaving it to the good sense of ‘Parliament
to decide as to which option is to be adopted. [Para 5.25]

113
18. It would be, therefore, pointless in debating the diverse arguments in respect of each
option or against each option. In fairness, each of the above options has a reasonable
zone of merit as also some areas of demerit. The Committee believes that the
wisdom of Parliament in this respect should be deferred to and the Committee,
therefore, so opines. [Para 5.26]
Members of Parliament: Vote, Speech and Conduct within the House
19. The Committee strongly feels that constitutional safeguards given to MPs under
Article 105 are sacrosanct and time-tested and in view of the near unanimity in the
Committee and among political part on their retention, there is no scope for
interfering with these provisions of the Constitution. Vote, conduct or speech within
the House is intended to promote independent thought and action, without fetters,
within Parliament. Its origin, lineage and continuance is ancient and time-tested.
Even an investigation as to whether vote, speech or conduct in a particular case
involves or does not involve corrupt practices, would whittle such unfettered
autonomy and independence within the Houses of Parliament down to vanishing
point. Such immunity for vote, speech or conduct within the Houses of Parliament
does not in any manner leave culpable MPs blameless or free from sanction. They
are liable to and, have, in the recent past, suffered severe parliamentary punishment
including expulsion from the Houses of Parliament, for alleged taking of bribes
amounting to as little as Rs.  10,000/- for asking questions on the floor of the House.
It is only external policing of speech, vote or conduct within the House that Article
105 frowns upon. It leaves such speech, vote and conduct not only subject to severe
intra-parliamentary scrutiny and action, but also does not seek to affect corrupt
practices or any other vote, speech or conduct outside Parliament. There is absolute
clarity and continued unanimity on the necessity for this limited immunity to be
retained. Hence, speculation on constitutional amendment in this regard is futile and
engenders interminable delay. [Para 6.19]
20. Consequently, the existing structure, mechanism, text and context of clauses 17 (1)
(c) and 17 (2) in the Lokpal Bill 2011 should be retained. [Para 6.20]
Lokpal and State Lokayuktas: Single Enactment and Uniform Standards
21. The Committee finds merit in the suggestion for a single comprehensive federal
enactment dealing with Lokpal and State Lokayuktas. The availability of uniform
standards across the country is desirable; the prosecution of public servants based
upon widely divergent standards in neighboring States is an obvious anomaly. The
Committee has given its earnest attention to the constitutional validity of a single
enactment subsuming both the Lokpal and Lokayukta and concludes that such an
enactment would be not only desirable but constitutionally valid, inter-alia because,
(a) The legislation seeks to implement the UN Convention on Corruption ratified by
India.
(b) Such implementing legislation is recognized by Article 253 and is treated, as one
in List III of the 7th Schedule.
(c) It gets additional legislative competence, inter-alia, individually or jointly under
Entries 1, 2 and 11A of List-III.
(d) A direct example of provision for National Human Rights Commission and also
for State Human Rights Commissions in the same Act is provided in the

114
Protection of the Human Rights Act 1986 seeking to  implement the UN
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights.
(e) Such Parliamentary legislation under Article 253, if enacted, can provide for
repealing of State Lokayukta Acts; subject, however, to the power of any State
to make State specific amendments to the federal enactments after securing
Presidential assent for such State specific amendments. [Para 7.261]
22. Additionally, it is recommended that the content of the provisions dealing with State
Lokayuktas in the proposed central/federal enactment must be covered under a
separate chapter in the Lokpal Bill. That may be included in one or more chapters
possibly after Chapter II and before Chapter III as found in the Lokpal Bill 2011.
The entire Lokpal Bill 2011 would have to incorporate necessary changes and
additions, mutatis mutandis, in respect of the State Lokayukta institutions. To give
one out of many examples, the Selection Committee would be comprised of the State
Chief Minister, the Speaker of the Lower House of the State, the Leader of
Opposition in the Lower House, the Chief Justice of the High Court and a joint
nominee of the State Election Commissioner, the State Auditor General and State
PSC Chairman or, where one or more of such institutions is absent in the State, a
joint nominee of comparable institutions having statutory status within the State.
[Para 7.27]
23. All these State enactments shall include the Chief Minister within their purview. The
Committee believes that the position of the State Chief Minister is not identical to
that of the Prime Minister. The argument for preventing instability and those
relating to national security or the image of the country do not apply in case of a
Chief Minister. Finally, while Article 356 is available to prevent a vacuum for the
post of Chief Minister, there is no counterpart constitutional provision in respect of
the federal Government. [Para 7.28]
24. Article 51 (c) of the Directive Principles of State Policy enjoining the federation to
“foster respect for international law and treaty obligations…” must also be kept in
mind while dealing with implementing legislations pursuant to international treaties,
thus providing an additional validating basis for a single enactment. [Para 7.29]
25. The Committee recommends that the Lokpal Bill, 2011 may be expanded to include
several substantive provisions which would be applicable for Lokayuktas in each
State to deal with issues of corruption of functionaries under the State Government
and employees of those organizations controlled by the State Government, but that,
unlike the Lokpal, the state Lokayuktas would cover an classes of employees.
[Para 7.30]
26. The Committee recommends that if the above recommendation is implemented the
Lokpal Bill, 2011 may be renamed as “Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011” [Para 7.31]
27. The Committee believes that the recommendations, made herein, are fully consistent
with and implement, in letter and spirit, the conclusions of the Minister of Finance
on the floor of the Houses in respect of establishment of Lokayuktas in the States,
as quoted in para 1.8 above. The Committee is conscious of the fact that the few
States which have responded to the Secretariat’s letter sent to each and every State
seeking to elicit their views, have opposed a uniform Central federal Lokpal and
Lokayukta Bill and, understandably and expectedly, have sought to retain their
powers to enact State level Lokayukta Acts. The Committee repeats and reiterates
the reasons given hereinabove, in support of the desirability of one uniform

115
enactment for both Lokpal and Lokayuktas. The Committee also reminds itself that
if such a uniform Central enactment is passed, it would not preclude States from
making any number of State specific amendments, subject to prior Presidential
assent, as provided in the Indian Constitution. The Committee, therefore, believes
that it has rightly addressed the two issues which arise in this respect viz. the need
and desirability for a uniform single enactment and, secondly, if the latter is
answered in the affirmative, that such a uniform enactment is Constitutionally valid
and permissible. [Para 7.32]
28. Since this report, and especially this chapter, recommends the creation of a uniform
enactment for both Central and State Lokayuktas, it is reiterated that a whole
separate chapter (or, indeed, more than one chapter) would have to be inserted in
the Lokpal Bill of 2011 providing for State specific issues. Secondly, this would have
to be coupled with mutatis mutandis changes in other parts of the Act to
accommodate the fact that the same Act is addressing the requirement of both the
federal institution and also the State level institution. [Para 7.33]
29. Furthermore, each and every chapter and set of recommendations in this report
should also be made applicable, mutatis mutandis, by appropriate provisions in the
Chapter dealing with State Lokayuktas. [Para 7.34]
30. Although it is not possible for this Committee to specifically list the particularised
version of each and every amendment or adaptation required to the Lokpal Bill, 2011
to subsume State Lokayuktas within the same enactment, it gives below a
representative non-exhaustive list of such amendments/adaptations, which the
Government should suitably implement in the context of one uniform enactment for
both Lokpal and Lokayuktas. These include:
(a) Clause; 1 (2) should be retained even for the State Lokayukta provisions since
State level officers could well be serving in parts of India other than the State
concerned as also beyond the shores of India.
(b) The Chief Minister must be included within the State Lokayukta on the same
basis as any other Minister of the Council of Ministers at the State level. Clause
2 of the 2011 Bill must be amended to include Government servants at the State
level. The competent authority in each case would also accordingly change e.g.
for a Minister of the Council of Minister, it would be the Chief Minister; for
MLAs, it would be the presiding officer of the respective House and so on and
so forth. The competent authority for the Chief Minister would be the Governor.
(c) As regards Clause 3, the only change would be in respect of the Chairperson,
which should be as per the recommendation made for the Lokpal.
(d) As regards the Selection Committee, the issue at the Lokayukta level has
already been addressed above.
(e) References in the Lokpal context to the President of India shall naturally have
to be substituted at the Lokayukta level by references to the Governor of the
State.
(f) The demarcation of the criminal justice process into five broad areas from the
initiation of complaint till its adjudication, as provided in Chapter 12, should also
apply at the State Lokayukta level. The investigative agency, like the CBI, shall
be the anti-corruption unit of the State but crucially, it shall be statutorily made
independent by similar declarations of independence as already elaborated in the

116
discussion in Chapter 12. All other recommendations in Chapter 12 can and
should be applied mutatis mutandis for the Lokayukta.
(g) Similarly, all the recommendations in Chapter 12 in respect of departmental
inquiry shall apply to the Lokayukta with changes made, mutatis mutandis, in
respect of State bodies. The State Vigilance Commission/machinery would, in
such cases, discharge the functions of the CVC. However, wherever wanting,
similar provisions as found in the CVC Act buttressing the independence of the
CVC shall be provided.
(h) The recommendations made in respect of elimination of sanction as also the
other recommendations, especially in Chapter 12, relating to Lokpal, can and
should be applied mutatis mutandis in respect of Lokayukta.
(i) Although no concrete fact situation exists in respect of a genuine multi- State
or inter-State corruption issue, the Committee opines that in the rare and
unusual case where the same person is sought to be prosecuted by two or more
State machineries of two or more Lokayuktas, there should be a provision
entitling the matter to be referred by either of the -States or by the accused to
the Lokpal at the federal level, to ensure uniformity and to eliminate turf wars
between States or jurisdictional skirmishes by the accused.
(j) As already stated above, the coverage of the State Lokayukta, unlike the
Lokpal, would extend to all classes of employees, including employees of state
owned or controlled entities. [Para 7.35]
Lower Bureaucracy: Degrees of Inclusion
31. The Committee, therefore, recommends
(a) That for the Lokpal at the federal level, the coverage should be expanded to
include Group A and Group B officers but not to include Group C and Group D.
(b) The provisions for the State Lokayuktas should contain similar counterpart
reference, for purposes of coverage, of all similar categories at the State level
which are the same or equivalent to Group A and Group B for the federal
Lokpal. Though the Committee was tempted to provide only for enabling power
for the States to include the State Lokayuktas to include the lower levels of
bureaucracy like groups ‘C’ and ‘D’ at the State level, the Committee, on
careful consideration, recommends that all the groups, including the lower
bureaucracy at the State level and the groups equivalent with ‘C’  and ‘D’ at the
State level should also be included within the jurisdiction of State Lokayuktas
with no exclusion. Employees of state owned or controlled entities should also be
covered.
(c) The Committee is informed by the DoPT that after the Sixth Pay Commission
Report, Group-D has been/will be transposed and sub-merged fully in Group-C.
In other words, after the implementation of the Sixth Pay Commission Report,
which is already under implementation, Group-D will disappear and there will be
only Group-C as far as the Central Government employees are concerned.
(i) Consequently, Group-C, which will shortly include the whole of Group-D
will comprise a total number of approximately 30 lakhs (3 million)
employees. Though the figures are not fully updated, A+B classes
recommended for inclusion by this Committee would comprise just under

117
3 lakhs employees. With some degree of approximation, the number of
Railway employees from group A to D inclusive can be pegged at about
13½ lakhs (as on March 2010). If Central Government PSUs are added,
personnel across all categories (Group A, B, C and D as existing) would be
approximately an additional 15 lakhs employees. Post and Telegraph across
all categories would further number approximately 4½ lakhs employees.
Hence the total, on the aforesaid basis (which is undoubtedly an
approximation and a 2010 figure) for Group A to D (soon, as explained
above, to be only Group-C) + Railways + Central PSUs + Post and
Telegraph would be approximately 63 lakhs, or at 2011 estimates, let us
assume 65 lakhs i.e. 6.5 million.
(ii) On a conservative estimate of one policing officer per 200 employees (a
ratio propounded by several witnesses including Team Anna), approximately
35000 employees would be required in the Lokpal to police the aforesaid
group of Central Government employees (including, as explained above,
Railways, Central PSUs, P&T etc.). This policing is certainly not possible
by the proposed nine member Lokpal. The Lokpal would have to spawn a
bureaucracy of at least 35000 personnel who would, in turn, be recruited
for a parallel Lokpal bureaucracy. Such a mammoth bureaucracy, till it is
created, would render the Lokpal unworkable. Even after it is created, it
may lead to a huge parallel bureaucracy which would set in train its own
set of consequences, including arbitrariness, harassment and unfair and
illegal action by the same bureaucracy which, in the ultimate analysis
would be nothing but a set of similar employees cutting across the same
A, B and C categories. As some of the Members of the Committee, in a
lighter vein put it, one would then have to initiate a debate on creating a
super Lokpal or a Dharampal for the policing of the new bureaucracy of
the Lokpal institution itself.
(iia) The Committee also notes that as far as the Lokpal institution is
concerned, it is proposed as a new body and there is no such preexisting
Lokpal bureaucracy available. In this respect, there is a fundamental
difference between the Lokpal and Lokayuktas, the latter having
functioned, in one form or the’ other in India for the last several decades,
with a readily available structure and manpower in most parts of India.
(iii) If, from the above approximate figure of 65 lakhs, we exclude C and D
categories (as explained earlier, D will soon become part of C) from
Central Government, Railways, PSUs, Post and Telegraph etc., the number
of A and B categories employees in these departments would aggregate
approximately 7.75 lakhs. In other words, the aggregate of C and D
employees in these classes aggregate approximately 57 or 58 lakhs. The
Committee believes that this figure of 7.75 or 8 lakhs would be a more
manageable, workable and desirable figure for the Lokpal institution, at
least to start with.
(iv) The impression that inclusion of Group ‘A’ and B alone involves exclusion
of large sections of the bureaucracy must be dispelled. Though in terms of
number, the aggregation of Groups ‘C’ and ‘D’ is an overwhelming
percentage of total Central Government employees, Groups ‘A’ and B
include the entire class above the supervisory level. Effectively, this means

118
that virtually all Central Government employees at the Section Officer
level and above would be included. It is vital to emphasize that this
demarcation has to be viewed in functional terms, since it gives such
categories significant decision making power in contra-distinction to mere
numbers and necessarily subsumes a major chunk of medium and big
ticket corruption.
(v) Another misconception needs to be clarified. There is understandable and
justifiable anger that inclusion of Group C and D would mean exclusion of
a particular class which has tormented the common man in different ways
over the years viz. Tehsildar, Patwari and similarly named or equivalent
officers. Upon checking, the Secretariat has clarified that these posts are
State Government posts under gazette notification notified by the State
Government and, hence, the earlier recommendation of this Committee
will enable their full inclusion.
(vi) We fur ther recommend that for the hybrid category of Union Territories,
the same power be given as is recommended above in respect of State
Lokayuktas. The Committee also believes that this is the appropriate
approach since a top heavy approach should be avoided and the
inclusionary ambit should be larger and higher at the state level rather
than burdening the Lokpal with all classes of employees.
(vii) As of now, prior to the coming into force of the Lokpal Act or any of the
recommendations of this report, Group C and D officers are not dealt with
by the CVC. Group C & D employees have to be proceeded against
departmentally by the appropriate Department Head, who may either
conduct a departmental enquiry or file a criminal corruption complaint
against the relevant employee through the CBI and/or the normal Police
forces. The Committee now recommends that the entire Group C & D,
(later only Group C as explained above) shall be brought specifically under
the jurisdiction of the CVC. In other words, the CVC, which is a high
statutory body of repute and whose selection process includes the Leader
of the Opposition, should be made to exercise powers identical to or at
least largely analogous, in respect of these class C and class D employees
as the Lokpal does for Group A and B. employees. The ultimate Lokpal
Bill/Act should thus become a model for the CVC, in so far as Group C
& D employees are concerned. If that requires large scale changes in the
CVC Act, the same should be carried out. This would considerably
strengthen the existing regime of policing, both departmentally and in
terms of anti-corruption criminal prosecutions, all Group C & D employees
and would not in any manner leave them either unpoliced or subject to a
lax or ineffective regime of policing.
(viii) Furthermore, this Committee recommends that there would be broad
supervisory fusion at the apex level by some appropriate changes in the
CVC Act. The CVC should be made to file periodical reports, say every
three months, to the Lokpal in respect of action taken for these class C
and D categories. On these reports, the Lokpal shall be entitled to make
comments and suggestions for improvement and strengthening the
functioning of CVC, which in turn, shall file, appropriate action taken
reports with the Lokpal.

119
(ix) Appropriate increase in the strength of the CVC manpower, in the light of
the foregoing recommendations, would also have to be considered by the
Government.
(x) The Committee also feels that this is the start of the Lokpal institution
and it should not be dogmatic and inflexible on any of the issues. For a
swift and efficient start, the LokpaI should be kept slim, trim, effective
and swift. However, after sometime, once the Lokpal institution has
stabilized and taken root, the issue of possible inclusion of Group C classes
also within the Lokpal may be considered. This phase-wise flexible and
calibrated approach would, in the opinion of this Committee, be more
desirable instead of any blanket inclusion of all classes at this stage.
(xi) Another consideration which the Committee has kept in mind is the fact
that if all the classes of higher, middle and lower bureaucracy are included
within the Lokpal at the first instance itself, in addition to all the
aforesaid reasons, the CVC’s role and functioning would virtually cease
altogether, since’ the CVC would have no role in respect of any class of
employee and would be reduced, at best, to a vigilance clearance authority.
This would be undesirable in the very first phase of reforms, especially
since the CVC is a high statutory authority in this country which has, over
the last half century, acquired a certain institutional identity and stability
along with conventions and practices which ought not to be uprooted in
this manner.
(d) All provisions for prior sanction/prior permission, whether under the CrPC or
Prevention of Corruption Act or DSPE Act or related legislation must be
repealed in respect of all categories of bureaucrats/government servants,
whether covered by the Lokpal or not, and there should consequently be no
requirement of sanction of any kind in respect of any class or categories of
officers at any level in any Lokpal and Lokayukta or, indeed, CVC proceedings
(for non-Lokpal covered categories). In other words, the requirement of sanction
must go not only for Lokpal covered personnel but also for non-Lokpal covered
personnel i.e. class ‘C’ and ‘D’ (Class D, as explained elsewhere, will eventually
be submerged into Class ‘C’). The sanction requirement, originating as a
salutary safeguard against witch hunting has, over the years, as applied by the
bureaucracy itself, degenerated into a refuge for the guilty, engendering either
endless delay or obstructing all meaningful action. Moreover, the strong filtering
mechanism at the stage of preliminary inquiry proposed in respect of the
Lokpal, is a more than adequate safeguard, substituting effectively for the
sanction requirement.
(e) No doubt corruption at all levels is reprehensible and no doubt corruption at the
lowest levels does affect the common man and inflicts pain and injury upon him
but the Committee, on deep consideration and reconsideration of this issue,
concluded that this new initiative is intended to send a clear and unequivocal
message, first and foremost, in respect of medium and big ticket corruption.
Secondly, this Committee is not oblivious to the fact that jurisdiction to cover
the smallest Government functionary at the peon and driver level (class C
largely covers peons, assistants, drivers, and so on, though it does also cover
some other more “powerful” posts) may well provide an excuse and a pretext to
divert the focus from combating medium and big ticket corruption to merely

120
catching the smaller fry and building up an impressive array of statistical
prosecutions and convictions without really being able to root out the true
malaise of medium and big ticket corruption which has largely escaped scrutiny
and punishment over the last 60 years.
(f) The Committee also believes that the recommendations in respect of scope of
coverage of the lower bureaucracy, made herein, are fully consistent with the
conclusions of the Minister of Finance on the floor of the Houses, as quoted in
para 1.8 above of this Report. Firstly, the lower bureaucracy has been, partly,
brought within the coverage as per the recommendations above and is, thus,
consistent with the essence of the conclusion contained in para 1.8 above.
Secondly, the Committee does not read para 1.8 above to meet an inevitable and
inexorable mandate to necessarily subsume each and every group of civil servant
(like Group ‘C’ or Group ‘D’, etc.). Thirdly, the in principle consensus reflected
in para 1.8 would be properly, and in true letter and spirit, be implemented in
regard to the recommendations in the present Chapter for scope and coverage of
Lokpal presently. Lastly, it must be kept in mind that several other
recommendations in this Report have suggested substantial improvements and
strengthening of the provisions relating to policing of other categories of
personnel like C and D, inter alia , by the CVC and/or to the extent relevant, to
be dealt with as Citizens’ Charter and Grievance Redressal issues. [Para 8.18}
False Complaints and Complainants : Punitive Measures
32. It cannot be gainsaid that after the enormous productive effort put in by the entire
nation over the last few months for the creation of a new initiative like the Lokpal
Bill, it would not and cannot be assumed to be anyone’s intention to create a remedy
virtually impossible to activate, or worse in consequence than the disease. The
Committee, therefore, starts with the basic principle that it must harmoniously
balance the legitimate but competing demands of prevention of false, frivolous
complaints on the one hand as also the clear necessity of ensuring that no preclusive
bar arises which would act as a deterrent for genuine and bona fide complaints.
[Para 9.6]
33. The  Committee sees the existing provisions in this regard as disproportionate, to the
point of being a deterrent. [Para 9.7]
34. The Committee finds a convenient analogous solution and therefore adopts the model
which the same Committee has adopted in its recently submitted report on Judicial
Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 presented to the Rajya Sabha on August 30,
2011. [Para 9.8]
35. In para 18.8 of the aforesaid Report, the Committee, in the context of Judicial
Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 said : “The Committee endorses the rationale
of making a provision for punishment for making frivolous or vexatious complaints.
The Committee, however, expresses its reservation over the prescribed quantum of
punishment both in terms of imprisonment which is up to 5 years and fine which is
up to 5 lakh rupees. The severe punishment prescribed in the Bill may deter the
prospective complainants from coming forward and defeat the very rationale of the
Bill. In view of this, the Committee recommends that Government should
substantially dilute the quantum of the punishment so as not to discourage people
from taking initiatives against the misbehaviour of a judge. In any case, it should
not exceed the punishment provided under the Contempt of Court Act. The

121
Government may also consider specifically providing in the Bill a proviso to protect
those complainants from punishment/penalty who for some genuine reasons fail to
prove their complaints. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Bill should
specifically provide for protection in case of complaints made ‘in good faith’ in line
with the defence of good faith available under the Indian Penal Code.” [Para 9.9]
36. Consequently, in respect of the LokpaI Bill, the Committee recommends that, in
respect of false and frivolous complaints, :
(a) The punishment should include simple imprisonment not exceeding six months;
(b) The fine should not exceed Rs.25000; and
(c) The Bill should specifically provide for protection in case of complaints made in
good faith in line with the defence of good faith available under the Indian Penal
Code under Section 52 IPC. [Para 9.10]
The Judiciary: To Include or Exclude
37. The Committee recommends:
(i) The Judiciary, comprising 31 odd judges of the Apex Court, 800 odd judges of the
High Courts, and 20,000 odd judges of the subordinate judiciary are a part of a
separate and distinct organ of the State. Such separation of judicial power is
vitally necessary for an independent judiciary in any system and has been
recognized specifically in Article 50 of the Indian Constitution. It is interesting
that while the British Parliamentary democratic system, which India adopted,
has never followed the absolute separation of powers doctrine between the
Legislature and the Executive, as, for example, found in the US system, India
has specifically mandated under its Constitution itself that such separation must
necessarily be maintained between the Executive and the Legislature on the one
hand and the Judiciary on the other.
(ii) Such separation, autonomy and necessary isolation is vital for ensuring an
independent judicial system. India is justifiably proud of a vigorous (indeed
sometimes over vigorous) adjudicatory judicial organ. Subjecting that organ to
the normal process of criminal prosecution or punishment through the normal
courts of the land would not be conducive to the preservation of judicial
independence in the long run.
(iii) If the Judiciary were included simpliciter as suggested in certain quarters, the
end result would be the possible and potential direct prosecution of even an apex
Court Judge before the relevant magistrate exercising the relevant jurisdiction.
The same would apply to High Court Judges. This would lead to an
extraordinarily piquant and an untenable situation and would undermine judicial
independence at its very root.
(iv) Not including the Judiciary under the present Lokpal dispensation does not in
any manner mean that this organ should be left unpoliced in respect of
corruption issues. This Committee has already proposed and recommended a
comprehensive Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill which provides a
complete in-house departmental mechanism, to deal with errant judicial behavior
by way of censure, warning, suspension, recommendation or removal and so on
within the judicial fold itself. The Committee deprecates the criticism of the

122
Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill as excluding issues of corruption for
the simple reason that they were never intended to be addressed by that Bill and
were consciously excluded.
(v) As stated in para 21 of the report of this Committee on the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, to this report, the Committee again recommends, in the
present context of the Lokpal Bill, that the entire appointment process of the
higher judiciary needs to be revamped and reformed. The appointment process
cannot be allowed and should not be allowed to continue in the hands of a self-
appointed common law mechanism created by judicial order operating since the
early 1990s. A National Judicial Commission must be set up to create a broad-
based and comprehensive model for judicial appointments, including, if
necessary, by way of amendment of Articles 124 and 217 of the Indian
Constitution. Without such a fundamental revamp of the appointment process at
source and at the inception, all other measures remain purely ex-post facto  and
curative. Preventive measures to ensure high quality judicial recruitment at the
entrance point is vital.
(vi) It is the same National Judicial Commission which has to be entrusted with
powers of both transfer and criminal prosecution of judges for corruption. If
desired, by amending the provisions of the Constitution as they stand today,
such proposed National Judicial Commission may also be given the power of
dismissal/removal. In any event, this mechanism of the National Judicial
Commission is essential since it would obviate allegations and challenges to the
validity of any enactment dealing with judges on the ground of erosion or
impairment of judicial independence. Such judicial independence has been held
to be part of the basic structure of the Indian Constitution and is, therefore,
unamendable even by way of an amendment of the Indian Constitution. It is for
this reason that while this Committee is very categorically and strongly of the
view that there should be a comprehensive mechanism for dealing with the
trinity of judicial appointments, judicial transfers and criminal prosecution of
judges, it is resisting the temptation of including them in the present Lokpal
Bill. The Committee, however, exhorts the appropriate departments, with all the
power at its command, to expeditiously bring a Constitutional Amendment Bill
to address the aforesaid trinity of core issues directly impinging on the judicial
system today viz. appointment of high quality and high calibre judges at the
inception, non-discriminatory and effective transfers and fair and vigorous
criminal prosecution of corrupt judges without impairing or affecting judicial
independence.
(vii) The Committee finds no reason to exclude from the conclusions on this subject,
the burgeoning number of quasi-judicial authorities including tribunals as also
other statutory and non-statutory bodies which, where not covered under
category ‘A’ and ‘B’ bureaucrats, exercise quasi-judicial powers of any kind.
Arbitrations and other modes of alternative dispute resolution should also be
specifically covered in this proposed mechanism. They should be covered in any
eventual legislation dealing with corruption in the higher judiciary. The
Committee notes that a large mass of full judicial functions, especially from the
High Courts has, for the last 30 to 40 years, been progressively hived off to
diverse tribunals exercising diverse powers under diverse statutory enactments.
The Committee also notes that apart from and in addition to such tribunals, a
plethora of Government officials or other persona designata exercise quasi

123
judicial powers in diverse situations and diverse contexts. Whatever has been
said in respect of the judiciary in this chapter should, in the considered opinion
of this Committee, be made applicable, with appropriate modifications in respect
of quasi-judicial bodies, tribunals and persons as well. [Para 10.21]
The Lokpal : Search and Selection
38. To ensure flexibility, speed and efficiency on the one hand and representation to all
organs of State on the other, the Committee recommends a Selection Committee
comprising:–
(a) The Prime Minister of India- as Head of the Executive.
(b) The Speaker Lok Sabha- as Head of the Legislature.
(c) The Chief Justice of India-as Head of the Judiciary.
(d) The leader of the Opposition of the Lower House.
(e) An eminent Indian, selected as elaborated in the next paragraph.
N.R: functionaries like the Chairman and Leader of the Opposition of the Upper
House have not been included in the interests of compactness and
flexibility. The Prime Minister would preside over the Selection
Committee. [Para 11.18]
39. The 5
th Member of the Selection Committee in (e) above should be a joint nominee
selected jointly by the three designated Constitutional bodies viz., the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India, the Chief Election Commissioner and the UPSC
Chairman. This ensures a reasonably wide and representative degree of inputs from
eminent Constitutional bodies, without making the exercise too cumbersome. Since
the other Members of the Selection Committee are all ex-officio, this 5th nominee
of the aforesaid Constitutional bodies shall be nominated for a fixed term of five
years. Additionally, it should be clarified that he should be an eminent Indian and
all the diverse criteria, individually, jointly or severally, applicable as specified in
Clause 4 (1) (i) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 should be kept in mind by the aforesaid
three designated Constitutional nominators. [Para 11.19]
40. There should however, be a proviso in Clause 4(3) to the effect that a Search
Committee shall comprise at least seven Members and shall ensure representation 50
per cent to Members of SC’s and/or STs and/or Other Backward Classes and/or
Minorities and/or Women or any category or combination thereof. Though there is
some merit in the suggestion that the Search Committee should not be mandatory
since, firstly, the Selection Committee may not need to conduct any search and
secondly, since this gives a higher degree of flexibility and speed to the Selection
Committee, the Committee, on deep consideration, finally opines that the Search
Committee should be made mandatory. The Committee does so, in particular, in view
of the high desirability of providing representation in the Search Committee as
stated above which, this Committee believes, cannot be effectively ensured without
the mandatory requirement to have a Search Committee. It should, however, be
clarified that the person/s selected by the Search Committee shall not be binding on
the Selection Committee and secondly, that, where the Selection Committee rejects
the recommendations of the Search Committee in respect of any particular post, the
Selection Committee shall not be obliged to go back to the Search Committee for the
same post but would be entitled to proceed directly by itself. [Para 11.20]

124
41. Over the years, there has been growing concern in India that the entire mass of
statutory quasi judicial and other similar tribunals, bodies or entities have been
operated by judicial personnel i.e. retired judges, mainly of the higher judiciary viz.
the High Courts and the Supreme Court. [Para 11.20(A)]
42. There is no doubt that judicial training and experience imparts not only a certain
objectivity but a certain technique of adjudication which, intrinsically and by training,
is likely to lead to greater care and caution in preserving principles like fair play,
natural justice, burden of proof and so on and so forth. Familiarity with case law and
knowledge of intricate legal principles, is naturally available in retired judicial
personnel of the higher judiciary. [Para 11.20(B)]
43. However, when a new and nascent structur e like Lokpal is being contemplated, it is
necessary not to fetter or circumscribe the discretion of the appointing authority. The
latter is certainly entitled to appoint judges to the Lokpal, and specific exclusion of
judges is neither contemplated nor being provided. However, to consider, as the
Lokpal Bill, 2011 does, only former Chief Justices of India or former judges of the
Supreme Court as the Chairperson of the Lokpal would be a totally uncalled for and
unnecessary fetter. The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 3(2) be
suitably modified not to restrict the Selection Committee to selecting only a sitting
or former Chief Justice of India or judge of the Supreme Court as Chairperson of
the Lokpal. [Para 11.20(C)]
44. A similar change is not suggested in respect of Members of the Lokpal and the
existing provision in clause 3 (2) (b) read with clause 19 may continue. Although the
Committee does believe that it is time to consider tribunals staffed by outstanding
and eminent Indians, not necessarily only from a pool of retired members of the
higher judiciary, the Committee feels hamstrung by the Apex Court decision in L.
Chandra Kumar Vs. Union of India 1997 (3) SCC 261 which has held and has been
interpreted to hold that statutory tribunals involving adjudicatory functions must not
sit singly but must sit in benches of two and that at least one of the two members
must be a judicial member. Hence, unless the aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court
in L. Chandra Kumar Vs. Union of India is reconsidered, the Committee refrains
from suggesting corresponding changes in clause 3 (2) (b) read with clause 19,
though it has been tempted to do so. [Para 11.20(D)]
45. There is merit in the suggestion that clause 3 (4) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 be further
amended to clarify that a person shall not be eligible to become Chairperson or
Member of Lokpal if:
(a) He/she is a person convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude;
(b) He/she is  a person less than 45 years of age, on date of assuming office as
Chairperson or Member of Lokpal;
(c) He/she has been in the service of any Central or State Government or any
entity owned or controlled by the Central or State Government and has vacated
office either by way of resignation, removal or retirement within the period of
12 months prior to the date of appointment as Chairperson or Member of
Lokpal. [Para 11.20(E)]
46. In clause 9 (2), the existing provision should be retained but it should be added at
the end of that clause, for the purpose of clarification, that no one shall be eligible
for re-appointment as Chairperson or Member of the Lokpal if he has already
enjoyed a term of five years. [Para 11.20(F)]

125
47. The Committee has already recommended appropriate representation on the Search
Committee, to certain sections of society who have been historically marginalized.
The Committee also believes that although the institution of Lokpal is a relatively
small body of nine members and specific reservation cannot and ought not to be
provided in the Lokpal institution itself, there should be a provision added after
clause 4 (5) to the effect that the Selection Committee and the Search Committee
shall make every endeavour to reflect, on the Lokpal institution, the diversity of
India by including the representation, as far as practicable, of historically
marginalized sections of the society like SCs/STs, OBCs, minorities and women.
[Para 11.20(G)]
48. As regards clause 51 of the Lokpal Bill, 2011, the Committee recommends that the
intent behind the clause be made clear by way of an Explanation to be added to the
effect that the clause is not intended to provide any general exemption and that
“good faith” referred to in clause 52 shall have the same meaning as provided in
section 52 of the IPC. [Para 11.20(H)]
The Trinity of the Lokpal, CBI and CVC:
In Search of an Equilibrium
49. (A) Whatever is stated hereinafter in these recommendations is obviously applicable
only to Lokpal and Lokayukta covered personnel and offences/misconduct, as already
delineated in this Report earlier, inter alia , in Chapter 8 and elsewhere.
(B) For those outside (A) above, the existing law, except to the extent changed, would
continue to apply. [Para 12.32]
50. This Chapter, in the opinion of the Committee, raises an important issue of the
quality of both investigation and prosecution; the correct balance and an apposite
equilibrium of 3 entities ( viz. Lokpal, CBI and CVC) after creation of the new entity
called Lokpal;. harmonious functioning and real life operational efficacy of
procedural and substantive safeguards; the correct balance between initiation of
complaint, its preliminary screening/inquiry, its further investigation, prosecution,
adjudication and punishment; and the correct harmonization of diverse provisions of
law arising from the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, the CVC Act, the
proposed Lokpal Act, the IPC, CrPC and the Prevention of Corruption Act. It is,
therefore, a somewhat delicate and technical task. [Para 12.33]
51. The stages of criminal prosecution of the Lokpal and Lokayukta covered persons and
officers can be divided broadly into 5 stages, viz. (a) The stage of complaint, whether
by a complainant or suo motu , (b) the preliminary screening of such a complaint, (c)
the full investigation of the complaint and the report in that respect, (d) prosecution,
if any, on the basis of the investigation and (e) adjudication, including punishment,
if any. [Para 12.34]
52. The Committee recommends that the complaint should be allowed to be made
either by any complainant or initiated suo motu  by the LokpaI. Since, presently,
the CBI also has full powers of suo motu  initiation of investigation, a power which
is frequently exercised, it is felt that that the same power of suo motu  proceedings
should also be preserved for both the CBI and the Lokpal, subject, however, to
overall supervisory jurisdiction of the Lokpal over the CBI, including simultaneous
intimation and continued disclosure of progress of any inquiry or investigation by
the CBI to the Lokpal, subject to what has been elaborated in the next paragraph.
[Para 12.35]

126
53. Once the complaint, through any party or suo motu  has arisen, it must be subject
to a careful and comprehensive preliminary screening to rule out false, frivolous and
vexatious complaints. This power of preliminary inquiry must necessarily vest in the
Lokpal. However, in this respect, the recommendations of the Committee in para
12.36(I) should be read with this para. This is largely covered in clause 23 (1) of the
Lokpal Bill, 2011. However, in this respect, the Lokpal would have to be provided,
at the inception, with a sufficiently large internal inquiry machinery. The Lokpal Bill,
2011 has an existing set of provisions (Clauses 13 and 14 in Chapter III) which
refers to a full-fledged investigation wing. In view of the structure proposed in this
Chapter, there need not be such an investigation wing but an efficacious inquiry
division for holding the preliminary inquiry in respect of the complaint at the
threshold. Preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal also semantically distinguishes itself
from the actual investigation by the CBI after it is referred by the Lokpal to the
CBI. The pattern for provision of such an inquiry wing may be similar to the existing
structure as provided in Chapter III of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 but with suitable
changes made, mutatis mutandis , and possible merger of the provisions of Chapter
VII with Chapter III. [Para 12.36]
54. The Committee is concerned at the overlap of terminology used and procedures
proposed, between preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal as opposed to investigation by
the investigating agency, presently provided in Clause 23 of the Lokpal Bill. The
Committee, therefore, recommends:
(a) that only two terms be used to demarcate and differentiate between the
preliminary inquiry to be conducted by the Lokpal, inter-alia , under Chapters VI
and VII read with Clause 2(1)(e) as opposed to investigation by the investigating
agency which has been proposed to be the CBI in the present report.
Appropriate changes should make it clear that the investigation (by the CBI as
recommended in this report), shall have the same meaning as provided in
Clause 2 (h) of the Cr.P.C whereas the terms “inquiry” or “preliminary
investigation” should be eschewed and the only two terms used should be
“preliminary inquiry” ( by the Lokpal) on the one hand & “investigation” (by
the CBI), on the other.
(b) the term preliminary inquiry should be used instead of the term inquiry in
clause 2(1)(e) and it should be clarified therein that it refers to preliminary
inquiry done by the Lokpal in terms of Chapters VI and VII of the Lokpal Bill,
2011 and does not mean or refer to the inquiry mentioned in Section 2(g) of the
Cr.P.C.
(c) the term “investigation” alone should be used while eschewing terms like
“preliminary investigation” and a similar definitional provision may be inserted
after Clause 2(1)(e) to state that the term investigation shall have the same
meaning as defined in Clause 2(h) of the Cr.P.C.
(d) Similar changes would have to be made in all other clauses in the Lokpal Bill,
2011, one example of which includes Clause-14. [Para 12.36(A)]
55. There are several parts of Clause 23 of the 2011 Bill, including Clauses 23(4), 23(5),
23(6), 23(9) and 23(11) which require an opportunity of being heard to be given to
the public servant during the course of the preliminary inquiry i.e. the threshold
proceedings before the Lokpal in the sense discussed above. After deep consideration,
the Committee concludes that it is unknown to criminal law to provide for hearing

127
to the accused at the stage of preliminary inquiry by the appropriate authority i.e.
Lokpal or Lokayukta in this case. Secondly, the preliminary inquiry is the stage of
verification of basic facts regarding the complaint, the process of filtering out false,
frivolous, fictitious and vexatious complaints and the general process of seeing that
there is sufficient material to indicate the commission of cognizable offences to
justify investigation by the appropriate investigating agency. If the material available
in the complaint at the stage of its verification through the preliminary inquiry is
fully disclosed to the accused, a large part of the entire preliminary inquiry, later
investigation, prosecution and so on, may stand frustrated or irreversibly prejudiced
at the threshold. Thirdly, and most importantly, the preliminary inquiry is being
provided as a threshold filter in favour of the accused and is being entrusted to an
extremely high authority like the Lokpal, created after a rigorous selection
procedure. Order agencies like the CBI also presently conduct preliminary  inquiries
but do not hear or afford natural justice to the accused during that process.
Consequently the Committee recommends that all references in Clause 23 or
elsewhere in the Lokpal Bill, 2011 to hearing of the accused at the preliminary
inquiry stage should be deleted. [Para 12.36(B)]
56. Since the Committee has recommended abolition of the personal hearing process
before the Lokpal during the preliminary inquiry, the Committee deems it fit and
proper to provide for the additional safeguard that the decision of the Lokpal at the
conclusion of the preliminary inquiry to refer the matter further for investigation to
the CBI, shall be taken by a Bench of the Lokpal consisting of not less than 3
Members which shall decide the issue regarding reference to investigation, by a
majority out of these three. [Para 12.36.(BB)]
57. Naturally it should also be made clear that the accused is entitled to a full hearing
before charges are framed. Some stylistic additions like referring to the charge sheet
“if any” (since there may or may not be a chargesheet) may also be added to Clause
23(6). Consequently, Clauses like 23(7) and other similar clauses contemplating
proceedings open to public hearing must also be deleted. [Para 12.36(C)]
58. Clause 23(8) would have to be suitably modified to provide that the appropriate
investigation period for the appropriate investigating agency i.e. CBI in the present
case, should normally be within six months with only one extension of a further six
months, for special reasons. Reference in Clause 23(8) to “inquiry” creates highly
avoidable confusion and it should be specified that the meanings assigned to inquire
and investigate should be as explained above. [Para 12.36(D)]
59. The Committee also believes that there may be several exigencies during the course
of both preliminary inquiry and investigation which may lead to a violation of the 30
days or six months periods respectively specified in Clause 27(2) and 23(8). The
Committee believes that it cannot be the intention of the law that where acts and
omissions by the accused create an inordinate delay in the preliminary inquiry and/
or other factors arise which are entirely beyond the control of the Lokpal, the
accused should get the benefit or that the criminal trial should terminate. For that
purpose it is necessary to insert a separate and distinct provision which states that
Clauses 23(2), 23(8) or other similar time limit clauses elsewhere in the Lokpal Bill,
2011, shall not automatically give any benefit or undue advantage to the accused and
shall not automatically thwart or terminate the trial. [Para 12.36(E)]
60. Clause 23(10) also needs to be modified. Presently, it states in general terms the
discretion to hold or not to hold preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal for reasons to be

128
recorded in writing. However, this may lead to allegations of pick and choose and of
arbitrariness and selectivity. The Committee believes that Clause 23(10) should be
amended to provide for only one definition viz., that preliminary inquiry may be
dispensed with only in trap cases and must be held in all other cases. Even under
the present established practice, the CBI dispenses with preliminary inquiry only in
a trap case for the simple reason that the context of the trap case itself constitutes
preliminary verification of the offence and no further preliminary inquiry is
necessary. Indeed, for the trap cases, Section 6 A (ii) of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946 also dispenses with the provision of preliminary inquiries.
For all cases other than the trap cases, the preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal must
be a non dispensable necessity. [Para 12.36(F)]
61. Clause 23(11) also needs to be modified/deleted since, in this Report, it is proposed
that it is the CBI which conducts the investigation which covers and includes the
process of filing the charge sheet and closure report. [Para 12.36(G)]
62. Similarly Clause 23 (12) (b) would have to be deleted, in view of the conclusion
hereinabove regarding the absence of any need to provide natural justice to the
accused at the stage of preliminary inquiry. Clause 23(14) is also unusually widely
worded. It does not indicate as to whom the Lokpal withhold records from.
Consequently that cannot be a general blanket power given to the Lokpal to withhold
records from the accused or from the investigating agency. Indeed, that would be
unfair, illegal and unconstitutional since it would permit selectivity as also suppress
relevant information. The clause, therefore, needs to be amended. [Para 12.36(H)]
63. The case of the Lokpal initiating action suo motu , requires separate comment. In a
sense, the preliminary inquiry in the case of a Lokpal suo motu  action becomes
superfluous since the same body ( i.e.  Lokpal) which initiates the complaint, is
supposed to do a preliminary inquiry. This may, however, not be as anomalous as it
sounds since even under the present structure, the CBI, or indeed the local police,
does both activities i.e. suo motu  action as also preliminary screening/inquiry. The
Committee was tempted to provide for another body to do preliminary inquiry in
cases where the Lokpal initiates suo motu  action, but in fact no such body exists and
it would create great multiplicity and logistical difficulty in creating and managing so
many bodies. Hence the Committee concludes that in cases of suo motu  action by
Lokpal, a specific provision must provide that that part of the Lokpal which initiates
the suo motu  proposal, should be scrupulously kept insulated from any part of the
preliminary inquiry process following upon such suo motu  initiation. It must be
further provided that the preliminary inquiry in cases of suo motu  initiation must be
done by a Lokpal Bench of not less than five Members and these should be
unconnected with those who do the suo motu  initiation. [Para 12.36(I)]
64. These recommendations also prevent the Lokpal from becoming a single institution
fusing unto itself the functions of complainant, preliminary inquirer, full
investigator and prosecutor. It increases objectivity and impartiality in the criminal
investigative process and precludes the charge of creating an unmanageable
behemoth like Lokpal, while diminishing the possibility of abuse of power by the
Lokpal itself. [Para 12.37]
65. These recommendations also have the following advantages:
(i) The CBI’s apprehension, not entirely baseless, that it would become a Hamlet
without a Prince of Denmark if its Anti-Corruption Wing was hived off to the
Lokpal, would be taken care of.

129
(ii) It would be unnecessary to make CBI or CVC a Member of the Lokpal body
itself.
(iii) The CBI would not be subordinate to the Lokpal nor its espirit de corps  be
adversely affected; it would only be subject to general superintendence of
Lokpal. It must be kept in mind that the CBI is an over 60 year old body,
which has developed a certain morale and espirit de corps , a particular culture
and set of practices; which should be strengthened and improved, rather than
merely subsumed or submerged within a new or nascent institution, which is
yet to take root. Equally, the CBI, while enhancing its autonomy and
independence, cannot be left on auto pilot.
(iv) The CVC would retain a large part of its disciplinary and functional role for
non Lokpal personnel and regarding misconduct while not being subordinate to
the Lokpal. However, for Lokpal covered personnel and issues, including the
role of the CBI, the CVC would have no role.
(v) Mutatis mutandis  statutory changes in the Lokpal Bill, the CVC and the CBI
Acts and in related legislation, is accordingly recommended. [Para 12.38]
66. After the Lokpal has cleared the stage for further investigation, the matter should
proceed to the CBI. This stage of the investigation must operate with the following
specific enumerated statutory principles and provisions:
(A) On the merits of the investigation in any case, the CBI shall not be
answerable or liable to be monitored either by the Administrative Ministry or
by the Lokpal. This is also fully consistent with the established jurisprudence
on the subject which makes it clear that the merits of the criminal
investigation cannot be gone into or dealt with even by the superior courts.
However, since in practise it has been observed in the breach, it needs to be
unequivocally reiterated as a statutory provision, in the proposed Lokpal Act,
a first in India.
(B) The CBI shall, however, continue to be subject to the general supervisory
superintendence of the Lokpal. This shall be done by adding a provision as
exists today in the CVC Act which shall now apply to the Lokpal in respect of
the CBI. Consequently, the whole of the Section 8 (1) (not Section 8 (2) ) of
the CVC Act should be included in the Lokpal Bill to provide for the
superintendence power of the Lokpal over the CBI. [Para 12.39]
67. Correspondingly, reference in Section 4 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act
to the CVC would have to be altered to refer to the Lokpal. [Para 12.40]
68. At this stage, the powers of the CBI would further be strengthened and enhanced
by clarifying explicitly in the Lokpal Bill that all types of prior sanctions/terms or
authorizations, by whatever name called, shall not be applicable to Lokpal covered
persons or prosecutions. Consequently, the provisions of Section 6 (A) of the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act
and Section 197 of the IPC or any other provision of the law, wherever applicable,
fully or partially, will stand repealed and rendered inoperative in respect of Lokpal
and Lokayukta prosecutions, another first in India. Clause 27 of the Lokpal Bill,
20ll is largely consistent with this but the Committee recommends that it should
further clarify that Section 6 A of the DSPE Act shall also not apply in any manner
to proceedings under the proposed Act. The sanction requirement, originating as a

130
salutary safeguard against witch hunting has, over the years, as applied by the
bureaucracy itself, degenerated into a refuge for the guilty, engendering either
endless delay or obstructing all meaningful action. Moreover, the strong filtering
mechanism at the stage of preliminary inquiry proposed in respect of the Lokpal,
is a more than adequate safeguard, substituting effectively for the sanction
requirement. Elsewhere, this Report recommends that all sanction requirements
should be eliminated even in respect of non Lokpal covered personnel. [Para 12.41]
69. The previous two paragraphs if implemented, would achieve genuine and declared
statutory independence of investigation for the first time for the CBI. [Para 12.42]
70. The main investigation, discussed in the previous few paragraphs, to be conducted by
the CBI, necessarily means the stage from which it is handed over to the CBI by
the Lokpal, till the stage that the CBI files either a chargesheet or a closure report
under Section 173 of the CrPC. However, one caveat needs to be added at this stage.
The CBI’s chargesheet or closure report must be filed after the approval by the
Lokpal and, if necessary, suitable changes may have to be made in this regard to
Section 173 CrPC and other related provisions. [Para 12.43]
71. The aforesaid independence of the CBI is reasonable and harmonizes well with the
supervisory superintendence of the Lokpal in the proposed Lokpal Bill, which is now
exercised by CVC under Section 8 (1) of the CVC Act. The Committee recommends
the above provision, suitably adapted to be applicable in the relationship between the
Lokpal and the CBI. [Para 12.44]
72. The next stage of the criminal process would go back to the Lokpal with full powers
of prosecution on the basis of the investigation by the CBI. The following points in
this respect are noteworthy:
• Clause 15 in Chapter IV of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 already contains adequate
provisions in this regard and they can, with some modifications, be retained and
applied.
• The Committee’s recommendations create, again for the first time, a fair
demarcation between independent investigation and independent prosecution by
two distinct bodies, which would considerably enhance impartiality, objectivity
and the quality of the entire criminal process.
• It creates, for the first time in India, an independent prosecution wing, under the
general control and superintendence of the Lokpal, which, hopefully will
eventually develop into a premium, independent autonomous Directorate of Public
Prosecution with an independent prosecution service (under the Lokpal
institution). The Committee also believes that this structure would not in any
manner diminish or dilute the cooperative and harmonious interface between the
investigation and prosecution processes since the former, though conducted by the
CBI, comes under the supervisory jurisdiction of the Lokpal. [Para 12.45]
73. The next stage is that of adjudication and punishment, if any, which shall, as before,
be done by a special Judge. The Committee considers that it would be desirable to
use the nomenclature of ‘Lokpal Judge’ (or Lokayukta Judge in respect of States)
under the new dispensation. However, this is largely a matter of nomenclature and
existing provisions in the Lokpal Bill, 2011 in Chapter IX are adequate, though they
need to be applied, with modifications. [Para 12.46]

131
74. The aforesaid integrates all the stages of a criminal prosecution for an offence of
corruption but still leaves open the issue of departmental proceedings in respect of
the same accused. [Para 12.47]
75. The Committee agrees that for the Lokpal covered personnel and issues, it would be
counter-productive, superfluous and unnecessary to have the CVC to play any role
in departmental proceedings. Such a role would be needlessly duplicative and
superfluous. For such matters, the Lokpal should be largely empowered to do all
those things which the CVC presently does, but with some significant changes,
elaborated below. [Para 12.48]
76. Clauses 28 and 29 of the Lokpal Bill are adequate in this regard but the following
changes are recommended:
(i) The Lokpal or Lokayukta would be the authority to recommend disciplinary
proceedings for all Lokpal or Lokayukta covered persons.
(ii) The CVC would exercise jurisdiction for all non Lokpal covered persons in
respect of disciplinary proceedings.
(iii) The CBI would similarly continue to exercise its existing powers under the
CVC’s superintendence for all non Lokpal personnel and proceedings.
(iv) Departmental action must, as the law today stands, comply with the over
arching mandate of Article 311 of the Indian Constitution. Dissatisfaction or
objection to the practical operation of Article 311, fully understandable and
indeed justifiable, does not permit or impel us to ignore the existence of Article
311, until altered. If there is consensus outside the Committee on amending
Article 311, it must be amended as elaborated and recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 12.49. However, absent such a consensus, the passage
of the Lokpal Bill need not be held up on that account and hence the present
report makes recommendations on the basis of the continuance of Article 311.
If, however, it is amended as per paragraph 12.49, the proposed Lokpal Act can
easily be modified to reflect such changes.
(v) It may also be remembered that the Lokpal itself does not conduct the
departmental proceedings. For the law to provide for Lokpal to conduct the
entire departmental proceedings itself, would be to put a humungous and
unworkable burden on the institution.
(vi) Therefore, the power to take departmental action whether in the case of
bureaucrats or in the case of Ministers as provided in Clauses 28 and 29 of the
Lokpal Bill 2011, are largely appropriate.
(vii) The Committee is informed that suspension of a delinquent officer during his
criminal prosecution is virtually automatic in practice. However, the Committee
feels the need to emphasize that a specific provision be added in Chapter VII
making it clear that once any bureaucrat ( viz. group A or group B officer) as
covered in the proposed Lokpal Bill is under investigation and the Lokpal
makes a recommendation that such a person be suspended, such suspension
should mandatorily be carried out unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing
by a majority out of a group of 3 persons not below the rank of Ministers of
State belonging to the Ministries of Home, Personnel and the relevant
administrative Ministry of the delinquent officer, opine to the contrary. 
Such
suspension on Lokpal recommendation does not violate Article 311 in any

132
manner. Refusal by the aforesaid Committee of three provides a check and
balance qua possibly unreasonable Lokpal recommendations. The reference is
to three high functionaries of three Ministries and not to the Administrative
Ministry alone since it is frequently found in practice that the Administrative
Ministry’s responses alone may seek to preserve the status quo on account of
vested interests arising from the presence of the delinquent officer in that
Administrative Ministry.
(viii) There cannot be a counterpart suspension provision in respect of MPs or
Ministers or the like, but an explicit clause may be added to the existing
Clause 29 that the Presiding Officer of the relevant House in the case of MPs
and Prime Minister in the case of a member of the Council of Ministers shall
record a note in writing indicating the action being taken in regard to the
Lokpal’s recommendations or the reasons for not taking such action.
(ix) Wherever otherwise applicable, in respect of the details of the departmental
inquiry, the provisions of Article 311 would, unless altered and subject to Paras
D above and 12.49 below, continue to apply. [Para 12.49]
77. The Committee strongly pleads and recommends that the provisions of Article 311
require a close and careful re-look to ensure that reasonable protection is given to
bureaucrats for the independent and fair discharge of their functions but that the
enormous paraphernalia of procedural rules and regulations which have become a
major obstacle in the taking of genuine and legitimate departmental action against
delinquent officers, be eliminated. The Committee notes with concern and with
growing apprehension that serious and high level/big ticket corruption has increased
exponentially since Independence at all levels in the Lokpal proposed categories of
personnel. In particular, bureaucratic corruption has been relatively ignored or
underplayed in the context of the excessive media and civil society focus on political
corruption, coupled with the doctrine of civil service anonymity, which this country
imported from our former colonial masters. Hence, the substantial modification of
Article 311 or, indeed, its replacement by a much lesser statutory (not constitutional
counterpart) should be taken up and implemented at the earliest. It may be added
that what requires to be looked into is not the mere text of Article 311 but the
context which has grown around it, through an undesirably large number of statutory
and non-statutory rules, procedures and regulations coupled with huge common law
jurisprudence over the last 6 decades. It is universally believed that the aforesaid
has, in practice, converted Article 311, from a reasonable and salutary safeguard to
a haven for those indulging in mal-administration and/corruption with no fear of
consequences and the certainty of endless delay. The fact that Article 311 had been
given constitutional and not mere statutory status is also responsible for its largely
unchanged character over the last six plus decades. [Para 12.50]
78. Though not strictly within the purview of the Lokpal Bill 2011 itself, the Committee
also recommends that CVC’s advice in respect of departmental action to be taken by
the relevant department in case of 
non-Lokpal covered personnel must, by a suitable
amendment to the CVC Act, be made binding to the extent that, unless for reasons
to be recorded by a majority out of the same joint group as aforesaid, comprising 3
persons not below the rank of Ministers of State belonging respectively to the
Ministries of Home Affairs, Personnel and the Administrative Ministry to which the
delinquent officer belongs, states that CVC advice be not followed, such CVC advice
shall be binding. [Para 12.51]

133
79. The Committee has deliberated long and hard on whether it can or should go to the
extent of suggesting changes in the selection procedure of the CBI chief. Presently,
the CBI chief is appointed by the Government on the recommendation of a
Committee consisting of the CVC as Chairperson, Vigilance Commissioner,
Secretary, Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs and Secretary of the
Administrative Ministry (in this case the Ministry of Personnel) [See Section 4A of
the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946]. Section 8 (2) of the 1946 Act
further provides for a mandatory input in the selection of a new Director to be made
by the outgoing Director and also enjoins upon the Committee, in Section 8 (3), to
make recommendations for a panel of officers on  the basis of seniority, integrity
and experience in the investigation of anti- corruption cases, necessarily belonging to
the Indian Police Services. [Para 12.52]
80. Interestingly, Section 4 C of the same 1946 Act provides for the same Committee
to make recommendations for all appointments as also extension or curtailment of
tenure of all officers above the level of Superintendent of Police in the CBI.
[Para 12.53]
81. It is thus clear that it is not correct to suggest that the Central Government has
absolute discretion in appointing the CBI Dir ector. After the Vineet Narain vs. Union
of India judgment* by the Apex Court, significant changes were brought into the
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. In 2003 (by Act 45 of 2003) providing
for the aforesaid independent and autonomous regime for selection and appointment
of CEI Director. The Central Vigilance Commissioner who heads the selection and
recommendation process is itself a high statutory authority under a separate
enactment called the Central Vigilance Commission Act of 2003 which, in turn in
Section 4, obliges the Government to appoint the CVC on the basis of a
recommendation of a high powered Committee comprising the Prime Minster, the
Home Minister and the leader of opposition in the Lok Sabha. It is, therefore,
erroneous to brush aside the existing system as merely involving absolute power/
discretion to select Government favourites as CBI Director. [Para 12.54]
82. Furthermore, the Committee believes that it would neither be proper nor desirable
for the Committee to go into and suggest fundamental statutory alterations to the
procedure for selection and appointment of CBI Director, which appears, nowhere,
directly or indirectly, to be a subject referred for the consideration of this
Committee. Collateral recommendations of this nature by a side wind should, in the
opinion of this Committee, be avoided, especially since significant statutory changes
have been brought in with respect to the appointment of the CBI Director less than
8 years ago. [Para 12.55]
Constitutional Status: If, How and How Much
83. The Committee, therefore, recommends:-
(a) The institution of Lokpal must be given constitutional status by inserting into
the Constitution by way of constitutional amendment certain basic principles
about the Lokpal and leaving the details in the new proposed statute on which
this Committee is opining.
(b) One practical, reasonable and legally valid model would be for the Government
to consider the model and set of provisions asked for by the Committee and
* 1996(2) scc 199.

134
presented in the evidence to the Committee as a draft constitutional
amendment by two former Chief Justices of India. That draft is enclosed
herewith as Annexure ‘F’ and is self-explanatory.
(c) This constitutional amendment does not require ratification by not less than
half of the State Legislatures since it does not seek to make any change in any
of the provisions listed in the second proviso to Article 368 (2) of the Indian
Constitution.
(d) The constitutional amendment should, as reflected in the enclosed Annexure
‘F’ be a set of basic principles for the Lokpal as also provide for the basic set
up of the Lokayuktas. Both these provisions, proposed in the enclosed draft,
propose Part XV A and Articles 329(C) and 329(D), as enabling, empowering and
permissive provisions and authorize and empower the appropriate legislature to
make proper laws, mutatis mutandis , for Lokpal at the Centre and for
Lokayuktas at the State.
(e) Such a constitutional status would not only considerably enhance the stature,
legal and moral authority of the Lokpal institution but would make
interference and tinkering in these basic principles not subject to the
vicissitudes of ordinary or transient majorities. Over a period of time, it is
likely that these principles would develop into a set of immutable principles
and, possibly, even become part of basic structure of the Constitution rendering
the existence of the Lokpal and its basic features un-amendable even by a
constitutional amendment.
(f) Apprehensions regarding delay are misplaced. The constitutional amendment
bill would be much shorter than the statutory bill for the new proposed
Lokpal and can be passed on the same day and at the same time as the
latter, though by a different majority. It is inconceivable that while parties
are in favour of the institution of Lokpal in principle, as a statutory body,
parties would not agree with equal alacrity for the passage of a constitutional
amendment bill.
(g) The suggestion that the entire statutory bill should be transposed as a
constitutional amendment into the Constitution is untenable and impracticable.
That would eliminate flexibility and would require a constitutional amendment
for the smallest future change. Moreover, the Constitution does not and is not
intended to provide for nitty gritty operational details. It should be and is
intended to be a declaration of general and basic principles which, in turn,
enable and empower formal legislation, which in turn would take care of the
details.
(h) An easy or casual repeal of the entire Lokpal scheme would not be possible
once it is constitutionally entrenched.
(i) Similarly, there would be no option for the federal or State Legislatures not to
have a Lokpal or a Lokayukta at all since the constitutional mandate would be
to the contrary.
(j) Contextually, the issues and some of the suggestions in this Chapter may
overlap with and should, therefore, be read in conjunction with Chapter 7 of
this report. Though the Committee has already opined in Chapter 4 of this
Report here that the issues of grievance redressal should be dealt with in a.

135
separate legislation, the Committee hereby also strongly recommends that
there should be a similar declaration either in the same Chapter of the Lokpal
or in a separate Chapter proposed to be added in the Indian Constitution,
giving the same constitutional status to the citizens grievances and redressal
machinery.
(k) This recommendation also reflects the genuine and deep concern of this
Committee about the need, urgency, status and importance of a citizen’s
charter/grievance machinery and Committee believes that the giving of the
aforesaid constitutional status to this machinery would go a long way in
enhancing its efficacy and in providing a healing touch to the common man.
(l) Furthermore, the Committee believes that this recommendation herein is also
fully consistent with the letter and spirit of para 1.8 above viz. the conclusions
of the Minister of Finance in the Lower House recorded in para 1.8 above.
[Para 13.12]
The Jurisdictional Limits of Lokpal: Private NGOs,
Corporates and Media
84. There is no doubt that corruption is neither the exclusive preserve nor the special
privilege nor the unique entitlement of only the political or bureaucratic classes.
Nor can anyone justify exclusionary holy cows, supposedly immunized, exempted or
put outside the purview of a new and vigorous anti-corruption monitoring,
investigation and prosecution regime as the proposed new Lokpal Bill seeks to
create. If corruption is rampant in a country like India, it permeates and pervades
every nook and cranny of society and is certainly not restricted to the political or
bureaucratic classes. Indeed, while no specific statistical data are available, it may
not be at all inconceivable that, in quantum terms, the degree of corruption in the
non-political/non-bureaucratic private sector, in the aggregate, is far higher than in
the realm of political and bureaucratic classes alone. Therefore, in principle, non-
application of the proposed Lokpal Bill to all such classes does not appear to be
justifiable. [Para 14.22]
85. In this connection, the very recent UK Bribery Act, 2010, is both interesting and
instructive. Drafted in a completely non-legalistic manner, format and language, this
Act seeks to criminalize corruption everywhere and anywhere, i.e. in the public and
private sectors in UK, in Governmental and non-Governmental sectors, by UK
citizens abroad, by non-UK citizens acting in UK and in the entire gamut of private
and individual transactions in addition to covering dealings in the private sector,
intra-private sector, intra-public sector, in Government and private interface and in
every other nook and cranny of society. [Para 14.23]
86. Despite the above and despite the simplicity and attractiveness of an all inclusive
approach, the latter must yield to exigencies of logistics, operational efficacy and
pragmatism. Since this is the nation’s first experiment with a central Lokpal
institution, it would amount to starry-eyed idealism to recommend the blanket
inclusion of every segment of society under the jurisdiction of an omnipotent and
omniscient Lokpal. Such comprehensive inclusion is entirely understandable and may
be logically more justifiable in principle, but, in the final opinion of the Committee,
must await several years of evolution of the Lokpal institution and a corpus of
experiential and practical lessons as also the wisdom of a future generation of
Parliamentarians. [Para 14.24]

136
87. As far as the proposed dispensation is concerned, the only available dividing and
demarcating line between the complete inclusion and partial exclusion of entities
from the jurisdiction of the Lokpal would have to be some test of Government
ownership and/or control and/or size of the entity concerned. In this regard, clauses
17 (1) (f) and (g) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 are relevant. Clause 17 (1) (f) applies the
Lokpal jurisdiction mainly to office-bearers of every society, A.o.P. or trust,
registered or not, but wholly or partially financed or aided by the Government,
subject to being above some specified annual income minima. Clause 17 (1) (g),
similarly, applies the Lokpal to office-bearers of every society, A.o.P. or trust,
receiving donations from the public, again subject to an annual income minima to be
specified by the Central Government. [Para 14.25]
88. After deep consideration, the Committee believes and recommends that these clauses
should be merged and expanded to provide for the following coverage/jurisdiction of
the Lokpal:
(a) The Lokpal jurisdiction should apply to each and every institution/entity, by
whatever name called, owned or controlled by the Central Government, subject,
however, to an exclusionary minima, where the ownership or control of the
Central Government de minims. Such minima would have to be specified and
the power of such specification should be given to the Central Government by
notification;
(b) Additionally, all entities/institutions, by whatever name called, receiving
donations from the public above a certain minima, liable to be specified by the
Central Government should be included. In addition, 
as also all entities/
institutions receiving donations from foreign sources in the terms and context
of the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA) in excess of Rs.10 lakh per
year, should be covered, whether or not, controlled by the Government. This is
largely as per existing clause 17 (1) (g), except for the addition of the foreign
donation recipient facet;
(c) It should be clarified that this coverage shall apply, as also stated above, to
every entity and institution, by whatever name called, be it corporate, society,
trust, A.o.P., partnership, sole proprietorship, LLP or any other, registered or
not. It should also be made clear that the approach is functional or ownership
based or size based and not based on nomenclature;
(d) It is thus clear that corporates, media or NGOs should and would be covered
only to the above extent and not otherwise. [Para 14.25.A]
89. Despite the foregoing elaborations and ‘lament’ regarding exclusion of large slices of
society from the Lokpal regime, it must not be forgotten that all persons, whether
private, individual, and totally non-Governmental, are already necessarily covered as
abettors, co-conspirators, inciters and givers or recipients or bribes in terms of
clause 17 (3) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011. It may, however, be further clarified suitably
in inclusive and not exhaustive terms in clause 17 (3) that the phrase “if such person
is associated with the allegation of corruption”, should include abettors, bribe-givers,
bribe-takers, conspirators and all other persons, directly or indirectly, involved in the
act or omission relating to corruption within which all other persons and entities in
clause 17 are subsumed. The word “associated” presently used is too general and
vague. [Para 14.26]

137
90. The Committee further recommends that clause 17 (3) should be explicitly clarified
to the effect that the abettor, conspirator or person associated, in any manner,
directly or indirectly, with the corruption allegation, shall not only be included but
be fully liable to investigation, prosecution and punishment and that the proviso to
clause 17 (3) shall be limited only to proposed action to be taken ‘in case of a person
serving in the affairs of a State’ and not qua anyone. else. [Para 14.26.A]
Support Structure for the Lokpal: Whistle Blowers, Phone
Tappers and Legal Aid/Assistance Issues
91. As regards the whistleblower issue, this Committee has made a detailed
recommendation on the subject on August 10, 2011 in respect of the Bill referred to
it. That Bill and the Committee’s recommendation are under the active decision
making process of the Government of India for eventual translation into law.
[Para 15.10]
92. The Committee recommends that the Whistleblowers Bill (Bill No. 97 of 2010)
referred to the Committee, with the changes already recommended by the
Committee in respect of that Bill (in the Committee’s report dated August 10, 2011),
be implemented into law simultaneously and concurrently with the Lokpal Bill. In
that case, only one provision needs to be inserted in the Lokpal Bill to the effect
that safeguards and machinery provided elaborately in the proposed Whistleblowers
Bill, as opined upon by the Committee, would be applicable, mutatis mutandis to the
Lokpal Bill. In particular, the Committee notes that clauses 10, 11, 12 and 13 of the
aforesaid Whistleblowers Bill, provide a fairly comprehensive fasciculus of provisions
providing safeguards against victimization, protection of witnesses and other persons,
protection of identity of complainant and power to pass interim orders. The
Whistleblowers Bill also sets up a competent authority and provides for several other
related provisions to make the functioning of that authority efficacious and to
enhance the efficiency, potency and vigour of the safeguards intended to be provided
to a whistleblower. The proposed provision in the Lokpal Bill should act as a cross
referencing, breach of which should activate the related/ applicable provisions of the
Whistleblower Bill and render them applicable to all Lokpal proceedings, as if set out
in the Lokpal Bill, 2011. [Para 15.11]
93. Naturally, one of the main adaptations of the Whistleblowers Bill for Lokpal
proceedings would be that the competent authority in respect of Lokpal covered
persons and offences would be the Lokpal and references in the Whistleblowers Bill
to CVC or other entities would be rendered inoperative for purposes of Lokpal
personnel and officers. [Para 15.12]
94. If, however, the aforesaid Whistleblower Bill, along with the recommendations of this
Committee in that regard, are not enacted into law by the Government of India, co-
terminously and simultaneously with the Lokpal Bill, then this Committee
recommends the creation of some safeguards, in substance and essence, by the
addition of a whole new chapter and certain provisions in the proposed Lokpal Bill.
However, those provisions in the Lokpal Bill would be largely an adaptation of the
same provisions of the Whistleblowers Bill, especially clauses 10 to 13 of the
Whistleblowers Bill, while, as explained above, making the Lokpal the competent
authority for such whistleblower issues. [Para 15.13]
95. As regards phone tapping, the Committee emphasizes and underlines the basic
reality that phone tapping by regulatory and policing agencies has been prevalent in

138
India for several years and the rules and regulations in that regard have undergone
periodic refinement and amendment. Currently the regime of phone tapping is
governed by Indian Telegraph Act and Rules read with the judgments of the Supreme
Court inter alia  in People ‘Union for Civil Liberties Vs. Union of India (1997) 1 SCC
301. The Committee believes that there is no reason, sufficiently strong, to suggest
that this substantive law should be altered in respect of Lokpal proceedings.
[Para 15.14]
96. Phone tapping has been resorted to, inter alia , by agencies as diverse as CBI,
Enforcement Directorate, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence and others, under the
aforesaid regime of the Act., Rules and the Supreme Court mandated principles. In
all such cases, the Committee is not aware of any situation where any of these
agencies are entitled to suo motu , on their own, without separate authorization, and
in secrecy, initiate or continue phone tapping. There is, therefore, no reason as to
why the proposed Lokpal institution should also not be subjected to the same regime
and mechanism. To provide for inherent and separate power in the Lokpal institution
in this regard, would also create an excessive and undesirable concentration of
powers,” would frequently involve a conflict of interest between preliminary inquiry,’
investigation and prosecution and would disturb the equilibrium of all investigative
agencies for the past several years with established practices in respect of phone
tapping issues. Indeed, the Committee notes that in other parts of this Report
(Chapter 12), the CBI is the principal investigating agency and, therefore, its powers
of phone tapping must continue as they exist today. [Para 15.15)
97. As regards legal aid/assistance, the Committee concludes that clause 56 as framed
does not intend to and should not be read to be a mandate for provision of automatic
legal aid for every accused in a Lokpal proceeding. Clause 56, by any fair reading,
and in the opinion of this Committee, is only intended to provide legal assistance by
way of legal representation to the accused in any case before the Lokpal e.g.:– a
preliminary inquiry. Firstly, the Committee does not read this to mean automatic
monetary or fiscal assistance or by way of lawyers’ fees for the accused. Secondly,
the Committee believes that this was intended to and recommended so that it should
be explicitly clarified that it permits the use of, or appearance by a legal practitioner,
where the accused asks for one in Lokpal proceedings eg:- a preliminary inquiry. In
any event, elsewhere in this Report we have recommended deletion of the concept
of hearing an accused during preliminary inquiry. If that is done away with, no issue
would arise of legal practitioners appearing. In any case, they are entitled to appear
in all later stages including trial. Finally, it should be clarified that clause 56 does
not intend to abrogate or dilute or attenuate any other provision of law under where,
by virtue of those provisions of law, the accused may be entitled to a monetary/fiscal
legal aid or assistance. [Para 15.16]
The Lokpal Miscellany: Residual Issues
98. Although it is implicit in the Lokpal Bill, 2011, the Committee believes that to
obviate all doubts and to prevent any jeopardy to ongoing trials, the proposed Lokpal
should have a specific provision categorically applying Section 4 (3) of the POCA to
Lokpal proceedings, to enable the special judge or Lokpal judge to try any other
offence, where connected, other than those covered by the Lokpal Act. [Para 16.3]
99. Clause 17  (1) in most of its sub-clauses, including (b), (c), (d) and so on, specifically
refers to a current/serving as also a former public servant ( e.g.  Minister, MP,
bureaucrat, etc. both past and present). [Para 16.4]

139
100. The Committee has seen the substantive provisions of POCA and it appears to be
clear that the POCA, which shall continue to be the substantive law applicable to
Lokpal trials and proceedings, seeks to render culpable and punish only official acts
done by public servants. Be that as it may, the Committee is of the opinion that a
specific provision should be inserted in Clause 17 clarifying and specifying that
reference to present and former public servants only means that they can be
prosecuted whether in or not in office, but only for acts/omissions done while they
were in office and not for allegedly fresh acts/omissions after ceasing to hold office.
[Para 16.5]
101. The Committee finds that clause 8 and especially clause 8 (1) of the Lokpal Bill, 2011
has struck the right balance and does not need any fundamental changes. It is
intended to strengthen the independence and autonomy of the Lokpal by not making
it easy to initiate complaints against Lokpal for the Lokpal’s removal. The
Committee, however, recommends an addition to clause 8 (l)(iii), to allay and obviate
the apprehension expressed in some quarters, that the process to remove the Lokpal
cannot be initiated, under the sub-clause, if the President (which essentially means
the Central Government) refuses to refer the complaint against the Lokpal. The
Committee feels that this apprehension would be adequately taken care of by
providing in clause 8 (1)(iii) that where the President does not refer a citizen’s
complaint against the Lokpal to the Apex Court, the President ( i.e. the Central
Government) shall be obliged to record reasons for the same and to furnish those
reasons to the complainant within a maximum period of 3 months from the date of
receipt of the complaint. The Committee feels that this process, including the
transparency involved in recording these reasons and the attendant judicial review
available to the complainant to challenge such reason/refusal, contains an adequate
check and balance on this subject. [Para 16.6]
102. Additionally, the Committee recommends that Clause 8 (1) (iv) be added in the
existing Lokpal Bill, 2011 to provide, specifically, that anyone can directly approach
the apex court in respect of a complaint against the Lokpal (institution or individual
member) and that such complaint would go through the normal initial hearing and
filter as a preliminary matter before the normal bench strength as prescribed by the
Supreme Court Rules but that, if the matter is admitted and put for final hearing,
the same shall be heard by an apex court bench of not less than 5 members. It is
but obvious that other consequential changes will have to be made in the whole of
Section 8 to reflect the addition of the aforesaid Clause 8 (1) (iv). [Para 16.6A]
103. Clause 21 of the Lokpal Bill, 2011 needs a re-look. In its present form, it appears
to empower the Lokpal Chairperson to intervene and transfer any pending case from
one Bench to another, which appears to include the power of transfer even while a
case is under consideration of the Lokpal bench on the merits. This un circumscribed
power would seriously impair the objectivity and autonomy of Lokpal Benches,
especially at the stage of preliminary inquiry which is a crucial filtering mechanism.
It also appears to be inconsistent with normal principles of jurisprudence which
seriously frown upon interference even by the Chief Justice in a pending judicial
matter before another Bench. The way out would be to delete this provision and to
provide for transfer only in exceptional cases where, firstly, strong credible
allegations are brought to the forefront in respect of the functioning of any
particular Lokpal Bench and secondly, the decision to transfer is taken by not only
the entire Lokpal institution sitting together, but also including the Members of the
Bench from which the matter is sought to be transferred. [Para 16.7]

140
104. As regards punishment under the Prevention of Corruption Act for a person
convicted of different offences relating to corruption, it is noteworthy that the
Prevention of Corruption Act prescribes, as it now stands, punishment not less than
six months which may extend to five years for various offences involving public
servant taking gratification in Sections 7, 8, 9, 10 and also Section 11 which deals
with public servant obtaining valuable thing without consideration. Section 12 of
POCA dealing with the abetment prescribes the same as six months to five years
range of punishment. On the other hand, for offences of criminal misconduct by
public servant, the prescribed punishment is not less than one year, extendable upto
seven years in Section 13 while Section 14 prescribes punishment of not less than
two years extendable to seven years. Section 15 prescribes the punishment for
offences referred to in clause C or clause D of 5.13(i) which has no lower limit but
a maximum of three years. Additionally, all these provisions empower the imposition
of fine. [Para 16.8]
105. Diverse representations from diverse quarters have suggested an enhancement of
punishment, with diverse prescriptions of quantum of sentence, including life
imprisonment. After deep consideration, the Committee finds it prudent to strike a
balanced, reasonable middle ground. A sudden, dramatic and draconian enhancement
is, in the opinion of the Committee, undesirable. The Committee cannot ignore the
inherent fallibility of mankind and if fallibility is inherent in every system,
draconian and extreme punishment, even in a few cases of wrongful conviction, would
be undesirable. [Para 16.9]
106. Taking a holistic view, the Committee is of the opinion that:
(a) In the cases of Sections 7, 8, 9 and the like, the range from six months to five
years should the substituted by imprisonment not less than three years which
may extend to not more than seven years.
(b) In the Sections 13 and 14 category of cases providing for a range to one year
to seven years, the Committee suggests enhancement, in the case of Section
13 offences, to a minimum of four years and a maximum of ten years while
for Section 14, the Committee suggests a minimum of five years and a
maximum of ten years.
(c) For Section 12 which presently prescribes six months to five years, the
aforesaid of minimum three and maximum of seven years shall apply whereas
for Section 15 which presently prescribes zero to three years, the, range should
be very minimum from two to maximum five years.
(d) Additionally, wherever applicable, there should be a general provision, cutting
across Sections, creating a power of full confiscation of assets, proceeds,
receipts and benefits, by whatever name called, arising from corruption by the
accused. This provision should be properly drafted in a comprehensive manner
to cover diverse situations of benefit in cash or kind, which, to the maximum
extent possible, should fully be liable to confiscation. [Para 16.9A]
107. Although this issue has been discussed in other parts of this Report, for the sake
of clarity, the Committee clarifies that there should be 3 specific and important time
limits in the final enactment viz. firstly, the period of 30 days extendable once by a
further period of 60 days for preliminary inquiry by the Lokpal; secondly, for
completion of investigation by the investigating agency, within 6 months with one

141
further extension of 3 months and thirdly, for completion of trials, within one year
with one further extension of 6 months. [Para 16.10]
108. The Committee finds no basis for and no reason to retain the last proviso to clause
17 (l)(g) which appears to be overbroad and altogether exempts from the Lokpal Bill
2011 any entity, simply because it is constituted as a new religious entity or meant
to be constituted as an entity for religious purposes. This proviso should be deleted,
otherwise this exception would virtually swallow up the entire rule found in the
earlier parts of clause 17. [Para 16.11]
109. As regards clause 51 of the Lokpal Bill 2011, the Committee recommends that the
intent behind the clause be made clear by way of an Explanation to be added to the
effect that the clause is not intended to provide any general exemption and that
“good faith” referred to in clause 52 shall have the same meaning as provided in
section 52 of the IPC. [Para 16.12]

MINUTES OF DISSENT

145
(i) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY - SHRI BALA V ANT ALIAS BAL APTE,
SHRI KIRTI AZAD, SHRI D.B. CHANDRE GOWDA, SHRI HARIN PATHAK,
SHRI ARJUN  RAM MEGHWAL AND SHRI MADHUSUDAN YADAV :
We are in receipt of the draft report discussed on 30/11/2011 on the Lokpal Bill. We have
perused the report and there are several substantial questions on which we are unable to agree. We
are, therefore, placing our opinion on those provisions of the report and the bill for your kind
consideration. Since the Final Report has not been circulated, the contents of this note should be
treated as our Final opinion. .
1. On inclusion of the Prime Minister in the Lokpal :
The draft recommendation presented to the Standing Committee does not give a tentative
opinion with regard to the inclusion of Prime Minister within the jurisdiction of the Lokpal. The
Lokpal is a procedural law. The substantive laws, be it in the Indian Penal Code or Prevention of
Corruption Act do not grant any immunity to the Prime Minister from the provisions of penal law.
The Code of Criminal Procedure also does not grant any immunity to the Prime Minister from the
provisions of the penal law. Thus the procedural law, such as the Lokpal Bill cannot grant to the
Prime Minister or any individual immunity from punishment under the substantive penal laws. If
such immunity is considered and granted the same may offend the mandate of equality contained
in Article 14 of the Constitution. The Prime Minister must be held accountable before the Lokpal
in relation to his conduct. We are not in agreement to the suggestion that if a Prime Minister is
held guilty of corruption, the nation must continue to accept him and hold him accountable only
after he ceases to be a Prime Minister. However, the discharged of the authority like the Prime
Minister, in relation to sensitive function of national security and public order could be excluded
from the provision of the Lokpal. This would be in consonance with the Bill presented by the NDA
Government. No immunity would be available in relation to commercial transactions.
2. Citizens’ Charter and grievances redressal mechanism:
The draft placed before the Standing Committee has recommended that a Grievances
Redressal mechanism should be provide for in order to ensure that neither red-tapism nor delay on
account of collateral motives hurts the interest of the citizens. The draft has recommended that this
mechanism should be placed in a separate framework and that the proposed Lokpal should not be
overloaded with the work of administering this mechanism. We are of the opinion that providing
such mechanism is absolutely necessary. It should be ensured that such a mechanism is provided
for in the present proposed law itself. The linkage between the Lokpal and the Grievance Redressal
Mechanism could also be maintained by providing for an ‘appeal against the competent authority
dealing with orders and grievances arising out of the redressal mechanism. A second appeal on
limited questions could be provided for the Lokpal itself. The enforceability of Citizens’ Charter and
Grievance Redressal Mechanism could thus converge under the authority of the Lokpal itself. This
would also be in accordance with the Finance Minister’s ‘Sense of the House’ statement that “This
House agrees in principal on the Citizen’s Charter, Lower Bureaucracy be brought under Lokpal
through appropriate mechanism...”
3. Members of the Parliament...vote, speech and conduct within the House:
The conduct of MPs within the House can only be investigated by the House and the
authorities constituted in the House itself. Each House is the master of its own discipline and

146
privileges. Thus, it would not be appropriate to allow an outside agency, including the Lokpal  to
investigate the conduct of the MPs within the House itself. To this extent, we are in agreement
with the recommendations of the Standing Committee. However, we are of the considered opinion
that the conduct of MPs which takes place physically and geographically outside the House and
amounts to an actionable conduct can be investigated as per the Law of the land. There can be
no immunity provided to the MPs not to have their conduct outside the House investigated.
4. Provision of S tate Lokayuktas in this Act:
It needs to be carefully examined whether dealing with Services of the State could be
provided for by a Central Legislation. List II Entry 41 deals with the state public services. !t is
a subject in the State List. If Constitutionally permitted, we may in this regard have a !aw under
Article 253 or pass an enabling provision under Article 252 in order to provide uniformity
throughout the country. In either case this could be done by a Central Legislation.
5. Lower Bureaucracy:
The earlier draft has suggested that Gr. C&D staff should be kept out of the ambit of the
Lokpal. It has been agreed that all Public servants holding civil post in Government should be
covered under the Bil1. This is in consonance with our view and the ‘sense of the House’
conveyed by the Finance Minister.
6. False and Frivolous complaints:
The Committee has rightly disagreed with the draft bill which provide for exemplary
punishment of five years and/or fine of Rs.5 lakhs in the event of a false and frivolous complaint.
The Committee has directed that the imprisonment for false and frivolous complaints should not
exceed six months. The fine should not exceed Rs.25,000/-. The authority to prosecute for a false
and frivolous complaint should be with the Lokpal. We are of the opinion that we cannot deter
away people from filing complaints because of fear of a very high punishment/penalty.
Proportionality has to be maintained between the crime and the punishment proposed to be
imposed. Thus a punishment of a period not exceeding 30 days and/or false fine of Rs.25,000/-
should be enough to deal with the false and frivolous complaint.
7. Judiciary:
The Committee has rightly suggested that Higher Judiciary should be kept out of the
provisions of the Lokpal. The manner in which the Lokpal has to be constituted cannot be an
appropriate mechanism to deal with the judiciary. We agree with the suggestion contained with the
draft that a National Judicial Commission be appointed in order to deal with the complaints of
misdemeanor against Judges. We further feel that a National Judicial Commission should be the
competent authority to deal with matters of both judicial appointments and complaints. There
should be a National Judicial Commission, which should comprise of the following:
1. The Chief Justice of India.
2. Two senior most judges of the Supreme Court
3. Minister of Law and Justice of Union Council of Ministers.
4. Leader of Opposition, in the House of the people.
5. Two imminent citizens nominated by a collegium comprising of the Prime Minister, the
Chief Justice of India and the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the people.

147
6. The Chief Justice of the High Court to be a member whenever appointments or
complaints in relation to that High Court are to be investigated.
This would require a Constitutional Amendment. The Amendment in this regard can be
introduced in Parliament in this session.
8. The Lokpal…Search & Selection:
We have considered the appointment mechanism suggested by the Committee. We are
unable to agree with the appointment mechanism suggested in the draft report. In our view, the
mechanism should comprise of a Selection Committee consisting of the
1. Prime Minister of India.
2. A Minister in the Union Council of Ministers, nominated by the PM.
3. Leader of the Opposition, in the House of the people.
4. Leader of the Opposition, in the Council of States
5. Two judges of the Supreme Court nominated by the CJI in consultation with the
Collegium of five (5) Senior Judges of the Supreme Court.
6. Central Vigilance Commissioner.
We are unable to agree to the suggestion made in the draft report that it is not mandatory
to have a Search Committee. It is extremely important that a Search Committee should be
appointed to undertake the spadework in selecting the very best of people to be appointed to Lokpal
institution.
There should be at least five members of the Search Committee. It should be headed by
an eminent person in order to ensure that the best names arc recommended by the Search
Committee for the consideration of the Selection Committee.
The Search Committee shall consists of persons possessing an unblemished record. These
persons could be persons who have been Chief Justice of India, Comptroller and Auditor General
of India, Chief Election Commissioner, Chief Vigilance Commissioner, Cabinet Secretary, Judges of
the Supreme Court, Chief Justice of the High Court etc. We would further suggest that the process
of short listing of the Lokpal Institution must be a transparent process inviting nominations and
publishing the details about the proposed names on the internet. While constituting the Search
Committee, due regard shall be given to ensure that historically and socially marginalized sections
are represented.
9. The Trinity of Lokpal, CVC and CBI: In search of an Equilibrium:
The CBI is an important limb of the anti-corruption set-up in the Government for
investigating and punishing corrupt public servants. The CBI has experience of decades and has
evolved as an institution. It has expertise in the matter of gathering evidence in relation to crimes
and in investigating the crime as also in prosecuting the criminals. We believe that in recent years
the CBI has seriously compromised itself as an institution because it is under the control of the
Central Government. We are, therefore, of the opinion that for efficient handling of the anti-
corruption mechanism and maintenance of independent and autonomous character of the CBI as an
institution, it is essential that the following steps are to be taken:
(i) The appointment of the CBI Director is made by the Government of India. This
appointment is made under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act. The

148
independence and autonomous character of the institution depends directly on the
personality of the Director. The appointment of the Director of the CBI will have to
be taken out of the purview of the Central Government of the day. Thus the
appointment of the Director of CBI should be made by a Statutory Collegium which
is created by amending the said Act under which the CBI functions. The said collegium
should comprises of the Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition in the House of the
people and the Chairperson , Lokpal. It shall be the responsibility of this Collegium to
ensure that the best available police officials ‘are appointed at the senior level in the
CBI.
(ii) The Department of Personnel will only be an administrative interface of the Central
Government dealing with the autonomous CBI. It shall be responsible for answering
questions in the Parliament.
(iii) In order to ensure that the CBI functions professionally and independently, an
additional safeguard should be provided by delinking the investigating wing of the CBI
from the prosecuting wing of the CBI. The Director of Prosecution of the CBI should
be an independent official and not merely an officer on deputation from the Ministry
of Law as at present in the practice. The appointment of the Director of the
Prosecution should be made by the same Collegium, which will appoint the Director
of the CBI. The Director of the Prosecution should be an officer of the rank of a
Special Director in the CBI. The Director of Prosecution shall appoint the CBI
Prosecutors who shall take instructions from him. They shall be entitled to
independently appraise the evidence and not follow blindly the instructions from the
investigative wing or the CBI.
(iv) The CBI shall report the progress of the cases referred to it by the Lokpal. The CBI
must function independently of Central Government as an independent and autonomous
agency. The Lokpal shall be entitled to conduct preliminary inquiries and if it is of the
opinion that a corrupt public servant needs to be investigated further, it shall refer the
matter to the CBI. who shall investigate the same in accordance with the provisions
of Code of Criminal Procedures. For the purposes of conducting preliminary enquiries,
the Lokpal shall be entitled to create a staff competent to discharge this job.
(v) The Lokpal should be entitled to perform the function in relation to the CBI which
were earlier being performed under Section 8(1) (a) & 8(1)(b) of “The Central
Vigilance Commission Act, 2003' by the CVC.
10. Constitutional Status:
We are in agreement with the recommendations contained with the draft that a constitutional
provision could be enacted by amendment providing for the institution of the Lokpal. However, the
details of the Lokpal legislation should be provided for a separate law.
11. NGOs, private companies and media organizations:
We have gone through the draft, which has been prepared. The draft is confusing. We are
of the opinion that the authority of the Lokpal should extend to investigating public servants/office
bearers and organizations connected with the Government or funded by the Government. It is
essential that the jurisdiction of the Lokpal should be extended to such organizations, which
receives sizeable funding: from government, and whose limit is a cap fixed by law i.e. Rs.10 lakhs
per annum and are discharging functions of a public character. Any private organization, which
does not receive any funding from the Government, cannot be included with in the ambit of the

149
Lokpal. For the functioning of the healthy democracy, we cannot afford to have intrusive
institutions.
12. Whistle-blowers legislation:
We believe that the whistleblowers protection legislation should simultaneously be enacted as
a part of the Lokpal legislation and the Lokpal should ensure the protection of the whistleblowers.
13. Phone tapping:
We are clearly of the opinion that the Standing Committee’s recommendation with regard
to the present status quo being maintained in the matter of tapping of telecommunications should
be maintained.
14. Removal of Lokpal:
We are clearly of the opinion that the proposal that only the Government can move for the
removal of Lokpal for his conduct is not appropriate. If a member of the Lokpal is biased in favour
of the Government, obviously the Government will not seek his removal. Any ‘person aggrieved’
should be entitled to move the Supreme Court for removal of the Lokpal. The Supreme Court
should have a two-phased procedure. A frivolous complaint against the Lokpal should be dismissed
at the initial stage itself. Heavy penalties can also be imposed, if frivolous petitions are filed. If the
Supreme Court decides to hear the complaint against a member of the Lokpal then the detailed
procedure of enquiry should be specified in the proposed bill. The power to recommend suspension
of a member of the Lokpal pending enquiry should be with the Supreme Court who will forward
the same to the Hon’ble President.
15. Budget of Lokpal:
A separate budget head in the Union Budget should be authorized and approved by the
Parliament to clear the budget of the Lokpal as an institution. Rules can be framed, laying down
detailed guidelines as to the manner in which the members of the Lokpal are entitled to spend the
budget.
16. Article 311 to be followed:
Once the Lokpal holds a public servant guilty and liable far disciplinary action, the
requirements of Article 311 of the Constitution will have to be complied with. The provisions of
Article 311 require that it is only the appointing authority, which can remove a public servant.
Needless to say that the appointing authority should give ‘due regard’ to the recommendations of
the Lokpal. In case, it chooses to disagree with the recommendations, it will have to give reasons
in writing.
17. Complaints against the Lokpal Staff:
A statutory Tribunal should be created by the Bill, which should hear the complaints against
the members of the administrative staffs of the Lokpal. Since, the senior members can delegate the
functions, which may be prescribed by rules, it is important that this complaint redressal
mechanism should be completely independent and autonomous.
18. Quantum of Punishment:
The cancer of corruption has spread very deeply and it has entered into the vitals of the

150
system. Therefore, the quantum of punishment prescribed for the guilty should be such that, it acts
as a deterrent. There should be time limit prescribed for the Lokpal, i.e. six months after initiating
an enquiry against the delinquent public servant. Similarly, the Act must provide for creation of
special benches of High Court, which shall in time-bound manner endeavor to dispose off the
appeals against the Lokpal.
Thanking you.
1. Sd/- 2. Sd/-
(KIRTI AZAD) (HARIN PATHAK)
Member, Lok Sabha. Member, Lok Sabha.
3. Sd/- 4. Sd/-
(BALA V ANT alias BAL APTE) (ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL)
Member, Rajya Sabha. Member, Lok Sabha.
5. Sd/- 6. Sd/-
(MADHUSUDAN YADAV) (D.B. CHANDRE GOWDA)
Member, Lok Sabha. Member, Lok Sabha.

151
151
(ii) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI RAM JETHMALANI
I have gone through the draft report on the Lokpal Bill, hereafter called the Report. I
however find that I am unable to agree with some recommendations made in the report. I,
therefore, submit the following note of dissent.
BRINGING THE CBI UNDER THE LOKPAL
This is my major point of concern and dissent. One has only to recall the glorious history
of the CBI and its present state of degradation. It owes its horizon to corruption offences
committed during the Second World War. It was intended to bring the offenders to book. For quite
sometime its record was excellent. It enjoyed the confidence of the Courts as well as the people.
It is a great misfortunate for the country that today it is no better if not Worse than any other
police organisation or investigating agency.
I must start with what a three Judge Bench or the Supreme Court of India had to say in
a judgment Centre for Public Interest Litigation & Anr. Vs. Union of India and others Paragraph
28. It is reproduced here under in full:-
“28. While CBI had to explain this averment made in para 18 of the writ petition, if really
it wanted to convey to the Court as to the non-availability of Part II file to comment on the above
allegation, one would have expected CBI to come forward with a simple explanation that it is
unable to respond to the above allegation in view of the fact that the said file was not traceable
instead of averring in the affidavit that no such file is in existence. The use of the words “no such
file” clearly indicates that what CBI intended to convey to the Court in the first affidavit was to
tell the Court that such file never existed and it is only when the reply to the said affidavit was
filed by the writ petitioners with a view to get over the earlier statement, the second affidavit was
filed by Mr. Raghuvanshi interpreting the world “existence” to mean “not traceable”. In the
circumstances mentioned hereinabove, we are unable to accept this explanation of CBI and are
constrained to observe that the statement made in the first affidavit as to the existence of Part II
file can aptly be described as suggestio falsi and suppressio veri. That apart, the explanation given
in the second affidavit of CBI also discloses a sad state of affairs prevailing in the organization.
In that affidavit, CBI  has stated before the Court that Part II file with which the Court was
concerned, was destroyed unauthorisedly with an ulterior motive by none other than an official of
CBI in collusion with a senior officer of the same organisation which fact, if true, reflects very
poorly on the integrity of CBI. We note herein with concern that courts including this Court have
very often relied on this organization for assistance by conducting special investigations. This
reliance of the courts on CBI is based on the confidence that the courts have reposed in it and
the instances like the one with which we are now confronted, are likely to shake our confidence
in this organisation. Therefore, we feel it is high time that this organisation puts it house in order
before it is too late”
The Supreme Court had to say this even though four years earlier in another case Costao
Fernandez Vs. State at the Instance of SSP. CBI Bombay in (1996).7 SCC 516 paragraph 7 and
8 held-
“7. The CBI says the injuries were self-inflicted. The CBI has taken this stand because,
according to it, the appellant had an ulterior motive in killing the deceased, which was to share
reward relating to recovery of smuggled gold worth Rs. 28 lakhs. The reward had, however,

152
become due in 1984 and the present occurrence had taken place on 16-05-1991. How far-fetched
is the imputed motive? The High Court itself has disbelieved this and has really criticized the CBI
for suggesting the same. This is, however not all. As the further case of the CBI is that no records
were placed before it to show that the appellant had prior information of smuggling, following
which the smuggler was chased. Another material used against the appellant is his so-called
abscondence.
8. None of the aforesaid has legs to stand, as would appear from what is being stated later.
A biased investigation of the type at hand from the CBI has indeed pained us, because people of
this country have still high hopes from it, which would get dashed if, bias creeps in its
investigation. But then the deceased was no ordinary mortal, as he was a brother of the one time
Chief Minister of Goa; and the occurrence had taken place in Goa.”
These two paragraphs show how it is instrument of serious miscarriage of Justice.
I am not exaggerating but I believe thatI have tremendous experience of the criminal side
of our justice system and the way CBI has become a shameless instrument of the evil political
design of the ruling government My experience convinces me that the CBI has got to be rescued
from this infamy and the nation saved from the grave consequences of its misdeeds. The present
system of supervision has become hopelessly inadequate and much more effective one has to be
imposed upon it.
I could quote instances a galore. The first instance that comes to my mind is Bofors
investigation and the role of Ottavio Quattrocchi. When investigation outside India revealed that
Mr. Quattrocchi had received a large amount of money in a foreign bank because be had assured
the Swedish Company that the deal will go through by a designated date and it did. An Ex-Director
of the CBI for whom I have great respect immediately informed the then director of the CBI that
now that Quattrocchi’s name has appeared and there is reason to believe that he is a conspirator,
immediate steps should be taken to arrest him. This was not done. The written request and advice
of the earlier CBI Director is on record and is available. Quattrocchi was not only able to f1y out
of the country but his wife, whom he left: behind, sold out all the Indian assets of the family and
without challenge or hindrance quietly walked out of the country, thereafter a pretence of effort
to extradite him from abroad was enacted but without any genuine intension of securing his
extradition.
Kindly enquire how the Malaysian Court refused the request for extradition because the CBI
did not carry out the simple request of the Judge to supply him with a summary of implicating
evidence against Quattrocchi. Arrogantly and almost in language which in India would be contempt
they told the Judge that they have filed a large number of volumes of evidence and the judge could
find the evidence for himself clearly inviting a dismissal. Crores have been spent on this pretended
performance first in Malaysia and then elsewhere.
As hereinafter explained the appointment of the Director and Officers of equivalent status
should be totally immunized from government’s interferencc or influence. In the following pages
you will find other instances of this unpardonable misdemeanor.
The entire reason for the Lokpal is to have an institution independent of the government for
investigating corruption involving the government so as to avoid the conflicts of interest involved
in a government controlled agency investigating corruption in the government. The Report proposes
that the CBI be the main anti corruption agency and that it be left in the administrative control of
the government, with only some vague and weak supervisory jurisdiction of the Lokpal in the same
manner in which the CVC currently has that supervisory jurisdiction. This would be totally
unsatisfactory and would leave the CBI under the control of the government through its power of
postings, transfers, promotions and disciplinary control. Using these powers the governments of the

153
day have been misusing the CBI for their own political purposes despite the supervisory jurisdiction
of the CVC.
I have equally strong views on including the Citizens Charter And Public Grievance
Redressal mechanism in the text of the Bill. Similarly the dissent of some Members of Parliament
on V ote, Speech and Conduct within House has my approve. I believe that some members have
put in their dissent and I endorse it.
I do wish to recall my great appreciation of the work that you have accomplished as a
Chairman of this Committee. I believe the Committee has unanimously recorded their admiration.
My comments on the CBI do not retract from the presence in their force of some honest
officers but they don’t seem to prevail.
I hope this reaches you within time.
Sd/-
(SHRI RAM JETHMALANI)
Member, Rajya Sabha.

154
154
(iii) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI RAM VILAS PASWAN:
(i) It may be recalled that the glass of juice that Anna Hazare drank to end his fast the Ramlila
maidan was offered by a little Dalit girl and a Muslim girl. This symbolic act was a clear
acknowledgement that they presented groups that are among the foremost victims of  a social order
which is still far from equal. It is a stark reality that even 60  odd years after Independence, the
SC & STs, women, minorities and OBCs continue to suffer from discrimination in almost every
walk of  life.
(ii) It may be recalled on several occasions the subject matter came up for discussion in the
standing committee as also when Team Anna appeared before the committee. From the deliberations
one got the general impression that reservation in Lokpal and search committee would be given for
this groups. But in the last meeting position was change and therefore I gave my note dissent on
the subject.
(iii) I strongly object to the ambivalent clause in the Report that insinuates that reservation of
positions in the Lokpal and Search Committee wil1 be optional and not mandatory. I wish to
emphasize that the Search Committee and Lokpal must have reservation for SC/ST, OBCs,
Minorities and Women to the extent of 50% of  the total so that it represents and inclusive secular
polity. Anything short of  this basic requirement is unacceptable to me.
(iv) I have serious reservations regarding the recommendations of the Standing Committee on
the Lokpal Bill.
(v) Most importantly, I strongly object to the ambivalent clause in the Report that insinuates
that reservation of positions in the Lokpal is desirable but optional. I wish to emphasize that the
Lokpal must necessarily have representation of  women, SCs & STs, OBCs and minorities in the
apex body to the extent of 50%  of the total so that it represents our inclusive secular polity.
Anything short of  this basic requirement is unacceptable to me and my party.
(vi) I have grave reservations regarding the Committee’s recommendation to include Group ‘A’
and ‘B’ officers (totaling about one million), corporates, private NGOs and media within the Lokpal
ambit, as this mandate when combined with’ the inquiry, investigation and prosecution procedures
spelt out in paras 49 to 81, will not only spawn a massive Lokpal bureaucracy that is another
Frankenstein monster similar to that envisaged in the Jan Lokpal Bill but will destroy all existing
institutions such as the CBI, the CVC, the internal vigilance apparatus in all Govt. organizations,
which have been painstakingly built up over the decades. Let me explain my reasons for this
seemingly harsh judgement.
(vii) The Standing Committee has recommended that the preliminary enquiry will be done by the
Lokpal for which it wil1 have a “sufficiently large internal enquiry division” and it has also been
mandated that no complaint except a trap case can be closed without inquiry. Is the Committee
aware that the CVC which deals only with Group ‘A’ officers of Central Govt. and PSUs was
required to give its advice on 5327 cases involving Group ‘A’ officers in 2010?  By adding Group
‘B’, NGOs, media, corporates and politicians, the Lokpal will have to deal with 30,000  to 40,000
cases and possibly more, every year covering the length and breadth of the country. The mammoth
task of  conducting preliminary enquiries into all these cases would require thousands of enquiry
officials and their paraphernalia in various parts of  the country. Presently, the preliminary enquiry
in most cases is done by the internal vigilance of each organization. On top of this, the Committee
also envisages a separate prosecution division under the Lokpal.

155
(viii) The Committee has recommended that in all cases, the investigation will be done by the CBI
which presently deals only with major cases of corruption. By entrusting all vigilance cases of
Lokpal covered employees to the CBI for investigation, we are ensuring that the CBI is unable to
handle even a small fraction of the workload with the existing strength. The CBI will certainly
insist on a massive increase in it manpower, while at the same time, it wil1 be frittering away much
of its energies on relatively petty cases.
(ix) The Committee has proposed that after the investigation is conducted by the CBI, the case
will be referred back to the Lokpal which wil1 then give the public servant an opportunity to be
heard. What this entails is that every charged employee from any part of the country will have to
appear before the Lokpal Board before the chargesheet is issued. This is a patently absurd and
unworkable suggestion.
(x) My greatest worry is the adverse impact that an overarching Lokpal will have on all govt.
institutions. With disciplinary powers largely in the hands of the Lokpal, thereby emasculating the
management of the different offices, there is bound to be organizational atrophy and paralysis.
(xi) I have highlighted the main issues on which I differ with the Committee’s
recommendations. May I also point out that my self and the Secretary General of my Party have
sent four letters to the Committee highlighting my party’s views on the Jan Lokpal Bill, the
Government draft and what my party envisages should be the structure and powers of the Lokpal.
For some reasons, the content of the letters have not been mentioned in the Report. For ready
reference, I am enclosing another copy.
Sd/-
(RAM VILAS PASWAN)

156
(iv) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR:
Note of Dissent  by Shri Shailendra  Kumar
I have following dissensions over the recommendations of Lokpal Committee. These should
also be included in the recommendations and report.
Citizens Charter and Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism
According to the para 1.8 of the draft report of the standing committee, at the end of the
discussions held on 27 th August. 2011 over the issue of Lokpal, the Minister of Finance Shri Pranab
Mukherjee had given the following statement in the House:
“This House agrees in principle on the Citizens Charter, Lower Bureaucracy to be brought
under Lokpal through appropriate mechanism and Establishment of Lok Ayuktas in the
States. I will request you to transmit the proceedings to the Department-related Standing
Committee for its perusal while formulating its recommendations for a Lokpal Bill.”
From this it is clear that it was the desire of the House to bring the issue of Citizens
Charter within the ambit of Lokpal. And if it is not done then it would appear that the Standing
Committee is violating the proposal of the House. Hence, it is my suggestion that the issue of
Citizens Charter should also be included in Lokpal Bill by adding another chapter to the Report. I
am annexing a draft of this Chapter along with this note (Annexure-‘A’).
The mechanism suggested in the Annexure would be completely decentralized in its nature
and this would facilitate public in getting their grievances addressed at the block or district level
itself. There will be no direct appeal to the members of the Lokpal in this mechanism. This
mechanism would also negate the apprehension that Lokpal would be overburdened by the
complaints and thus it would be rendered defunct.
On the contrary if a penalty is imposed on the head of a department, he would immediately
ensure that the Citizens Chal1er is not violated and such grievances are redressed immediately. After
some time people would not be required to file a complaint and the number of complaints would
instead start decreasing.
Group ‘C’ Employees
During a discussion in the House on 27
th August, “The Sense of the House” included bring
the corruption of lower level officials under the ambit of Lokpal, whether this Committee is not
once again violating the proposal of the House by deviating from this?
In most of the corruption cases officers and employees from top to bottom rung of the
bureaucracy are involved. In such a situation, how can we claim to establish an effective
mechanism against corruption by creating separate investigation agencies for higher and lower
bureaucracy? What would be the effect and utility of Lokpal if. 95 per cent Government employees
are not included within the ambit of this institution? General Public have to deal with these
Government employees in their day to day life. Police Inspector, Ration Inspector, School
Inspector, Sales Tax Inspector, Tehsildar, Patwari, corrupt Junior Engineer of NAREGA etc. are the
officers whose act of corruption victimises each and every citizen of the country. Allowing them
156

157
to continue their corrupt Practices or to handover them to any weak institution would prove to be
fatal for anti-corruption mechanism. Therefore, I strongly demand to bring the group ‘C’
employees also under the ambit of Lokpal.
It is said that by bringing 60 lakh employees within the ambit of Lokpal the volume of work
of this institution would increase to such an extent that the Lokpal would not be able to handle
it. Hence a separate agency would be entrusted the corruption related issues of group ‘C’ and ‘D’
employees. I wonder that if a separate agency can handle 57 lakh employees, why not the Lokpal
itself.
The Prime Minister and Lokpal
I agree with the point in view of the sensitivity of the office of the Prime Minister, he shall
be kept out of the ambit of the Lokpal. However, except the issues related to the national security,
nuclear, defence and foreign policy, the office of the Prime Minister may be brought within the
ambit of the Lokpal.
Selection of Members of Lokpal
I do not agree with the suggestion made by the Standing Committee in respect of  selection
committee. This selection committee consists of 5  members. Out of  these 5 members, Prime
Minister and the Speaker, Lok Sabha are from the Ruling Party. In additions to this the Leader of
the Opposition is also a member of the selection committee. In this perspective, a question arises
that when accusations of  corruption against these persons would come within the ambit of Lokpal,
would they ever like to select a strong & effective Lokpal?
Another member in the selection committee, would be jointly suggested by the CVC. CAG and
the Chairman, Union Public Service Commission (UPSC). In my  opinion, these three persons could
never reach a consensus on a common name. There is every possibility that some names would be
suggested to them by the Government and they would reach a consensus on of the names.
Therefore, it is my suggestion that selection committee should consist of the following members:–
1. The Prime Minister
2. The Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha
3&4. One Judge of  the Supreme Court and one Chief Justice of one of  the High Courts.
(Their names’ selection would be done by a full bench of the Supreme Court).
5. Chief Vigilance Commissioner
6. Chief Election Commissioner
7. Comptrol1er and Auditor General of  India
Search Committee
As all members of the selection committee would be very important persons and they would
also be very busy. It is, therefore, necessary that a joint search Committee should be formed by
including some retired and distinguished citizens. The search committee should invite public to
propose some of the names and then submit the names to Selection Committee after shortlisting
for their consideration.
Search committee should consist of  ten members out of  these five  members should have
retired as Chief Justice, Chief Election Commissioner, Comptroller and Auditor General of India and

158
Chief Vigilance Commissioner. (person included in the search committee should be unblemished,
independent of any political outfit and should not be holding any public office after retirement).
While these five names of the members for search committee would he determined by the selection
committee, these five members together would chose another five members from the civil society.
The five members of civil society would be the distinguished persons from Scheduled Caste,
Scheduled Tribes. Other Backward Castes, Minorities and women. Thus, selection committee
would consist of ten members out of these 5 members would be retired persons and 5 from the
civil society. It is essential that 50 per cent members from these must come from SC, ST, OBCs.
Minorities and women.
Selection committee and the search committee would take note of that fact that while
selecting the Lokpal 50% of the members must have representation from all the sections of the
society like SC, ST, OBCs, Minorities and women.
Process of shortlisting the names for search committee.
Draft Report of the Standing Committee is silent about the selection process. The selection
process must be completed in transparent manner with public participation and such process must
be categorically mentioned in the Bill itself. Our experience tells us that due to non-availability of
categorical selection process the Government of the day have been making arbitrary appointments
as head of the institutions. In this process competent persons close to and faithful to some political
families get appointed to such institutions and thus these institutions deviate from their objectives.
It is, therefore, my suggestion that following selection process may be incorporated in the Statute:
1. The search Committee shall invite suitable nomination for the office of Chairman and
members of Lokpal from distinguished persons or groups of various sections.
2. Only persons with integrity and with vast experience (particularly against corruption)
in public service could be nominated for the office of the Chairman and members of
the Lokpal.
3. While recommending the nomination, it would be essential to provide the basis of
eligibility of the candidate for that office, his contribution against corruption and details
of any type of accusations labeled against him under any law as also any other details
that search committee may prescribe.
4. The search committee would collect maximum details about the background of these
candidates and their achievements through other mediums.
5. After receiving the details of nominated candidates, it would be put on website in order
to invite reactions of the public regarding their eligibility and ineligibility.
6. Keeping in view above information, the search committee would prepare a unanimous
list of shortlisted probable candidates for the office of the Chairman and member of
Lokpal as far as possible. This list would contain thrice the names of the number of
vacancies.
7. In case three or more members of the search committee express reservations about
any of the candidates his name would not be included in the shortlist.
8. Before sending the list of shortlisted candidates to the selection committee, the details
of such candidates would be put on the website and again the information from general
public would be invited thereon.
9. Keeping in view all the information’s, the selection committee would select the
chairman and members of Lokpal from amongst the candidates included in the

159
shortlist. This selection as far as possible would be unanimous. If three or more
members of the selection committee express reservations on the name of the
candidate, selection of such candidates would not be considered.
10. After selecting eligible candidate for the office of chairman or members of the Lokpal
the Selection committee shall seek consent of selected candidates before forwarding it
to the President for final approval.
Lokpal and Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
At present CBI is under the control of the Government and we all know now the Ruling
Party in the Centre has been misusing the CBI for furthering their interest. Hence, there is an
urgent need to bring the CBI out from the control of the Government.
Now the question arises that whether CBI should be made an autonomous body or be
brought under the control of Lokpal. To make the CBI an autonomous body would mean to create
an institution which will have all powers of the police but would not be accountable to anyone.
Such an institution could become a threat to our democracy in future. Therefore, I am of the
opinion that CBJ may be brought under the control of Lokpal with following provisions:
(a) Selection of Director, CBI should be made in the same manner as the members of
Lokpal.
(b) Director, CBJ shall be under the Lokpal.
(c) The Central Government would have no role to play or intervene in formulation of its
policy or otherwise. All the work related to CBI shall be done by Lokpal.
Process for removal of Members of Lokpal
Who will be vested with the power of removal of Chairman or members of Lokpal In case
they have been found involved in corruption? Government wants that this power should exclusively
vest in it. I am of the view that this power should be given to the public. Any person could file
a complaint against the Chairman or the members of Lokpal the Chairman or the members of
Lokpal in the Supreme Court. After hearing the complaint the Supreme Court should decide whether
there is prima facie case or not? If there is a case. the Supreme Court shall direct removal of
chairman and member of the Lokpal after getting it investigated within three months.
In case of false and baseless complaints being made against the chairman or members of
Lokpal. The Supreme Court should have power to impose heavy fine or imprisonment so as to
deter public from unnecessary wasting the time of the Supreme Court. The power to suspend the
Chairman or members of Lokpal against whom. the complaints are under consideration should be
with the Supreme Court and not with the Government.
Autonomy and Independence of the Lokpal
It is very important that Lokpal should be comp1etely free from Government’s control. It
his been observed in the past that the Government is not comfortable with the institutions. It stops
funding them adequately in order to cripple their functioning and render them ineffective. Here
Lokpal would go into the depth of highest level corruption, it is obvious that it could buy the wrath
of those in the Government in some of the cases.
Therefore. following provisions are necessary to make the Lokpal autonomous and
independent:–

160
1. In order to make Lokpal financially independent a certain percentage of Government
of India’s expenditure may be fixed for Lokpal which could be as little as 0.1% of
the total expenditure of the Government. Lokpal could ask for budget for spending on
any item within the limit of the said allocation which could be placed for approval of
Parliament. Lokpal, instead of forwarding its budget to any Ministry, would place it
directly before the Parliament. The Parliament shall directly approve its budget.
In order to prevent misuse of funds for personal benefits or private amenities, a
provision could be made that the pay scales of members of Lokpal and. employees
would be at par with the pay scales of similarly placed officials in the Government of
India. Lokpal would seek the approval from Parliament for any modifications therein.
2. Lokpal shall be completely independent of the Government for its administrative,
economic and functional activities.
3. Lokpal would not be required to get any of its expenditure approved from any Ministry.
4. The appointment of the officers of Lokpal shall be made according to the rules made
by the Board of Lokpal (consisting of the Chairman, all members of the Lokpal).
5. Lokpal shall appoint a Secretary whose hierarchy would be at par with the Secretary
to the Government of India.
6. Lokpal shall be free to make appointments of judicial officer, advocates, senior
advocates etc. for their various functions,
7. In the official Bill the power to formulate rules regarding working of Lokpal has been
retained with the Government in respect of many issues. As a consequence the
Government is getting overwhelming powers to interfere in the working of the Lokpal.
Misusing these powers. the Governments could pose unwanted hindrance in the
working of Lokpal. The Power to formulate rules in respect of working of Lokpal
should vest exclusively with the Lokpal. The Government should have no power to
formulate any rule regarding Lokpal without its concurrence.
Removal of Government Employees from Service:
After the completion of an enquiry the case would be referred to the trial court. In addition
to this, the officer shall be liable for departmental penalty. In the official Bill there is a provision
for imposition of departmental penalty by the Minister of the concerned Department on the
employees working under him. It is not possible to abide by the same owing to the close relation
between the minister and the employees working under him since they work in close coordination.
There is every possibility of their being hands in gloves.
Therefore, it is my suggestion that the Lokpal Bench should offer the accused an
opportunity to be heard in public and reach the decision for imposition of the departmental penalty.
Lokpal would suggest the penalty to be imposed by the Appointing Authority of the accused officer.
The Appointing Authority within a month of receipt of the report of the Lokpal shall take a decision
on the action to be taken according to report within one month of the Report. In case the
Appointing Authority prefers to disagree with the suggestions of the Lokpal, same would be
intimated to the Lokpal after recording the reasons therefor. In case the Lokpal feels necessary he
would move the Court against this.
A bench comprising of the Members of the Lokpal shall deal with the matters related to
senior officers. But in order to deal with mutters concerning Junior officers a bench comprising
of appointed judicial officers may be constituted.

161
Complaints against Employees of Lokpal:
According to the provisions of the draft of the official Lokpal Bill, the Lokpal itself would
conduct inquiry into the complaints related to its own employees. This shall create a paradoxical
situation.
I suggest that for this an independent complaint Authority may be constituted on the lines
of suggestions given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court for police reforms. For this the following
chapter would be required to be added to the official Lokpal Bill.
Independent Complaint Authority:
A complaint authority shall be constituted at the national level and one or more such
authorities shall be constituted at State level to hear the complaints against the officers and
employees of Lokpal.
2. The procedure for selection to such authorities shall be same as for the members for the
Lokpal and it shall be done by the same Committee.
3. The Chairperson of the authority shall be a retired judge of the High Court. In addition to
this it shall also have two retired Government officers and two other distinguished citizens.
4. The complaint authority shall conduct open hearing of the complaints against the employees
of the Lokpal and shall take a decision on every complaint within two months of its receipt. The
employee of the Lokpal shal1 be given every opportunity to defend himself. If the accused
employee is found guilty of misconduct, or unfair inquiry or corruption, then the Complaint
Authority may order his removal, dismissal or reduction in rank.
5. The final order of the complaint authority shall be appealable to Supreme Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution.
6. If the Authority feels it appropriate it can order suspension of the employee of the Lokpal.
7. The Lokpal shall also bear the expenses incurred on the business of the complaint
Authority.
8. The business of the Authority shall be transacted in the benches as per rules made under
this Act.
Punishment in cases  of Corruption:
In case a company or its employees is punished under Prevention of Corruption Act such
company and all other companies associated with the promoters of such a company shall be barred
from transacting business with Government in the future. If any employee is punished for
corruption, he shall be removed from his office.
Procedure for Time Bound Appeal:
At present it takes many years for a decision by the High Courts in corruption case.
therefore, a provision for constitution of special division benches of the High Court for exclusive
hearing of cases under Anti-Corruption law shall be inserted in the law. The law should provide
that hearing of such appeal shall be concluded within a period of not more than six months.
The Judges of special courts (at trial level) hearing cases under Prevention of Corruption
Act and the judges of the Appellate Benches constituted in the High Courts for hearing these cases
shall exclusively hear the cases of Prevention of Corruption Act.

162
Incentives to Whistleblowers:
Encouraging persons against corruption.
The Lokpal shall put in place the appropriate incentive schemes to encourage Government
employees and other citizens to raise their voice, against corruption, to provide information and
encourage spirit of providing evidences about corruption and the amount of such incentive award
shall not be more than 10% of the amount recorded either out of the loss suffered by the
Government or expected loss to the Government.
Protection to Whistleblowers:
Persons raising voice against corruption either by using Right to Information or otherwise
are being targetted across the nation. They are being victimized and are also subject to attacks.
There is apprehension that no sooner than some person lodges a complaint with Lokpal he would
be subjected to harassment. In such a situation only the Lokpal will be better placed to provide
security to the complainant since it would be well conversant with the case. But to tackle this
problem, the Government is bringing a separate bill where the authority to provide security to the
person raising voice against corruption will vest with the Central Vigilance Commission instead of
the Lokpal. In the year 2003, the Supreme Court in the matter of Satyendra Dubey’s Murder had
appointed Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) as the nodal agency to provide professional and
physical security to the Whistleblowers. But during past 8 years despite receiving a huge number
of applications the CVC. has failed to provide security even to a single person. It is because that
the CVC neither has the resources nor the authority to do so. During the last few years 13 right
to information activist have been murdered and CVC has failed to provide security to anyone of
them. Even the Standing Committee of the Parliament stated in their point that the CVC is not the
appropriate institution for  this work. I therefore, strongly opine that the responsibility of providing
security to the whistleblowers should vest with Lokpal.
Annexure ‘A’
Definition: ‘Grievance’ means a claim made by any person who did not get a satisfactory
solution as provided in Citizen’s Charter even after contacting the Head of a department.
Chapter:
1. After the enforcement of this law every public authority shall in a reasonable time, but
within a maximum of one year, formulate a citizen’s charter.
2. Every Citizens’ Charter shall clearly mention the committed time frame and business being
transacted by the officers responsible for completion of the work within given time frame.
3. If any public authority fails to formulate a citizens’ charter within an year of the
enforcement of this law. The Lokpal after the deliberation with that public authority shall
itself formulate the Citizens’ Charter and it would be binding upon the Public Authority.
4. Every public authority shall assess the necessary resources required to implement its
Citizens’ Charter and the Government shall provide the said resources.
5. Every public authority, in its office where it may be, shall nominate one employee as
the public grievance officer. In the event of violation of the Citizens’ Charter a citizen
will be able to complain to such Public Grievance Officer.
6. The senior most officer in every office shal1 be nominated as the public grievance
officer.

163
7. It will be the duty of the public grievance officer to receive complaints regarding
violation of Citizens’ Charter and to address them not more than 30 days time.
8. In the event of a complaint, not being addressed within the stipulated time frame of
30 days by the public grievance officer, a complaint can be lodged with the Head of
the Department.
9. If the head of the department also fails to address the problem within 30 days, a
complaint can be made to the Judicial officer of the Lokpal.
10. Lokpal shall appoint at least one judicial officer in every district. This number may be
more, depending upon the quantum of work in every district. Lokpal shall appoint
Judicial officers from amongst retired judges, retired Government officers or such kind
of ordinary citizens.
11. If in the opinion of the judicial officer, the complaint has not been address in an
appropriate matter, he shall penalize the responsible officer for the non-redressal of the
grievance after giving the related parties an opportunity for hearing. The penalty for
delay in grievance redressal shall not be more than 500 per day and 50,000 per officer.
This amount shall be deducted from the salary of the accused officer for  responsible.
In such cases, if aggrieved person is socially or economically backward, the amount
of penalty to be recovered from the responsible officer will be double.
12. In such cases the Judicial officer of the Lokpal shall also order the concerned officer
to address the complaint of the complainant in a given time frame.
13. Recurrence of similar nature of complaints received against an officer, it will be treated
as corruption.
14. In the event of recurring complaints being received against an officer, the judicial
officer shall recommend to the division bench of Lokpal for removal or reduction in
the rank of the responsible officer for such complaints. The division bench after duly
hearing the officer shall recommend such stringent action to the Government.
15. Every public authority shall review its Citizens’ Charter once a year and shall bring
appropriate changes. The review shall be done in the presence of the representative of
the Lokpal and through public deliberations.
16. The Lokpal can order for incorporating changes in the Citizens’ Charter of the public
authority. But such changes have to be approved by the three member division bench
of the Lokpal.
17. The concerned public authority shall implement the order of the Lokpal to make
changes in the Citizens’ Charter within one month of the receipt of such order.
18. The social audit of the work of every judicial officer shall be done once in every six
months. In such social audit the judicial officer shall present himself before the public,
and present all facts related to his work, shall answer all question asked by the public
and shall incorporate the suggestions of the public in his procedure. Such public
hearing shall be done in the presence of the senior officer of the Lokpal.
19. No case shall be closed until the complaint of the complainant is addressed or it is
rejected by the judicial officer.
Sd/-
(SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR)
Member, Lok Sabha

164
(v) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI PRASANTA KUMAR MAJUMDAR:
As has been widely acknowledged by overwhelming sections of our society, unabated rise
of corruption and incidents of scams are attributable to the policy of economic liberalization
being mindlessly pursued by the successive Governments since the early 1990’s in the country
without caring for the need of putting in place adequate regulatory measures and/or ensuring
transparency.
Even the commitment for putting in place the mechanism of ‘Ombudsman’ (Lokpal) have
witnessed wavering by Government of the day since 1967. The present Lokpal Bill, 2011,
therefore, holds out yet again a substantial potential for the Parliament to make good for the lost
opportunities by bringing in an effective Law; in the backdrop of the enormous dimension and
magnitude of corruption witnessed by the society virtually since independence of our country, in
its attempt to usher in a corruption-free system of governance. Since India is a country comprising
vastly of poor population and knowing that corruption hurt them the hardest, by any attempt to
combat the ‘corruption’ if made in a half-hearted manner we would not only be failing in our duty
to protect the basic interest of the poor but would also be inviting the wrath of the affected
citizens which would, in turn, weaken Indian democracy -the signs of which have off late started
surfacing in various forms and substance.
Viewed in this perspective, the Draft of the 48
th Report of the Standing Committee on the
‘Lokpal Bill, 2011’ has disappointed us as it has failed to hit at the root of corruption in our society
in several critical areas where it has been seen to be prevailing mostly and, hence, I, on behalf
of the Revolutionary Socialist Party, feel constrained to register dissent note on some of the
Committee’s recommendations as detailed hereunder:–
Chapter 4: Citizen’s Charter and Grievances Redressal Mechanism:
While the recommendation in para 4.16 is appreciated, I would like to reiterate the
suggestion made in my letter to the Chairman dated 4/11/2011 that the proposed mechanism on the
Citizens’ Charter and Grievances Redressal should be given a Constitutional Status in order to
prevent its casual amendments/manipulation.
Chapter 5: Inclusion/Exclusion of Prime Minister:
While I take note that on the issue of inclusion or exclusion of the Prime Minister under
the Lokpal Committee will be awaiting the outcome of its deliberations scheduled for Nov.30 &
Dec. 01, 2011, I take this opportunity to reiterate our party stand that Prime Minister and PMO
must be included within the ambit of the Lokpal because Prime Minister is not above the Law and
nor is he immune to the Indian Penal Code or Cr. PC in the matter relating to the Prevention of
Corruption Act, keeping him out of the Lokpal will not be justified. Notably, Prime Ministers in
several other democracies of the world are included within the provision of Ombudsman.
Chapter 8: Inclusion of Lower Bureaucracy under the Lokpal:
The common man (aam admi) experiences ‘corruption’ at the lower level of bureaucracy
who are entrusted with the responsibility of delivery of public services, like issuing of Ration Card,
Birth Certificate, ST/SC/OBC certificates, Driving Licence, Passports, Disbursement of Govt.
subsidies and so on, on day to day basis. While the Lokpal Bill is restricted to the Group-A cadre
164

165
of bureaucracy, it is recommended in the Draft Report (Para 8.18A) for inclusion of Group-B
official within its ambit.
Since this will be a half-hearted attempt to combat corruption, we strongly demanded that
Group-C employees of Govt/PSUs must be brought under the Lokpal in order to make the system
corruption free.
Chapter 10: Corruption in Judiciary:
While we confer with the suggestion contained in para 10.21 (ii) of the Draft Report that
subjecting judiciary to the normal process of criminal prosecution or punishment through the
normal courts of the land would not be conducive to the preservation of the judicial independence
in the long run, we demand that a comprehensive provision for facilitating investigation/prosecution
and punishment against corruption in the judiciary in a non-complicated manner by an appropriate
provision in the proposed Judicial Commission. We demand that this requirement mlust be fulfilled
by providing appropriate mechanism within the Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010.
We would demand that the above Chapter-wise suggestions may be incorporated in the final
Report of the Standing Committee failing which this letter be treated as a Note of Dissent from
my side and be annexed to the Final Report of the Committee.
Sd/-
(SHRI PRASANTA KUMAR MAJUMDAR)
Member, Lok Sabha

166
166
(vi) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI PINAKI MISRA:
1. The Biju Janata Dal (BJD) is firmly of the opinion that the office of the Prime Minister
must be included in the purview of the Lokpal Institution. The Constitution framers advisedly did
not give the Prime Minister any immunity from prosecution, as the did to the office of the
President of India. Similarly the Indian Parliament when enacting the Prevention of Corruption Act
did not give the P.M. any immunity from prosecution. In fact this was again advisedly so since,
unlike in the United States of America, in our system since independence the P.M. has very often
held important economic portfolios such as defence, telecom etc., in which ministries there have
been numerous scandals. Therefore there is no reason to grant the P.M. who in our Parliamentary
System is “only first among equals”, any immunity from the Lokpal’s scrutiny, WHILE THE P.M.
HOLDS OFFICE.
This can be subject to just exceptions of some sensitive subjects like Space, Atomic Energy,
National Security etc. Also a further safeguard could be that the full strength of the Lokpal must
decide on a investigation/prosecution of the P.M., with at least a 3/4th majority deciding in favour
of such action.
2. The ‘A’  and ‘B’ category Govt. Servants in Central Services have already been included as
per the Committee’s decision. As far a category ‘C’ is concerned a provision should be
incorporated in the Bill that in the event in future the Lokpal believes that there are any “significant
decision making level staff” escaping the rigors of scrutiny, and which is significantly impacting
the anti corruption drive, the said “C” category staff may also be included. That way the vast
number of nearly 57 lakh “C”  level employees such as peons, stenos and typists etc., who  really
have no important decision making roles, will not burden the Lokpal Institution. The BJD believes
the Lokpal at the Centre should be a body of prestigious and reputed persons, served by a honest
and compact Secretariat and the discussion which was mooted in our Committee Meetings that a
35,000 strong Lokpal Secretariat could be created to monitor the approximately 60 lakh employees
of “A”, “B” &”C” category will be extremely impractical due to multifarious reasons.
Further the lower bureaucracy in category “C” in the States, who play an important role
in the lives of the people on a daily basis such as SHOs’ and sub inspectors of police, junior
engineers of various departments such as PWD, irrigation and rural development, excise and civil
supplies staff, revenue field staff etc. can all be included under the purview of the Lokayukts in
the States, which would make the Institution have a wide base at the bottom, becoming learner
and more tightly knitted as it goes up, to tackle the big ticket corruption at the Central level, rather
than making it “TOO TOP HEAVY”, which may result in collapse of the mechanism before it starts
its important work.
3. The independence of the C.B.I. is of paramount importance. The Supreme Court’s judgment
in the Vineet Narain case envisaging the independence of the C.B.I. has been followed in the breach
by all Government since 1998. This is because the C.B.I. has continued to be the favoured hatchet
instrument of all ruling regimes, and therefore it has become ineffective in tackling corruption, and
that has led to the present clamour for a popular anti corruption crusade leading up to the demand
for a vigorous Lokpal by the public.
The decision of the Committee on 30
th November to free the C.B.I. Director’s appointment
from the control of the ruling Government was a salutary step and the decision to reverse the same
by majority vote at the meeting of 1
st December is MOST REGRETTABLE and appears to have

167
been motivated by vested interests at the Centre. The B.J.D. believes that since the C.B.I. is going
to be the principal investigative arm of the Lokpal, it must be released from the right control of
the Central Government as at present.
The post of Director C.B.I. and all Special Directors must be selected by a  Selection
Committee comprising of the Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha and the
Chairman, Lokpal. This would be an effective way to ensure that in future the ruling party at the
Centre is not able to control the C.B.I. through handpicked officers and pick and choose the anti
corruption drive to suit their political convenience as has happened repeatedly in the past, leading
to severe erosion in the credibility of the C.B.I. and serious weakening of the entire anti corruption
drive. Further it has been seen that the C.B.I. has become the exclusive turf of the Indian Police
Service, which is not desirable. It should be ensured in future that the C.B.I is staffed with officers
from diverse services in order to make it a more representative body. Similarly the post of CVC
and the Director of the Directorate of Prosecution (recommended elsewhere by our Committee),
should also be released from Governmental controls and be selected by this above suggested
independent mechanism. This would truly add to the robustness of the anti corruption movement.
4. The decision of  the Committee to recommend separate Constitutional provision for  the
creation of an independent Citizen’s charter is a  good step and the B.J.D. hopes that an effectives
Citizen’s Charter and Public Grievance Redress mechanism will be put in place by the Government
at the earliest. The B.J.D. believes that the mechanism provided by the Government in the draft
Citizen’s Right to Grievance Redress Bill which has been put up on the website is inadequate and
must be comprehensively changed and redrafted to make it more efficacious. Further since giving
effect to this would entail substantial additional expenditure for poorer states like Odisha, the BJD
hopes that the Central Government will support the states entirely in terms of the necessary
financial outlay in that regard.
5. The B.J.D. also believe that the present Whistleblower’s Protection Bill that is pending in
Parliament has serious lacunae and has given rise to acute misgivings amongst large sections of
Civil society. This must be withdrawn by the Government and a more comprehensive and effective
Whistleblower’s Protection Bill should be introduced at the earliest.
Sd/-
(SHRI PINAKI MISRA)
Member, Lok Sabha

168
168
(vii) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY ADV . A. SAMPATH:
The people of India are eagerly expecting Parliament to adopt a legislation that will
constitute an effective Lokpal authority to curb corruption in high places and in the public sphere.
With this in view, 1 am submitting this note of dissent as I strongly feel the incorporation of the
steps mentioned below are essential for a strong and effective Lokpal body to be set up.
1. The Prime Minister should be brought under the purview of the Lokpal.
2. The Members of Parliament should be brought under the purview of the Lokpal. For
Members of Parliament, Article 105 of the Constitution provides protection with regard to freedom
of speech and voting. The real issue is that, this freedom and protection does not extend to acts
of corruption by Members of Parliament. This should be done through an amendment to Article
105 of the Constitution of India on the lines recommended by the National Commission to review
the working of the Constitution.
3. The powers of the Lokpal should be expanded to include not only Group A and Group B
officers, but also officers belonging to Group C and Group D. The provisions for the State
Lokayuktas should contain similar counterpart reference for purposes of coverage of all similar
categories at the state level which are the same or equivalent to Group A., Group B, Group C and
Group D for the Lokpal.
4. The constitution of the Search Committee should be made mandatory to prepare the panel
of names for the consideration of the Selection Committee for the appointment of chairperson and
other members of the Lokpal.
5. The Lokpal should be provided with its own investigative mechanism with exclusive
jurisdiction for the Prevention of Corruption Act.
6. The CBI Director should be selected by the Selection Committee constituted for selecting
Chairperson and other members of the Lokpal.
7. The definition of “corruption” under the PCA 1988 is inadequate. Therefore the following
needs to be added: “willfully giving any undue benefit to any person or obtaining any benefit from
any public servant in violation of any laws or rules.”
8. Lokpal should be given powers to investigate cases which involve business entities and
to recommend cancellation of licenses, contracts, lease or agreements if it was obtained by corrupt
means, The Lokpal should also have the power to recommend  blacklisting companies from getting
Government contracts and licenses. Similarly, if the beneficiary of an offense is a business entity,
the Lokpal should have the power to recommend concrete steps to recover the loss caused to the
public exchequer.
Sd/-
(ADV . A. SAMPATH)
Member, Lok Sabha

169
169
(viii) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI S. SEMMALAI:
I strongly feel that the decision arrived at the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice relating to the formation of Lokayukta as necessary
instrument to contain corruption through a single enactment of Lokpal Bill by the Centre is an
infringement of the State’s power and intrusion of State autonomy. It would strike at the roots of
the federal concept enshrined in the Constitution of India.
Art. 246 of  the Constitution empowers the States to make law with respect to any of the
matters enumerated in list-III of the Seventh Schedule of the Indian Constitution. By exercising the
powers provided under Art. 253 of the Constitution has indicated in the draft report, the Centre
attempts to over-ride the independence of the State and relegate the States to a subordinate
position. This is quite unacceptable. The concept of federalism, as mandated by the Constitution
does not allow the Center to treat the States with over-riding powers and authority. Strong States
are vital to a stable and strong Center. The Constitution does not make any difference between
Centre and States and the concurrent list enjoyed by the Centre and the States should be to serve
the interest of both the limbs.
Hence, I strongly advocate that the States should be given freedom to constitute Lokayukta
and the State Legislature should be allowed to decide when and in what manner such a body
(Lokayukta) has to be created. The Center’s directions in this regard through a Lokpal Act as
contemplated in the Committee’s report is unwarranted and unjustifiable.
I place on record on behalf of my party AIADMK my dissenting view against the
Committee’s report in paragraph 16 of page No.143. I urge the Committee to reconsider its view
taking into account the strong sentiments and views expressed by the Government of Tamil Nadu
and other State Governments and withdraw the portion of the recommendation (Para 16 of Page
No.143) contained in the Committee report.
Sd/-
(SHRI S. SEMMALAI)
Member, Lok Sabha

170
170
(ix) MINUTES OF DISSENT BY KUMARI MEENAKSHI NATARAJAN, ADV . P.T. THOMAS
AND SHRIMATI DEEPA DASMUNSHI
We the undersigned member of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice propose that the 48 th Report of the Committee on the
Lokpal Bill, 2011 be amended as needed to reflect the following:-
1. The CVC should be placed under the Lok Pal and the State Vigilance Commissions should
be under Lokayukta.
2. Investigations into corruption cases by the CBI shall be subject to the superintendence and
control of the Lok Pal.
3. Group C officers shall be included in the jurisdiction of the Lok Pal in accordance with
appropriate administrative arrangements.
4. The proposal that Article 311 of the Constitution of India be repealed or amended should
be deleted from the Report.
Sd/-
(Meenakshi Natarajan)
Sd/-
(P.T. Thomas)
Sd/-
(Deepa Dasmunshi)

171
171
(x) MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI VIJAY BAHADUR SINGH:
The common man is being harassed and has to pay bribes at each steps whenever he
contacts the Government officials. The quantum of bribe increase with the status of officials. But
the common man in majority is harassed by lower officials also and have to grease their palm at
the entry level who are mostly lower officials.
Since, in Lokayukta at the State level employees of Class-I to IV have been covered there
is no reason or logic of exempting similar Class-C employees in the Central Government from the
jurisdiction of Lokpal.
Majority of the poor man are harassed on day to day basis by Class-C employees also in
very large degrees. Therefore, it would fair, proper and also in public interest to cover Class-C
employees also under jurisdiction of Lokpal.
Sd/-
(Vijay Bahadur Singh)

MINUTES

175
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Wednesday, the 10 th August, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
8. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
9. Shri Devji M. Patel
10. Shri Harin Pathak
11. Shri Lalu Prasad
12. Shri S. Semmalai
13. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
15. Shri Manish Tewari
16. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shrimati Alka Sirohi, Secretary;

176
2. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Additional Secretary (S&V);
3. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary (Vigilance); and
4. Shri Ashok K.K. Meena, Director (V-II).
• Central Bureau of Investigation
Shri Balwinder Singh, Special Director.
• Central Vigilance Commission
Shri K.P. Tripathi, Secretary.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
• Legislative Department
Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary.
B. NON - OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Shri Anna Hazare;
2. Shri Arvind Kejriwal;
3. Ms. Kiran Bedi;
4. Shri Shanti Bhushan; and
5. Shri Prashant Bhushan.
2. The Chairman of the Committee extended a warm welcome to the Members of the
Committee and informed them that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has referred the Lokpal Bill,
2011 to the Committee on the 8th August, 2011 for examination and report within three months.
The Committee authorized the Secretariat to issue a press release on the Bill inviting suggestions
from individuals, experts/organisations.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and officials of Department of Personnel
and Training and the officers of Legislative Department. He then requested the Secretary,
Department of Personnel and Training to make a presentation on the Lokpal Bill, 2011. The
Secretary, while making a detailed power point presentation on the Bill, elucidated upon the reasons
that necessitated the introduction of the Bill. The Secretary also apprised the Committee about the
salient features of the Bill. The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought clarifications,
which were responded to by the Secretary.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
4. The Chairman then welcomed S/Shri Anna Hazare, Shanti Bhusan, Prashant Bhusan, Arvind
Kejriwal and Shrimati Kiran Bedi. He then requested them to place their views on the Lokpal Bill,
2011 before the Committee.
5. The witnesses, raised serious doubts about efficacy of the Lokpal as envisaged in the Bill
in tackling corruption. In their opinion the Lokpal in this Bill was not independent of the control
of the Government since majority of the Members of the Selection Committee were to be selected
by the Government. They also expressed concern on the power given to the Government to
suspend a Member of Lokpal. They suggested that all employees, irrespective of their rank or
position should be brought under the purview of Lokpal as the Bill in its present state with Group
‘A’ and above officer only within its jurisdiction would not be able to check the day to day
corruption at the ground level faced by the common man. They suggested a Lokpal at the Centre
and the Lokayuktas in all States/UTs having uniform powers/functions.

177
6. They objected to the provision in the Bill envisaging preliminary enquiry before registering
an FIR against a public servant and were unhappy about exclusion of Prime Minister, judiciary, acts
of MPs inside Parliament from the purview of the Bill. They suggested that Lokpal should also have
the power to protect whistle blowers and pointed out that the punishment in case an act of
corruption is proved, is far less than the penalty proposed in the Bill in case of frivolous/ malafide
complaints. They also objected to the inclusion of even those NGOs within the fold of the Bill
which were not getting any aid from Government as, in their view, this would weaken the activities
of such NGOs.
7. They were of the view that conflict of interest arising out of public servants dealing with
companies/firms/agencies, in their official capacity, taking up post retirement jobs in the same
company/firm/ agency, is not addressed in the Bill and opined that duality of agencies in
investigation process will lead to overlapping of jurisdiction, thereby hampering the efficiency of
the mechanism. The witnesses replied to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the
Committee.
8. Some Members asked questions form the witnesses. The Chairman pointed out that as far
as the Committee is concerned, no proceedings were a formality, that every input would be sought
and looked at seriously and that a holistic, considered decision would be taken. The discussion,
originally scheduled for one hour with the Hazare Team, lasted just under two hours and was
detailed and intense. The Chairman also informed the witnesses that this is only the beginning and
that the Committee looked forward to call Civil Society members again in the future.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 6.45 
P.M.

178
178
I
FIRST MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 23 rd September, 2011 in the Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Shri O.T. Lepcha
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Kirti Azad
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
16. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
17. Shri Pinaki Misra
18. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
19. Shri Harin Pathak
20. Shri Lalu Prasad
21. Adv. A. Sampath
22. Shri S. Semmalai
23. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
24. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
25. Adv. P.T. Thomas
26. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav

179
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
• National Campaign for People's Right to Information
1. Shrimati Aruna Roy; Member;
2. Shri Shekhar Singh, Member;
3. Shri Harsh Mander, Member;
4. Shrimati Anjali Bharadwaj, Member;
5. Shri Nikhil Dey, Co-convener; and
6. Shri Venkatesh Nayak, Co-convener.
• Lok Satta Party
Shri Jayaprakash Narayan, President.
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
• Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel
and Training)
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
• Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary; and
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh; Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the newly constituted Committee
and briefed them on the Lokpal Bill, 2011 which is presently under examination of the Committee.
The Chairman also welcomed the witnesses invited to give oral evidence before the Committee on
The Lokpal Bill, 2011 and the representatives of the Department of Personnel and Training and the
Legislative Department of Government of India. Thereafter, he requested Shrimati Aruna Roy and
her team to apprise the Committee of their views on the various provisions of the Bill.
3. Shrimati Aruna Roy expressed her appreciation of the Committee’s decision to hear all
voices with respect to the Lokpal Bill. She apprised the Committee on the main features of the
Lokpal Bill drafted by NCPRI and requested the representatives of her organization to make
presentations before the Committee on the provisions of the Lokpal Bill.
3.1 Thereafter, the representatives of NCPRI raised their concerns about the issues that
remain unaddressed or have been incorrectly addressed in the Government Bill. Offering
comments on the selection procedure of the Members of the Lokpal, they proposed that the
provision of Search Committee for recommending the Members of the Lokpal should be
mandatory. On the inclusion of Group ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ officials under the Lokpal, they opined
that such categories of officials should also be made part of the Lokpal Bill. However, for this
purpose, they proposed an alternative mechanism comprising of a system of Uplokpal at the
Centre and Uplokayukta in the States.

180
3.2 The witnesses stated that the Parliament is competent enough to legislate for Lokayukta in
States and opined that the present Bill should, accordingly, provide for Lokayuktas in the States.
They emphasized that constitutional methods are available for achieving this end. On grievance
redressal mechanism, they favoured the need for such a system but opined that the issue should
be addressed through a separate Bill.
3.3 On the inclusion of the Prime Minister with in the ambit of Lokpal, they were of the opinion
that the Prime Minister should be under the purview of the Lokpal provided that safeguards to
protect the office of the Prime Minister from frequent frivolous complaints are put in place.
3.4 As regards the punishment for the frivolous complaints, they were of the view that only
the complainants with malicious intent should be punished and the quantum of the punishment
should also be reduced. They suggested that the Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill should
be made more effective over the issue of making judiciary accountable, They also raised the issue
of protection of the whistle blowers and suggested measures to be incorporated in the Lokpal Bill
so as to ensure the safety of the whistle blowers.
3.5 Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications from the witnesses, who in turn replied in
detail. The Chairman requested the representatives to send the replies in writing to questions which
were not replied to in the meeting. The witnesses were also requested to send the amendments that
they propose in the Government Bill, indicating the additions/deletions therein in square brackets.
(The Witnesses then withdrew)
4. Then, the Chairman welcomed Shri Jayaprakash Narayan, President Loksatta Party and
requested him to present his viewpoints on various provisions of Lokpal Bill.
4.1 Taking the floor, Shri Jayaparkash Narayan, made an outline of the background of the ongoing
debate over the Lokpal Bill in the country. Highlighting the debatable issues with respect to the
various provisions of the Lokpal Bill he offered his comments thereon.
4.2 He drew the attention of the Committee towards the various functional and dysfunctional
aspects of the implementation of the proposed Government Bill on the Lokpal. He also suggested
remedial measures and additional safeguards which need to be considered if the Bill is to make an
effective legislation and provide a workable institution of Lokpal commensurate with Indian
Constitution and model of governance and polity.
4.3 The main issues he emphasized upon were inclusion of Prime Minister in the Lokpal, putting
the conduct of MPs in Parliament within the ambit of Lokpal, issue of corresponding Lokayuktas
in States; role, functions, jurisdictions and responsibilities of CVC and CBI in relation to the Lokpal
Bill and accountability of judiciary, etc.
5. The Committee, then, decided to hear the rest of presentation of Shri Jayaprakash Narayan the
next day i.e. Saturday the 24
th September, 2011 and requested him to appear before the Committee,
accordingly.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
6. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the discussion was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 7.42 
P.M.

181
181
II
SECOND MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 10.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 24 th September, 2011, in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Shri O.T. Lepcha
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Kirti Azad
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
16. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
17. Shri Pinaki Misra
18. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
19. Shri Harin Pathak
20. Shri Lalu Prasad
21. Adv. A. Sampath
22. Shri S. Semmalai
23. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
24. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
25. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
26. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav

182
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Shri Jayaprakash Narayan, Lok Satta Party;
2. Shri Ashok Kumar Parija, Chairman, Bar Council of India;
3. Shri Pratap Bhanu Mehta, President, Centre for Policy Research, New Delhi;
4. Shri Harish N. Salve, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India. and
5. Dr. Udit Raj, President, Indian Justice Party.
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
• Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel
and Training)
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
• Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and Shri Jayaprakash
Narayan who had been requested to appear before the Committee for sharing his views/suggestions
on The Lokpal Bill, 2011. He also welcomed the representatives of the Department of Personnel
and Training and the Legislative Department of Government of India. Thereafter, He requested
Shri Jayaprakash Narayan to resume his presentation on the Bill from the previous day.
3. Shri Jayaprakash Narayan made a brief reference to the points he made on the previous day.
The issue of the Citizen’s Charter formed the core of his presentation. He was of the view that
without making statutory provisions for ensuring legal guarantee to select services, the objective
of the Citizen’s Charter remains unfulfilled.
3.1 With regard to frivolous complaints in connection with the functioning of Lokpal, he was
of the view that the present law is adequate to deal with such complaints. Recognizing the need
for punishment for the malicious complaints, he however, favors a more balanced quantum of
punishment.
3.2 He also apprised the Committee over the issues of inclusion of NGOs, corporate houses and
media within the ambit of Lokpal Bill. The point that in view of the prevalence of collusive
corruption between a public servant and a private entity, mechanism must be worked out so as to
bring them under the purview of the Prevention of Corruption Act and the Lokpal institutions.
3.3 Then Members sought various clarifications and the witness responded to some of the
queries. The Chairman asked Shri Jaiprakash Narayan to send in writing the replies to questions
which were not replied to during the meeting.
(The witness then withdrew)

183
4. Then the Chairman welcomed Shri Ashok Kumar Parija, Chairman, Bar Council of India to
the meeting and requested him to present his viewpoints on the legal aspects of the various
provisions of the Bill.
4.1 Shri Ashok Kumar Parija initiated his response favoured for the Lokpal to be a
Constitutional Body in line with the Election Commission. With regard to the coverage of the
Lokpal, he suggested the Lokpal to be a decentralized body having multiple branches. He was
of the view that the mandate of the Lokpal should be confined only to the investigation part and
issues of Citizen’s Charter and Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism should be looked after,
separately.
4.2 Expressing his opinion over the CBI, he made a strong case for an independent and
autonomous CBI. He also threw light on the rule of Search Committee in the proposed legislation
for Lokpal and favoured a more balanced selection body for the members of the Lokpal. Issues
like bringing the conduct of MPs in Parliament, whistle blower protection, removal of the Lokpal,
Lokayukts in States also formed the part of his presentation.
4.3 Then Members sought various clarifications and the witness responded to some of the
queries. The Chairman asked Shri Parija to send in writing the replies to questions which were not
replied to during the meeting.
(The witness then withdrew)
5. Thereafter, Dr. Pratap Bhanu Mehta made a very lucid and pointed presentation over the
provisions of the Lokpal Bill. Bringing out the basic principles that a legislation should meet, he
made analytical and insightful observations on the issues arising out of the ongoing debate over the
Lokpal Bill.
5.1 Lauding the Lokpal Bill for providing an independent mechanism for pursuing prosecution
in cases of corruption, he offered a strong defence for the provisions made in the Bill. On the issue
of whether the PM should be within the ambit of Lokpal, he was of the view that given the
importance of the office of the Prime Minister, he should be brought within the ambit of the Lokpal
subject to certain conditions. Likewise, he also favoured that Constitutional protection provided to
the MPs and opined that it should remain intact.
5.2 With regard to whether NGOs, Media and private sectors be brought under the Lokpal, he
was apprehensive that such a move may put the dynamism of civil society at a standstill. He was
also not in favour of bringing the lower bureaucracy within the ambit of Lokpal. Instead, he
suggested that the CVC should be made a supervisory body to look after corruption in the lower
bureaucracy.
5.3 Then Members sought various clarifications and the witness responded to some of the
queries. The Chairman asked Shri Mehta to send in writing the replies to questions which were
not replied to during the meeting.
(The witness then withdrew)
(The Committee adjourned for Lunch at 1.30 
P.M. to reassemble at 2.15 P.M.)
6. The Chairman while resuming the meeting welcomed Shri Harish N. Salve to the meeting
and requested him to apprise the Committee on various provisions of the Bill. Shri Salve set the
stage for his presentation on the provisions of the Lokpal Bill by making general comments over
the menace of corruption and its socio-political implications. He emphasized that the issues that
arose during the ongoing debate on Lokpal need to be examined in the light of the ideas of civil
liberties, federalism, and separation of investigation from trials.

184
6.1. He also drew the attention of the Committee to other systemic gap in the judicial delivery
system like delay in trails, low conviction rate, and shortage of judges. He was of the view that
the civil society version of Jan Lokpal Bill is violative of the principle of federalism.
6.2 He, however emphasized the need for a Union legislation on Citizen’s Charter applicable all
over India. On the inclusion of the Prime Minister under the Lokpal, he opined that there should
be clear demarcated areas of exclusion in the functioning of the Prime Minister’s Office where the
Prime Minister cannot be subject to the Lokpal in the lines of the U.K. and Hong-kong models of
ombudsman and supported the idea that functioning of the all economic Ministries under the Prime
Minister’s Office should be brought within the ambit of Lokpal.
6.3 He also underscored the need to make NGOs accountable. He was of the view that NGOs
must share accountability with other institutions, if they claim to be a part of the governance.
Though he was not in favour of putting judiciary under the Lokpal, he, however, contended that
judiciary needs to be made more accountable and reviewing of the present collegium system of the
appointment of judges. The queries made by Members were replied by the witness.
(The witness then withdrew)
7. The Chairman, welcomed the next witness Shri Udit Raj and requested him to present his
views on the Lokpal Bill. Arguing for a more inclusive and representative character for the
institution of the Lokpal, he appealed the Committee for inclusion of the members of SCs, STs,
OBCs, and Minorities in the Lokpal structure. He also argued for broadening the definition of
“corruption”, keeping in view the specific requirements of the weaker sections of the society.
7.1 He did not favour the Janlokpal Bill on many counts particularly over its demand for
exclusion of the NGOs. Instead, he opined that NGOs should come under the Lokpal. He was also
of the view that corporate houses and media should also be covered under the Lokpal. He also
floated the idea that the bribe giver must be made accountable by bringing it under the definition
of corruption.
7.2 Members sought clarifications from the witness, who in turn responded to in detail. The
Chairman of the Committee also requested Shri Udit Raj to send written replies on those matters
not readily available with them, for reference of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. The Chairman requested all groups of witnesses to send their proposed amendments in the
Government Bill indicating the additions/deletions in square brackets.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 4.21 
P.M.

185
185
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 10.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 1 st October, 2011, in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
12. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
15. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal,
16. Shri Pinaki Misra
17. Shri Harin Pathak
18. Shri Lalu Prasad
19. Adv. A. Sampath
20. Shri S. Semmalai
21. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
22. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
23. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
24. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav

186
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Central Vigilance Commission
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar, Central Vigilance Commissioner;
2. Shri. K.D. Tripathi, Secretary; and
3. Shri Anil Sinha, Additional Secretary.
Central Bureau of Investigation
1. Shri Amar Pratap Singh, Director, CBI;
2. Shri Balwinder Singh, Special Director, CBI; and
3. Shri V .K. Gupta, Special Director, CBI.
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES AND PENSIONS
Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary (Vigilance); and
2. Shri Ashok K.K. Meena, Director (V-II).
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
Legislative Department
Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary.
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee and
Shri Pradeep Kumar, Central Vigilance Commissioner who was invited to share his views/
suggestions on the provisions of the Lokpal Bill, 2011. He also welcomed the representatives of the
Department of Personnel and Training and the Legislative Department. Thereafter, he requested the
Central Vigilance Commissioner to apprise the Committee of his views on the Bill.
2. The Central Vigilance Commissioner began with a power point presentation and outlined the
powers and responsibilities conferred upon the Central Vigilance Commission under the CVC Act,
2003. He also threw light on the major causes of corruption, the activities of the Commission in
relation to complaint handling, preventive action, preventive vigilance international collaborations and
the Commission’s supervisory role vis-a-vis  the CBI. He highlighted how the nature of
superintendence of the institution of Lokpal differs from that of CVC and elaborated on how both
institutions can strengthen the vigilance administration. On corporate corruption, he opined that
provision should be made in the Lokpal Bill and the Prevention of Corruption Act to address
corporate corruption.
3. The CVC favoured a strong and effective Lokpal to focus on political corruption while the
CVC should continue to function as a premier integrity institution with the jurisdiction over higher

187
bureaucracy. He was of the view that CVC and Lokpal should work in tandem without disturbing
the prevailing vigilance administration.
3.1 On the lines of Second Administrative Reforms Commission, the witness recommended that
CVC be made an ex-officio member of the Lokpal. For the purpose of further strengthening of
CVC, he advocated that CVC should be accorded autonomy on the lines of UPSC & CAG and that
Departments of Government of India should be made liable to explain in Parliament for non -
acceptance of CVC’ s advice. He further suggested that time limit should be fixed for trials under
the Prevention of Corruption Act and appeals before High Courts should also be disposed within
a fixed time frame.
4. The Members took note of the points made by the witness and sought various clarifications
from the witness. The Chairman also requested the witness to send the replies in writing.
(The witness then withdrew)
5. The Chairman of the Committee extended a warm welcome to Shri Amar Pratap Singh,
Director, CBI and requested him to apprise the Committee of his views on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
The witness expressed his appreciation on the objectives of the Bill and termed it as a strong anti-
corruption measure. He, however. emphasized the need for further strengthening of the CBI and
enhancing its functional autonomy to effectively deal with the menace of corruption.
5.1 The witness further suggested that a collaborative synergy needs to be evolved between the
Lokpal and CBI, if the corruption in the country is to be effectively curbed. He also drew the
attention of the Committee on delays in trials and huge pendency of cases and suggested that a
strong criminal justice system is needed to strengthen and supplement the anti corruption measures
being taken by the Government.
6. He was, however, not in favour of merging the anti-corruption wing of CBI with Lokpal
and argued that such a move is not practical as it may pave the way for overlapping of jurisdiction
between CBI and Lokpal. Likewise, he also did not support subsuming the prosecution wing of
CBI. Instead, he opined that Lokpal can exercise general superintendence on anti-corruption matters
as laid down in the Vineet Narayan case.
7. Referring to the observations made by the Supreme Court in the Vineet Narayan Case, he
requested the Committee to consider more autonomy and enhancement of the time-period of the
tenure of Director, cm. He also favoured that the Director, CBI should be made an ex-officio
member of the Institution of Lokpal with same powers and status as prescribed for other members
of the Lokpal. He, however, opined that all powers to meet financial, administrative and legal
requirements of CBI may vest in Lokpal and the power to sanction prosecution under the section
197 of the CrPC and section 19 of Prevention of Corruption Act in anti-corruption cases of CBI
may also vest in Lokpal.
8. The Members took note of the points made by the witness and sought various clarifications.
The Chairman asked the witness to send written replies to questions which could not be answered.
(The witness then withdrew)
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 2.00 
P.M.

188
188
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 13 th October, 2011 in Room No. G-74,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Shri O.T. Lepcha
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
10. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
11. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
14. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
15. Shri Pinaki Misra
16. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
17. Shri Harin Pathak
18. Adv. A. Sampath
19. Shri S. Semmalai
20. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
21. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
22. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director

189
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Justice M.N. Venkatachalaiah, Former Chief Justice of India; and
2. Justice J.S. Verma, Former Chief Justice of India
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary (Vigilance)
Ministry of Law and Justice
(Legislative Department)
1. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary; and
2. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to Members present and the
witnesses. Briefly highlighting on the credentials of  the witnesses, he invited them to share their
much valued views on the Lokpal Bill and principally on the aspect of  going in for a constitutional
amendment.
3. Justice M.N. Venkatachalaiah traced the evolution of  the institution of  the Indian Parliament
and stated that it has a great reputation all over the world. He drew the attention of  the Committee
on how the Indian democracy has been penned as robust but at the same time, the rowdiest in
the world and how the Parliament has sustained this great experiment.
4. The witness expressed his disappointment on the developing culture of  negative social
critical mass which unleashed a chain reaction and the disenchantment with institutions of
democracy and of  governance, which has unleashed a sense of  cynicism and worked as a power
of destruction rather than that of  re-construction. He emphasised on the ethical and philosophical
foundations of  the whole matter for rooting out corruption.
5. The witness however, cautioned that the paranoia of  corruption demoralizes the
administration. Honest officers should not be under a fear psychosis that they do not want to take
decision out of  fear that somebody would raise an issue. Such being the situation, he felt that a
constitutional declaration would assure the people that they live under the protection of  an adequate
system and then decide how the law should be framed. He wound up his submissions opining that
the Parliament of India must foremost come out with a constitutional exhortation that will provide
a system of  protection to the people from corruption.
6. The Chairman thanked Justice  M.N. Venkatachalaiah and invited Justice J.S. Verma to take
the floor.
7. Justice J.S. Verma expressed his gratitude for the invitation to share his views on the
Lokpal Bill and announced his total agreement with the views of Justice Venkatachalaiah for
bringing out a constitutional declaration. He also expressed his distress on the movement implying
that everyone is above Parliament and reminded that all legislations must be done within the
constitutional framework, and that the Constitution had entrusted that task to Parliament.

190
8. Reacting to cries for a strong Lokpal and substantiating on his support for a Constitutional
declaration, he stated that there could be nothing stronger than a Constitutional mandate.
9. He stated that passage of this Constitution Amendment Bill would make Lokpal a part of
the Constitution which implies that it remains a permanent feature and cannot be ordinarily amended
like an ordinary statute by some simple majority. Secondly, when it becomes a basic feature and
a part of the indestructible basic structure of the Constitution, it would be beyond the amending
power of any political equation or formulation and even of Parliament. In this way, the demand
for a strong Lokpal would also be fulfilled.
10. Justice Verma cautioned over a hasty legislation. He implored for  a holistic approach as
Justice Venkatachaliah had pointed out in addressing the morality aspects and the ethical values in
the legislation, the working of the system and its faithful implementation has to be seriously
addressed and accountability ensured when the details are drawn up.
11. He concluded his presentation conveying his faith in Parliament and pointing out the
noteworthyness of the high degree of commitment in the debate in Parliament and the earnestness
with which Members spoke on the subject cutting across party lines.
12. At this juncture, the Chairman pointed out that adopting Article 253 of the Constitution for
legislation for  the States would invite federal debate and sought clarification on the matter. He also
requested the witnesses to elucidate on their use of the phrase “appropriate legislature” in the Lok
Ayukta context which leaves a speculation as to whether it is Central or State legislature.
13. The witnesses informed the Committee that Article 253 of the Constitution provided for
implementing an international treaty, convention, etc., and as such, the Parliament is entitled to
enact for the whole or any part of the territory as has already been done in the case of the
Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993. As regards the use of the term  “appropriate legislature” in
the case of Lok Ayukta, they informed that it has been done deliberately to avoid the contentious
issue of contesting the erosion of the spirit of federalism.
14. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on the various provisions of the Lokpal Bill and
issues related thereto which were  clarified by the witnesses.
15. The Chairman then thanked the witness and expressed appreciation for sharing their erudite
views with the Committee. He also requested them to send in writing, if they so desire to make
supplementary submissions on the issues discussed.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
16. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
17. The Committee adjourned at 7.15 
P.M.

191
191
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Thursday, the 14 th October, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
8. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
11. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
13. Shri Harin Pathak
14. Shri Lalu Prasad
15. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
16. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
17. Adv. P.T. Thomas (ldukki)
18. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

192
A. NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
1. Shri B. Muthuraman, President;
2. Shri Sunil Kant Munjal, Past President;
3. Shri Harpal Singh, Chairman, CII National Committee on School Education;
4. Shri S Sen, Principal Advisor; and
5. Shri Sunil K Misra, Director.
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)
1. Shri R.V. Kanoria, Senior Vice President; and
2. Shri Arun Chawla, Assistant Secretary General.
The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM)
1. Shri Dilip Modi, President;
2. Shri D.S. Rawat, Secretary General; and
3. Shri Anil Singhal, Chief Technical Examiner.
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
• Legislative Department
1. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary;
2. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to Members and Shri B.
Muthuraman, President, CII and his team. He invited the President, CII to comment on the issues
contained in the Lokpal Bill, 2011 and particularly on whether the corporate sector should be
subjected to Lokpal.
3. Shri Muthuraman expressed appreciation for the invite and made preliminary remarks on
how corruption is damaging the country in several ways. He suggested two key measures that
needed to be put in place for progress towards a corruption free environment - First, to create
systems and processes that make it difficult to adopt corrupt practices. Secondly, to create
machinery, mechanisms and laws that identify and punish corrupt practices.
4. The witness informed the Committee that the CII welcomed the introduction of the Lokpal
Bill which ensured the second measure for curbing corruption by creation of law and machinery
to punish corrupt practices. He observed that the Prime Minister should be outside the purview of
the Lokpal and may be investigated after he demits office. He favoured continuance of the existing
arrangement as regards inclusion of the Judiciary and MPs’ action inside the Parliament while
phone tapping and protection of whistle blowers may be ensured with a separate law. He did not
favour merging of CBI’s Anti-Corruption Wing with the Lokpal.

193
5. The witness opined that inclusion of all bureaucracy may become an unworkable
proposition and therefore, for the first few years Lokpal should restrict itself only to higher
bureaucracy and later, lower bureaucracy may be included. He supported the setting up of
Lokayuktas in the States and for making an enabling provision in the Lokpal Bill for that purpose.
6. Placing his views on the inclusion of the corporate sector, the witness stated that enough
mechanisms already exist for corporate sector and as such, in his view, the corporate sector should
not be covered under the Lokpal. He, however, felt that implementation of these mechanisms can
be improved upon. On being asked to share his views of what the defining line should be if at
all, corporates and the private sector should be considered for inclusion within the purview of
Lokpal, the witness submitted that only that realm of the corporate body whose entity is owned
by public money in part or in whole may be considered for inclusion in the Lokpal.
7. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on various related issues arising out of the
presentation and the witness responded. Chairman also requested the witness to give written
response to the queries of Members, alongwith the changes proposed in the Bill.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. Chairman extended a warm welcome to Shri R.V . Kanoria, Vice-President, FICCI and his
colleague and requested him to make focussed comments on the contentious issues in the Lokpal
Bill, 2011 and from the point of view of Chamber of Commerce, to share his views on subsuming
of corporations within the ambit of a Lokpal. Shri Kanoria thanked the Committee for the invite
and in his preliminary remarks said that in a democracy, Parliament is supreme and sovereign in
determining the nature of legislation and change in established law.
9. Coming to the subject, the witness stated that coverage of corporates under the Lokpal
should be to the extent of involvement in collusive corruption. He also suggested that adequate
protection to whistleblowers in corporates within the whistleblower policy should be ensured
through a legislation. As regards the issue of bringing the lower grade officers within the ambit
of the Bill, he claimed that the maximum harassment meted out was from the lower grade officers.
Moreover, most of the decision making is done at these levels and therefore, the scope of the Bill
should be extended to the lower grade officers.
10. On the concept of bringing about a Citizen’s Charter, he was of the view that non-
adherence to a Charter tantamount to either abrogation of duty or corruption and, therefore, should
be taken into account. He suggested to give powers to the Lokpal to take cognizance, investigate
and initiate a trial on the basis of suo motu  evidence without having to go back to the Government.
He also felt judiciary’s independence should be maintained and supported the idea of Lokpals in the
States on uniform lines.
11. Thereafter, Members sought some clarifications and the witness replied to those queries.
The Chairman requested the witness to give written replies alongwith changes proposed in the Bill.
(The Witnesses then withdrew)
12. Then the Chairman welcomed Shri Dilip Modi, President, ASSOCHAM and his colleagues
and requested him to share his views on the issues in the Lokpal Bill, 2011 vis-a-vis corporations.
13. Shri Modi thanked the Committee for giving the opportunity to share their views and
claimed that since the corporates are already covered in the Prevention of Corruption Act, it would
not be proper to bring the corporates within the purview of Lokpal. He also contended it important
that the Lokpal Bill should not be seen in isolation, but in the context of a comprehensive statute
in consonance with other existing laws. The witness was of the opinion that judiciary should be
kept out of this Bill and the independence of judiciary should be maintained. With regard to the

194
drawing line on the extent of coverage of the corporates, he assured the Committee that written
submissions would be made thereon.
14. Thereafter, Members sought some clarifications on various related issues arising out of the
presentation and the replies were given to those queries. The Chairman requested the witness to
give written replies alongwith the changes proposed in the Bill.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
16. The Committee adjourned at 6.35 
P.M.

195
195
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 2.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 21 st October, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
6. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
7. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
8. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
14. Shri Harin Pathak
15. Shri Lalu Prasad
16. Adv. A. Sampath
17. Shri S. Semmalai
18. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
19. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
20. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
21. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director

196
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. National Commission for Scheduled Castes
Shri P.L. Punia, Chairman
2. Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Right's
1. Shri Amod K. Kanth, Chairperson; and
2. Shri Shashank Shekhar.
3. Federation for Economic Freedom
1. Shri Bharat Gandhi, Political Reformer and Auther; and
2. Shri Aruneshwar Gupta, Advocate Supreme Court.
4. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
1. Ms. Alexandra Solovieva, Deputy Country Director; and
2. Ms. Sumeeta Banerji, Assistant Country Director & Head.
5. Transparency International India
Shri P.S. Bawa, IPS, Chairman
6. PRS Legislative Research
1. Shri M.R. Madhavan;
2. Ms. Kaushiki Sanyal; and
3. Ms. Harsimaran Kalra.
7. Akhil Bhartiya Vidhyarthi Parishad (ABVP)
1. Shri Sunil Ambekar, National Organizing Secretary; and
2. Shri Sunil Bansal.
8. Shri P.S. Krishnan (IAS Retd)
9. Indian Social Institute
1. Dr. Christopher Lakra, Executive Director;
2. Dr. Ibrahim Qureshi;
3. Dr. Paul Diwakar; and
4. Prof. Sushma Yadav.
10. Gandhian Sewa and Satyagraha Brigade
1. Shri Shambu Dutt, Advisor; and
2. Justice Kamleshwar Nath.

197
11. Bharat Raksha Manch
1. Shri Om Prakash Gupta, IFS National Working President; and
2. Shri Rattan Lal Gupta.
12. All India Council of Human Rights, Liberties & Social Justicc
1. Shri Anthony Raju, National President; and
2. Shri J.E. John.
13. Consumer Online Foundation
1. Shri S. Krishnan, Advisor; and
2. Shri. Pyush Misra, Governing Council Member.
14. Public Interest Legal Support and Research Centre (PILSARC)
1. Shri Rajeev Dhavan, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India and Director,
PILSARC; and
2. Ms. Swati Chawla, Senior Researcher.
15. Shri J.B. Mohapatra, Former Joint Secretary, Judges Inquiry Committee
16. Civil Society for Truth
1. Dr. Sowesh Pattanaik; and
2. Shri Ritwik Agrawal.
17. Confederation of All India Traders
1. Shri Praveen Khandelwal, Secretary General;
2. Shri Satish Garg; and
3. Shri Nander Madaan.
18. 1. Ms. Sandhya Jain, Journalist; and
2. Shri Rohit Srivastava, Journalist.
19. Shri Ranjit Singh
20. Akhil Bhartiya Sant Samiti
1. Acharya Pramod Krishanam, President;
2. Yogi Rakesh Nath;
3. Mahant Naryan Giri;
4. Mahant Durga Das;
5. SwatanterYogi;
6. Acharya Madan; and
7. Shri Umesh Yogi
21. Editors Guild of India
1. Shri T.N. Ninan, Chairman and Editorial Director, Business Standards;
2. Ms. Coomi Kapoor, Journalist; and
3. Shri Suresh Bafna, Journalist.

198
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
• Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary.
(In the absence of Chairman Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik was voted to the Chair)
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members present and all the witnesses who had responded to
the invite of the Committee by making their presence to share their views on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
He made a preliminary briefing on the work done by the Committee and then requested them to
take the floor one after the other.
3. Shri P.L. Punia, Chairman, National Commission for Scheduled Castes made submissions
primarily for representation of the scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other backward classes
in the Lokpal. He also shared his views with regard to the composition of the Selection Committee
and the Search Committee and various other provisions of the Bill.
4. Thereafter, Shri J.B. Mohapatra in his submissions dwelt broadly on the status of the CBI,
delegation of powers, coverage of the term ‘public servants’ and various issues likely to arise in
the implementation of the provisions of the Bill.
5. Shri Amod K. Kanth, Chairman, Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights and
‘PRAYAS’ made a power-point presentation on the various provisions of the Bill including
accountability of the anti-corruption wing of the CBI, inclusion of Prime Minister under Lokpal, etc.
6. Representing the Federation for Economic Freedom, S/shri Bharat Gandhi and Aruneshwar
Gupta appraised the Committee of their apprehension on whether corruption would be rooted out
with the establishment of the institution of Lokpal. They made observations with regard to the role
of media, the feasibility of merging the CBI with Lokpal, representation of the scheduled castes,
scheduled tribes and other backward classes in the Lokpal, coverage of both the bribe taker and
giver, coverage of private companies, etc.
(Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi assumed the Chair)
7. Chairman then requested the witnesses to send their further comments on the Lokpal Bill,
2011 if any, in writing within a week.
8. Ms. Sumeeta Banerji of the United Nations Development Programme made a power-point
presentation highlighting global examples on some broad issues, such as, jurisdiction, accountability,
citizens’ charters, etc. and cited examples on how some aspects have been addressed in anti-
corruption laws in different countries.
9. Shri P.S. Bawa of Transparency International India gave a brief account of the merits of
the Lokpal Bill, 2011. He made suggestions on issues such as, Lokpal’s jurisdiction, procedure of
inquiry and investigation, action against Members of Parliament, legal assistance to a defaulter,
power to make rules, etc.
10. Another witness, Ms. Sandhya Jain made observations on the composition of the Selection
Committee, setting up of Lokayukta in States, bringing media under some kind of scrutiny,
inclusion of lower bureaucrats, etc.

199
11. PRS Legislative Research representative, Shri M.R. Madhavan made remarks on the
anticipated resultant status of various issues if the Lokpal Bill is passed in its current form, such
as role of the Central Vigilance Commission, office of the Prime Minister and information related
to national security. He supported inclusion of NGOs and corporations under the Lokpal.
12. Representing the Akhil Bhartiya Vidhyarthi Parishad (ABVP), Shri Sunil Ambekar, National
Organizing Secretary and Shri Sunil Bansal commented on the restrictions imposed on the Chairman
and members for re-employment after they cease to hold office, inclusion of NGOs and lower
bureaucracy within the ambit of the Lokpal, Citizen’s Charter, false and frivolous complaints,
protection of complainants, etc.
13. Representing Public Interest Legal Support Centre (PILSARC), Shri Rajeev Dhavan
suggested for pruning of the Selection Committee to three people to have a manageable collegium
and commented on issues relating to complaints, inquiry and investigation, inclusion of the Prime
Minister, lower bureaucracy and jurisdiction of the CVC after instituting Lokpal, Parliament
legislating on the Lok Ayuktas, etc.
14. Another witness, Shri P.S. Krishnan briefed the Members on a Samajik Nyaya Lokpal Bill
drafted by him with focus on SC, ST, BC, minorities categories. He advocated reservation in
Lokpal and Lokayuktas. He also made remarks on the remuneration for members of the Search
Committee and commented on Whistleblower’s protection.
15. Dr. Christopher Lakra of Indian Social Institute made suggestions on selection and
appointment of the Selection Committee and removal of Lokpal. He also commented on grievance
redressal mechanism and suggested a mechanism to restrict false, frivolous and vexatious
complaints.
15.1 Dr. Ibrahim Qureshi of Indian Social Institute said in his presentation that NGOs, corporate
sectors and trusts should also be considered for coverage under the Lokpal.
16. Shri T.N. Ninan, Chairman of Editors Guild of India and Editorial Director, Business
Standards informed the Committee that the Guild has over 200 members representing large and
medium media organisations, both print and electronic and that there is no unanimity of views. The
only unanimous view that the Guild could submit was that it would be wrong and violative of the
freedom of press to bring the media under the Lokpal. He justified his view that the Lokpal is
supposed to make public servants accountable to the people of India and Journalists are not public
servants as they are not paid by the State. They are private actors who are accountable to their
readers and viewers.
17. Shri Acharya Pramod Krishanam, President of the Akhil Bhartiya Sant Samiti made general
observations of his apprehensions of a corruption free society even with the institution of Lokpal.
He also submitted his views regarding the jurisdiction of the Lokpal including inclusion of the Prime
Minister and favoured inclusion of corporates and media. He also raised his concern of the potential
of the Lokpal getting corrupt, especially when the Lokpal is proposed to be made so strong.
18. On behalf of Gandhian Sewa and Satyagraha Brigade, Justice Kamleshwar Nath expressed
faith in bringing about an effective Lokpal. He also submitted views regarding the jurisdiction of
the Lokpal, whether to give Constitutional status to the institution, role of the CVC and the CBI
and various aspects of the provisions of the Bill.
19. Deposing before the Committee, Shri Om Prakash Gupta of Bharat Raksha Manch submitted
his disagreement for keeping reservation within the Lokpal body but favoured the merging of the
Anti Corruption Department of the cm with Lokpal. He also submitted gave views on various other
provisions of the Bill.

200
20. Representing Consumer Online Foundation, Shri S. Krishnan placed his views on the
provisions of the Bill regarding the culpability of the bribe-giver, provision for whistleblowers, etc.
21. Shri Praveen Khandelwal of Confederation of All India Traders made submissions with
regard to corporations, apprehensions on the multiplicity of laws and agencies dealing with
corruption, fear of turning the Lokpal into a giant power, etc.
22. Dr. Sowesh Pattanaik of Civil Society for Truth made a powerpoint presentation on issues
such as, reservations for the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes, the acts and conducts of the
Members of Parliament inside Parliament and inclusion of private or non-governmental sector under
the Lokpal, restriction of eligibility of the Chairperson and Members for any post of public office
after they remit office, investigation agency of the Lokpal and other related issues.
23. Another witness, Shri Ranjit Singh opined that the Lokpal should expend the expertise of
the CVC and the cm and confine only to monitoring of these agencies. He proposed for setting
up of an Administrative Reforms Commission to deal with corruption issues.
24. Chairman then thanked all the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
25. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
26. The Committee adjourned at 6.41 
P.M.

201
201
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Thursday, the 3 rd November, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kirti Azad
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
14. Shri Pinaki Misra
15. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri S. Semmalai
18. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
19. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
20. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
21. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

202
A. NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Civil Society
1. Shri Shanti Bhushan;
2. Shri Prashant Bhushan;
3. Shri Arvind Kejriwal; and
4. Shrimati Kiran Bedi.
2. National Students' Union of India
1. Shri Roji M. John, Vice President;
2. Shri Bharat Kumar;
3. Shri Shahnawas Khan; and
4. Ms. Leni Jhadav.
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
• Legislative Department
Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the witnesses. He then requested
the witnesses to initiate their presentation on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
3. Shri Prashant Bhushan made a beginning by highlighting on the amendments that they had
proposed along with justifications therefor. He spelt the amendments proposed for providing
Lokayuktas in the States to ensure a uniform model law in the entire country. He also fully
endorsed the draft of Uttarakhand legislation on Lokayukta. As regards selection of the Chairman
and the Members of the Lokpal, he suggested for a broad-based collegium of eight to eleven
persons dominated by independent constitutional authorities and ten persons in the Search
Committee. He also suggested that removal of Chairperson or Members of the Lokpal may be done
through a complaint made to the Supreme Court by any member of the public and the power of
their suspension should be the prerogative of the Supreme Court. On their suggestion of merging
part of the CBI pertaining to corruption investigation into the Lokpal, he supporting the
Committee’s idea said that the Lokpal that way would get initial investigating machinery with it and
also that corruption investigation of all public servants would then be done only by one body.
4. As regards the jurisdiction of the Lokpal, the witnesses suggested that all cases of corruption,
including the Prime Minister irrespective of rank or position should be investigated by the Lokpal with
the safeguard that before  starting the investigation against an MP or a Minister or a Judge, the seven
member bench of the Lokpal would have to grant permission for filing the charge-sheet. He also
suggested for functional, financial and administrative autonomy of the Lokpal and that it should also
have the power to direct suspension or transfer of officer pending investigations.
5. The witnesses were also of the view that whistleblower protection must vest with the
Lokpal and that the CVC should be phased out and abolished after the Lokpal is instituted. The

203
witnesses made a detailed submission pertaining to punishment and financial penalty to be imposed
on the corrupt, inclusion of Citizens Charter, grievances redressal model, time-bound investigation
of offences, inclusion of lower bureaucracy and explained the consequential amendments required
in other laws.
6. As regards the Judiciary, the witnesses were of the view that the Judges of the High Courts
and the Supreme Court must come under the investigative ambit of the Lokpal. They supported
giving constitutional status to the Lokpal, subject to the Parliament passing it without the
requirement of ratification of the States. They also insisted on all the provisions of the Bill to  be
necessarily made a part of the Constitutional amendment Bill.
7. The Chairman thanked the witnesses and said that the Members would be seeking
clarifications from them in the meeting scheduled for the following day.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the National Students’ Union of India
and requested them to take the floor and present a focussed presentation on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
9. Shri Roji M. John, Vice President, National Students’ Union of India (NSUI) thanked the
Committee for giving to them the opportunity to present their views on the proposed Lokpal Bill.
He said that NSUI welcomed the Lokpal Bill, 2011 which proposes to establish a comprehensive
mechanism and a body to fight corruption in India. He also stated that the issue of corruption
needs to be dealt with utmost seriousness and, therefore, a legislation alone is not sufficient to root
out corruption. He maintained that punishing the culprit is the basic principle of any law but more
important is reforming the society to refrain from committing crime. He made general remarks on
ways to curb corruption.
10. The witness further conveyed support for Lokpal to be made a constitutional body
accountable to the Parliament and suggested some changes in the Bill. lie suggested to replace
eminent jurist to be nominated by the Central Government in the Selection Committee with the
Central Vigilance Commissioner, appointment of Secretary and other officers and staff of the
Lokpal to be made by the Chairperson or such Member or officers of Lokpal as the Chairperson
may direct, all major staff selection in the Lokpal to be made by the UPSC or the SSC and that
the Lokpal may initiate inquiry against officers working in the State Governments who were earlier
working with the Union or other bodies related to the Central Government, without the requirement
of consent from the State Government. He also felt that penalties for false complaints was too
harsh and may deter complainants fearing harsh repercussions.
11. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on some issues which were responded to by the
witness. Chairman then thanked them for sharing their views.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The Committee adjourned at 6.53 
P.M.

204
204
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Friday, the 4 th November, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kirti Azad
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
10. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
14. Shri Pinaki Misra
15. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Lalu Prasad
18. Adv. A. Sampath
19. Shri S. Semmalai
20. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
21. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
22. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
23. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

205
A. NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Civil Society
1. Shri Anna Hazare;
2. Shri Shanti Bhushan;
3. Shri Prashant Bhushan;
4. Shri Arvind Kejriwal;
5. Shrimati Kiran Bedi;
6. Shri Manish Sisodia
7. Shri Suresh Pathare
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
• Legislative Department
Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary.
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and also extended a warm welcome
to the witnesses. He informed that the session was entirely for questions-answers. He first
requested Shri Anna Hazare to make supplementary submissions to the presentation made by
members of his team on the previous day before the Committee.
3. Shri Anna Hazare expressed desire for a strong and effective Lokpal and an integration of
all corruption legislations into one law. He expressed an apprehension that having separate laws for
Judges, etc. would weaken the set up.
4. Thereafter, a Member drew the attention of all present to the provisions dealing with corruption
as contained in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and expressed his disappointment on the
fact that a strong law which is in force has been disregarded all along. He also sought clarifications
relating to inclusion of all sections of employees under the jurisdiction of Lokpal, including matters
relating to discipline, inclusion of Prime Minister and the powers proposed to be vested with the
Lokpal to recommend, cancel or modify lease, licence, etc.
5. Thereafter, Members requested the witnesses to give justification on their suggestions for
inclusion of only politicians and the bureaucracy and excluding the entire civil society, the corporate
sector and the NGOs in their version of the Bill, inclusion of more than one-third from Judiciary
in the composition of the Selection Committee while holding the view that the Judiciary itself was
corrupt and the logic for proposing a highly centralized Lokpal.
6. Members also sought clarifications on the various issues arising out of the presentation
made by the witnesses the previous day on the provisions of the Lokpal Bill which included
distinction sought to be made between the expressions ‘Jan’ and ‘Lok’, phone tapping, and the
expected expenditure to be incurred on infrastructure and day-to-day running of the Lokpal.
Further, Members requested the witnesses to clarify on their proposed grievance redressal structure
and Citizens’ Charter, suo motu  powers proposed to be given to Lokpal to investigate, their proposal
regarding appeal against orders of Lokpal, etc.

206
7. The witnesses were also requested to further elucidate their views on the tackling
corruption in media, suggestions on matters relating to the safeguard of the national security,
foreign policy, defence, etc., the accountability for the Lokayukta and the Lokpal, interpretation of
the term ‘public servant’, whether Lokpal should have its own agency to investigate by not
involving the well-tested CBI or the CVC and whether or not the Lokpal should work within the
framework of the Constitution. Clarifications were also sought on many other issues including the
constitutional amendment for Lokpal without the requirement of ratification by the States.
8. Some Members also requested the witnesses to share their views on reservations for
weaker sections, i.e. SC and ST, OBC and Minorities in the Lokpal.
9. On the proposals to wind up the CVC, a part of the CBI and its merger with the Lokpal
and Lokpal’s power to tap telephones, Members raised apprehensions that the country will then
transform into a police State with the Lokpal as the super-power. They were also apprehensive
over the feasibility of the Lokpal handling the grievances of the whole country, on the powers
proposed to be vested with Lokpal for the transfer, suspension or removal of officers under
investigation and the manner in which the Lokpal would man its investigations considering its vast
jurisdiction when the CBI itself had to take personnel from the State police forces. The witnesses
were requested to clarify on these points.
10. The witnesses responded to the queries in substantial details. The Chairman at the end
thanked the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee adjourned at 8.38 
P.M.

207
207
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Monday, the 14 th November. 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
9. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
10. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
14. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
15. Shri Pinaki Misra
16. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
17. Shri Harin Pathak
18. Shri Lalu Prasad
19. Adv. A. Sampath
20. Shri S. Semmalai
21. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
22. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
23. Adv. P.T. Thomas (ldukki)
24. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
25. Shri Madhusudan Yadav

208
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary;
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, J.S.; and
3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the internal meeting of the
Committee meant to finalise views on vital issues before it. Some Members raised concern over
the demoralizing situation created by a certain sections of the public and the media by alleging that
all politicians were corrupt and dishonest. They regretted such events and felt that all this had
lowered the prestige of the MPs and the Committee.
3. The Members then took up the issue regarding inclusion of Lokayuktas for States in the
Lokpal Bill for consideration. Members deliberated on whether the Central Act to create State
Lokayuktas would be constitutionally valid. After a thorough deliberation on the issue, the
Committee felt that if the Parliament has the power to legislate on the subject matter then it would
be desirable to have a common law in the interest of uniformity and synergy.
4. On the inclusion of Citizens’ Charter and Public Grievances, the Committee deliberated
extensively and felt that these should be dealt with in separate legislations bringing about a uniform
set up in all States and empowered with statutory authority.
5. On the issue of inclusion of lower bureaucracy within the jurisdiction of the Lokpal, the
Committee considered at length the desirability and repercussions of adding the lower bureaucracy
into the folds of the Lokpal. One view that came strongly before the Committee was to have Group
A and B officers under the Lokpal. It was felt that Group B officers constituting Section Officer
and above (including equivalent level officers in PSUs and entities owned/controlled by the Central
Government) would, in effect, cover by-and-large all important and material persons. It was
pointed out that inclusion of peons, drivers and messengers would raise the number to such an
extent so as to make things unmanageable for the Lokpal. An apprehension was expressed that in
case all employees were covered, only lower class employees would be punished while the big
corruption might slip away. Some Members of the Committee, however, wanted Group C and D
employees also to be covered under the Lokpal. The views being on both sides, the issue before
the Committee was that of drawing a line for the purpose of coverage under the Lokpal in the best
interest of all. The discussion ended with a note to in any case include Group A and B officers
under the Lokpal.

209
6. On the issue of inclusion of the acts and speech of MPs in Parliament, after deliberation
on the various aspects of the issue, the Committee came to the conclusion not to interfere with
the well established privilege of MPs as contained in Art 105 of the Constitution of India.
7. The Committee also considered the provisions relating to punishment for false and frivolous
complaints and felt that it should be made less stringent. Issues relating to the judiciary was also
deliberated upon in detail and after elaborate discussion on the subject, the Committee felt that
judiciary should not be brought within the ambit of the Lokpal but should be dealt with separately.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 6.05 
P.M.

210
210
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Tuesday, the 15 th November, 2011 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
6. Shri O.T. Lepcha
7. Shri Amar Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Shri Pinaki Misra
14. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
15. Shri Harin Pathak
16. Shri Lalu Prasad
17. Adv. A. Sampath
18. Shri S. Semmalai
19. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
20. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
21. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

211
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary;
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, J.S.; and
3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Resuming the previous day’s
discussion, the Members took up for consideration the issue of inclusion of the Prime Minister
within the ambit of the Lokpal. Members analyzed the various views submitted by the witnesses
and the suggestions received on the issue from various quarters of the public. They explored the
pros and cons of the various opinions. Even after a long and intense debate, no consensus could
be arrived at. The Committee, then, decided to re-consider the issue at the time of adoption of the
draft report on the Bill and deferred consideration of the same.
3. Chairman then placed before the Committee for consideration matters relating to the CBI
and CVC, their exact role, status, functioning vis-a-vis the institution of the Lokpal. The Committee
analyzed the various submissions and views received on these issues, especially those relating to
investigation and prosecution of cases. Members appreciated the idea of an independent Directorate
of Public Prosecution. Members were agreeable to vest investigation of Lokpal cases with the CBI
and prosecution through the Directorate of Prosecution under the Lokpal.
4. In the case of CVC, Members deliberated extensively on its role and status and noted that
with officers of Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ brought within the ambit of the Lokpal, all other employees of
the Government should fall under CVC. Members also felt that the recommendations of Lokpal for
suspension, removal or departmental action against officers should be binding on the departments,
with some appropriate escape route.
5. Thereafter, Members discussed the issue of Selection Committee. The Committee were
agreeable that the Selection Committee should be strong and manageable and therefore, should
primarily not consist of many members.
6. After a brief deliberation on the issue, the Committee agreed that the Selection Committee
may consist of the respective heads of the Executive, Judiciary and the Legislature, i.e. the Prime
Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. In addition to these, there
may be an eminent Indian to be recommended by the Chairman of the CAG, CEC and the UPSC.
7. Coming to the issue of the Search Committee, Members agreed that Search Committee should
be selected and constituted by the Selection Committee and 50% of the same should be represented
by Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities and Women.
8. As regards whistleblowers, the Committee felt that in view of a separate legislation on it,
the need to provide for protection of whistleblowers in the Lokpal legislation was not felt
necessary.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 6.15 
P.M.

212
212
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Thursday, the 24 th November, 2011 in Committee Room ‘E’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
14. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
15. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
16. Shri Pinaki Misra
17. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
18. Shri Harin Pathak
19. Adv. A. Sampath
20. Shri S. Semmalai
21. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
22. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Iddukki)
23. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary

213
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. At the outset, Chairman welcome the Members. The deliberations began with consideration
of the extent of inclusion of NGOs, private companies, media houses, trusts, societies or
association of persons in the ambit of the Lokpal. After brief discussion, the Committee noted the
Bill already covers a vast category of bodies/institutions falling in the category of ‘owned or
controlled by the Central Government’ or where Government donations exceed certain notified
amount. The Committee, however, agreed to add to this list such bodies/institutions that were
recipient funds under FCRA above a specified amount which could be ten or twenty thousand
dollars per annum.
3. The Committee then came to the definitions of ‘corruption’ from the angle of covering
corruption in private sector. It was felt that Section, 8, 9 & 13 of Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 contain a comprehensive definition of corruption and a new definition was not desirable at
this stage.
4. The Committee next considered Clause 56 pertaining to legal assistance, Clause 51
pertaining to action taken in good faith by a Government servant and Clause 52 regarding action
taken in good faith. The Committee felt that:- (i) in Clause 56 the words ‘shall provide’ may read
as ‘shall allow’, and (ii) Clause 51 may remain as it is though there were apprehensions of
excessive protection to civil servants. As regards Clause 52, it was noted that the provisions were
intended to protect officers against action taken in good faith under the Lokpal Bill.
5. On the issue of giving Lokpal a Constitutional status, the Committee felt that the
submissions made by the former CJIs were acceptable. The Committee noted that if the Bill for
constitutional amendment was introduced simultaneously with the Lokpal Bill, there would be no
delay even in case the constitution amendment is also resorted to.
6. The Committee next discussed phone tapping and felt that status-quo be maintained in this
matter. Members also re-examined the strength of the Lokpal, the Selection Committee, the Search
Committee and the provision for representation of SCs, STs, backward classes and minority
groups, including women therein. A view was raised to increase the strength of the Lokpal from
9 to 11 and give representation to SC/ST, backward classes, etc. proportionately. The view was
responded to by stating that adequate reservation is proposed to be provided in the Search
Committee will take care of these aspects. However, another view also emerged suggesting
provision for reservation in the Selection Committee. The discussion ended on a note emphasizing
on the desirability of the Lokpal to reflect the pluralism and diversity of India. The Committee also
considered action on whistleblowers in relation to the institution of Lokpal. It came around to a
view to suitably add provisions of the Whistleblowers’ Bill in the Lokpal legislation.
7. The Committee then took up for discussion the issue of inclusion of the Prime Minister
within the ambit of the Lokpal. Members were of divergent views on the issue and therefore, the
matter was deferred to be dealt at the time of consideration of the draft report. Thereafter,
Chairman informed the Members that in a few day they would received the draft report.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.46 
P.M.

214
214
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Wednesday, the 30 th November, 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Amar Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Kirti Azad
9. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
10. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
14. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
15. Shri Pinaki Misra
16. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
17. Shri Harin Pathak
18. Adv. A. Sampath
19. Shri S. Semmalai
20. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
21. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
22. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Iddukki)
23. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav

215
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Initiated the deliberations, he
referred to the draft report which had been circulated to the Members. He pointed out that the draft
report containing 16 chapters dealt with issues that had already been agreed upon in principle. The
issue of inclusion of Prime Minister was, however, yet to be finally decided upon.
3. The Members were requested to take up for consideration the issue of inclusion of Prime
Minister under the purview of Lokpal. The Chairman referred to the four different options that had
emerged in the course of the Committee’s deliberations so far, viz., (i) inclusion of Prime Minister
in substantive terms with deferred prosecution and some supplementary safeguards to take care of
instances where the term ‘as Prime Minster’ gets repeated; (ii) complete exclusion with no deferred
prosecution; (iii) inclusion of Prime Minister with two safeguards, namely, subject matter exclusion
(subjects like national security, foreign affairs, atomic energy, space, etc.) and cumulatively
provision of a condition for clearance of full bench of Lokpal before initiation of action against
Prime Minister; and (iv) full inclusion with no safeguards.
4. The Members expressed their views on the above issue and substantiated their observations.
However, no consensus could be arrived at on the subject. In view of this, the Chairman proposed
the sense of the Committee on the issue in two models, namely, (i) total exclusion and (ii) deferred
exclusion and said that these options may be conveyed to the Parliament, leaving the decision on
their wisdom.
5. Some Members raised the issue of non-inclusion of Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ Government
employees. The Chairman of the Committee clarified that it was based on the broad consensus in
the Committee, as reflected in its earlier sittings. However, several Members strongly opined for
inclusion of all levels of bureaucracy under the Lokpal in consonance with the sense of the House.
Keeping in view the aspects of operation efficacy on the one hand and the sentiments of the
Members of the Committee on the other (for inclusion of the entire lower bureaucracy), it was
agreed to include Group ‘C’ employees also under the Lokpal in addition to the Group’ A’ and ‘B’
employees.
6. Some Members emphasized on the need to revamp the CBI, especially the selection process
of the top officers of the CBI, so as to ensure autonomy in function of the organisation. It was
agreed to modify the existing selection process of Director, CBI, by providing a selection process
similar to the one that was being proposed for the Lokpal.
7. Members discussed on the penal provision under the Prevention of Corruption Act and felt
that there was a need for an upward revision of penalties for indulgence in corruption. It was
agreed to propose a minimum of three years and a maximum of seven years imprisonment together
with confiscation of disproportionate assets, under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
8. There was some discussion on the Search Committee for the Lokpal. It was agreed to make
the constitution of the Search Committee by the Selection Committee mandatory.
9. There was a discussion on the procedure for removal of Lokpal prescribed under Clause
8 of the Bill. It was suggested to make further provisions in Clause 8 of the Bill whereby a citizen

216
could make a complaint to the Supreme Court. It was also suggested that power of suspension
of Lokpal should be vested in the Supreme Court instead of the President.
10. Citizens’ Charter, Grievance Redressal Mechanism, etc. were also discussed and it was felt
that the sense of the House did not mean provision of these mechanism in the Lokpal Bill itself.
11. The Chairman then requested the Members to give their Notes of dissent within a short
time.
12. He also informed that evidences recorded before  the Committee will be laid on the Table
of both the Houses along with the Report.
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
14. The Committee adjourned at 6.41 
P.M.

217
217
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Thursday, the 1 st December, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri O.T. Lepcha
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
12. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
16. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
17. Shri Pinaki Misra
18. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
19. Shri Harin Pathak
20. Adv. A. Sampath
21. Shri S. Semmalai
22. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
23. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
24. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Iddukki)
25. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
26. Shri Madhusudan Yadav

218
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and explained the circumstances
leading to convening of the meeting. He informed the Committee of the requests received from
Members to hold a meeting of the Committee as they were not fully aware and cognigent of the
jurisdictional limits and boundaries of Groups A, B, C and D and felt that the discussion in  the
last meeting held on 30
th December was incomplete. He requested those members to explain
themselves the basis of their requests.
3. The members then, one by one, expressed their views on the inclusion/exclusion of Group
‘C’ under the control of Lokpal. There was a broad consensus among the members for exclusion
of Group ‘C’. It was suggested that Group ‘C’ may be monitored or controlled by the CVC. It
was further agreed that CVC may give a report in every two or three months to the Lokpal giving
the details of its work on Group ‘C’ corruption.
4. The members who were not in favour of exclusion of Group ‘C’ strongly opposed its
exclusion. They also expressed their displeasure with regard to the change of Committee’s view
that emerged during its meeting held on 30
th November, 2011. They insisted on giving the Note of
Dissent on the issue.
5. The second issue cited by the Members for reconvening the meeting of the Committee was
the appointment process of Director, CBI. The Committee was informed by these members that
the appointment of Director, CBI did not fall within the purview of this Bill. The CBI Director is
appointed under a different Act namely, Delhi Special Police Establishment Act. The Members then
citied Rule 273 of the Rules of Business of the Council of States which provides that the
Committee should examine only such Bills introduced in either of the Houses as are referred to it
by the Chairman or Speaker as the case may be. There was a broad consensus on this issue and
it was decided that the existing mode of selection of Director, CBI may continue.
6. The Members, who were not in agreement with the broad consensus stated that the change
in the selection process of CBI was desirable in order to ensure the independence of CBI. They
referred to the view that emerged in the last meeting of the Committee held on 30
th November,
2011 for providing a change in the selection process on the lines of the selection process for
Lokpal.
7. Some Members also desired that another meeting should be held to adopt the Report. The
Chairman agreed to hold another meeting for approval of the Draft Report. The Chairman then
informed the Members that the time given by the Hon’ble Chairman for examination of the Bill was
upto the 7
th December, 2011. As the Committee had to hold one more meeting it was agreed to
seek a short extension of time for 4-5 days for presentation of Report.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 6.20 
P.M.

219
219
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7 th December, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Amar Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kirti Azad
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
14. Shri Harin Pathak
15. Shri Lalu Prasad
16. Adv. A. Sampath
17. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
18. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
19. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Iddukki)
20. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

220
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and informed them of the five/six
changes made in the draft report on the Lokpal Bill, 2011 in the light of discussion held in the
previous meeting. He also informed that today’s meeting had been called only for  the purpose of
adoption of the draft report.
3. A Member drew the attention of the Committee on the derogatory manner in which Shri
Prashant Bhushan, one of the witnesses who had appeared before the Committee to depose his
views on the Lokpal Bill, 2011 had remarked on the Committee Chairman to Media. The Committee
places on record its condemnation of the comment.
4. The Committee next took up the draft report for consideration. Some Members suggested
minor typographical changes in a few  paras of the draft report which were noted.
5. Several Members requested the Chairman to permit their submission of Notes of Dissent on
the issues broadly agreed to by the Committee and on which they do not agree individually.
Chairman acceded to their requests. Some Members submitted their dissent notes which were taken
on record. Some Members who sought to raise again certain issues dealt with in the draft report
were asked to submit their views in the form of dissent note, which would be appended with the
report.
6. Thereafter, the draft report was adopted. The Committee decided to present the Report,
along with the Notes of dissent and the Evidence recorded by the Committee, to the Parliament
on the 9
th December, 2011.
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence nominated Shri Shantaram
Laxman Naik and in his absence, Dr. Balchandra Mungekar, to present the Report and Evidence
in the Rajya Sabha and nominated Shri Pinaki Misra and in his absence, Shri Harin Pathak to lay
the same on the table of Lok Sabha.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.35 
P.M.

221
ANNEXURES

223
ANNEXURE-A
[Vide para 1.2 of the Report]
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 39 of 201 1
THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT  OF L OKPAL
3. Establishment of Lokpal.
4. Appointment of Chairperson and Members and Selection Committee.
5. Filling up of vacancies of Chairperson and Members.
6. Term of office of Chairperson and Members.
7. Salary, allowances and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
8. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Member of Lokpal.
9. Restriction on employment by Chairperson and Members after ceasing to hold office.
10. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances.
11. Secretary, other officers and staff of Lokpal.
CHAPTER III
I
NVESTIGATION  W ING
12. Investigation Wing.
13. Investigation officer to have powers of police.

224
14. Investigation officer to inquire on direction of Lokpal.
CHAPTER IV
PROSECUTION  W ING
15. Prosecution wing and appointment of Director of Prosecution.
CHAPTER V
EXPENSES  OF INSTITUTION  OF L OKPAL TO BE CHARGED  ON C ONSOLIDATED  F UND OF I NDIA
16. Expenses of Lokpal to be charged on Consolidated Fund of India.
CHAPTER VI
JURISDICTION  IN RESPECT  OF INQUIRY
CLAUSES
17. Jurisdiction of Lokpal.
18. Matters pending before any court or committee or authority before inquiry before
Lokpal not to be affected.
19. Constitution of Benches of Lokpal.
20. Distribution of business amongst Benches.
21. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.
22. Decision to be by majority.
CHAPTER VII
P
ROCEDURE  IN RESPECT  OF INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION
23. Provisions relating to complaints and inquiry and investigation.
24. Inspection of documents and furnishing copies thereof to persons against whom
complaints have been made.
25. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard.
26. Lokpal may require any public servant or any other person to furnish information,
etc.
27. Previous sanction not necessary for investigation and initiating prosecution by Lokpal
in certain cases.
28. Action on inquiry in relation to public servants not being Ministers or Members of
Parliament.
29. Action on inquiry against public servant being Ministers or Members of Parliament.
CHAPTER VIII
POWERS  OF L OKPAL
30. Search and seizure.
31. Lokpal to have powers of civil court in certain cases.
32. Power of Lokpal to utilise services of officers of Central or State Government.

225
33. Provisional attachment of assets.
34. Confirmation of attachment of assets.
35. Power of Lokpal to recommend transfer or suspension of public servant connected
with allegation of corruption.
36. Power of Lokpal to give directions to prevent destruction of records during inquiry.
37. Power to delegate.
CHAPTER IX
SPECIAL  C OURTS
38. Special Courts to be notified by Central Government.
39. Letter of request to a contracting State in certain cases.
CHAPTER X
C
OMPLAINTS  AGAINST  C HAIRPERSON , M EMBERS  AND OFFICIALS  OF L OKPAL
CLAUSES
40. Complaints against Chairperson and Members not to be inquired by Lokpal.
41. Complaints against officials of Lokpal.
CHAPTER XI
A
SSESSMENT  OF LOSS AND RECOVERY  THEREOF  BY S PECIAL  C OURT
42. Assessment of loss and recovery thereof by Special Court.
CHAPTER XII
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
43. Budget.
44. Grants by Central Government.
45. Annual statement of accounts.
46. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
CHAPTER XIII
D
ECLARATION  OF ASSETS
47. Declaration of assets.
48. Presumption as to acquisition of assets by corrupt means in certain cases.
CHAPTER XIV
OFFENCES  AND P ENALTIES
49. Prosecution for false complaint and payment of compensation, etc., to public servant.
50. False complaint made by society or association of persons or trust.

226
CHAPTER XV
MISCELLANEOUS
51. Protection of action taken in good faith by any public servant.
52. Protection of action taken in good faith by others.
53. Members, officers and employees of Lokpal to be public servants.
54. Limitation to apply in certain cases.
55. Bar of Jurisdiction.
56. Legal assistance.
57. Act to have overriding effect.
58. Provision of this Act to be in addition to other laws.
59. Amendment of certain enactments.
60. Power to make rules.
61. Power of Lokpal to make regulations.
62. Laying of rules and regulations.
63. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
THE SECOND SCHEDULE

227
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
ON
Bill No. 39 of 201 1
THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the institution of Lokpal to
inquire into allegations of corruption against certain public
functionaries and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the Constitution of India established a democratic
Republic to ensure justice for all;
AND  WHEREAS  the country’s commitment to clean and
responsive governance has to be reflected in an effective institution
to independently inquire into and prosecute acts of corruption;
N
OW, THEREFORE , it is expedient to establish a strong and
effective institution to contain corruption.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Lokpal Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India and also applies to public
servants outside India.
227
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

228
Definitions
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification In the Official Gazette, appoint;
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of
this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force
of that provision.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “Bench” means a Bench of the Lokpal;
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Lokpal;
(c) “competent authority”, in relation to—
(i) a member of the Council of Ministers, means
the Prime Minister;
(ii ) a member of Parliament, other than a
Minister, means
(A) in the case of a member of the Council
of States, the Chairman of that Council; and
(B) in the case of a member of the House
of the People, the Speaker of that House;
(iii) an officer in the Ministry or Department of
the Central Government, means the Minister in charge
of the Ministry or Department under which such
officer is serving;
(iv) a chairperson or members of any body, or
Board or corporation or authority or company or
society or autonomous body (by whatever name called)
established or constituted by an Act of Parliament or
wholly or partly financed by the Central Government or
controlled by it, means the Minister in charge of the
administrative Ministry of such body, or Board or
corporation or authority or company or society or
autonomous body;
(v) an officer of any body or Board or
corporation or authority or company or society or
autonomous body (by whatever name called) established
or constituted by an Act of Parliament or wholly or
partly financed by the Central Government or controlled
by it, means the head of such body or Board or
corporation or authority or company or society or
autonomous body;
(vi) any other case not falling under sub-clauses
(i) to ( v) above, means the Central Government:
Provided that if any person referred to in sub-
clause ( iv) or sub-c1ause ( v) is also a Member of
Parliament, then the competent authority shall be—

229
(A) in case such member is a Member of
the Council of States, the Chairman of that
House; and
(B) in case such member is a Member of
the House of the People, the Speaker of that
House;
(d) “complaint” means a complaint, made in such form
as may be prescribed, alleging that a public servant has
committed an offence punishable under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988;
(e) “inquiry” means an inquiry conducted under this Act
by the Lokpal;
(f) “Judicial Member” means a Judicial Member of the
Lokpal appointed as such;
(g) “Lokpal” means the institution established under
section 3;
(h) “Member” means a Member of the Lokpal;
(i) “Minister” means a Union Minister but does not
include the Prime Minister;
(j) “notification” means notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(1) “public servant” means a person referred to in
clauses ( a) to ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of section 17;
(m) “regulations” means regulations made under this
Act;
(n) “rules” means rules made under this Act;
(o) “Schedule” means a Schedule to this Act;
(p) “Special Court” means the court of a Special Judge
appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988.
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this
Act but defined in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
(3) Any reference in this Act to any other Act or provision
thereof which is not in force in any area to which this Act applies
shal1 be construed to have a reference to the corresponding Act or
provision thereof in force in such area.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.

230
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT  OF L OKPAL
3. (1) As from the commencement of this Act, there shall
be established, for the purpose of making inquiries in respect
of complaints made under this Act, an institution to be called
the “Lokpal”.
(2) The Lokpal shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, who is or has been a Chief
Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court; and
(b) such number of Members, not exceeding eight
out of whom fifty per cent, shall be Judicial Members.
(3) A person shall be eligible to be appointed,—
(a) as a Judicial Member if he is or has been a Judge
of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of a High Court;
(b) as a Member other than a Judicial Member, if he is
a person of impeccable integrity, outstanding ability and
standing having special knowledge and expertise of not less
than twenty-five years in the matters relating to anti-
corruption policy, public administration, vigilance, finance
including insurance and banking, law, and management.
(4) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be a member of
Parliament or a member of the Legislature of any State or Union
territory and shall not hold any office of trust or profit (other than
the office as the Chairperson or a Member) or be connected with
any political party or carry on any business or practise any
profession and accordingly, before he enters upon his office, a
person appointed as the Chairperson or a Member, as the case may
be, shall, if—
(a) he holds any office of trust or profit, resign from
such office; or
(b) he is carrying on any business, sever his connection
with the conduct and management of such business; or
(c) he is practising any profession, cease to practise
such profession.
(5) The Chairperson and every Member shall, before entering
upon his office, make and subscribe before the President an oath or
affirmation in the form set out in the First Schedule.
4. ( 1) The Chairperson and Members shall be appointed by
the President after obtaining the recommendations of a Selection
Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister — chairperson;
(b) the Speaker of the House of the People — member;
Establishment
of Lokpal.
Appointment of
Chairperson and
Members and
Selection
Committee.

231
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the
People — member;
(d) the Leader of Opposition in the Council of States —
member;
(e) a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the
Prime Minister — member;
(f) one sitting Judge of the Supreme Court to be
nominated by the Chief Justice of India — member;
(g) one sitting Chief Justice of a High Court to be
nominated by the Chief Justice of India — member;
(h) one eminent Jurist to be nominated by the Central
Government — member;
(i) one person of eminence in public life with wide
knowledge of and experience in anti-corruption policy, public
administration, vigilance, policy making, finance including
Insurance and banking, law, or management to be nominated
by the Central Government — member.
(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(3) The Selection Committee may, if it considers necessary
for the purposes of selecting the Chairperson and Members of the
Lokpal and for preparing a panel of persons to be considered for
appointment as such, constitute a Search Committee consisting of
such persons of standing and having special knowledge and
expertise in the matters relating to anti-corruption policy, public
administration, vigilance, policy making, finance including insurance
and banking, law, and management, or in any other matter which,
in the opinion of the Selection Committee, may be useful in making
selection of the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal.
(4) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure
for selecting the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal which
shall be transparent.
(5) The term of the Search Committee referred to in sub-
section ( 3), the fee and allowances payable to its members and the
manner of selection of panel of names shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5. The President shall take or cause to be taken all necessary
steps for the appointment of a new Chairperson and Members at
least three months before the expiry of the term of such
Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, in accordance with the
procedure laid down in this Act.
6. The Chairperson and every Member shall, on the
recommendations of the Selection Committee, be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal and hold office as
Filling up of
vacancies of
Chairperson and
Members.
Term of office
of Chairperson
and Members.

232
such for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which
he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of seventy
years, whichever is earlier:
Provided that he may—
(a) by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, resign his office; or
(b) be removed from his office in the manner provided
in section 8.
7. The salary, allowances and other conditions of service
of—
(i) the Chairperson shall be the same as those of
the Chief Justice of India;
(ii) other Members shall be the same as those of a
Judge of the Supreme Court:
Provided that if the Chairperson or a Member is, at the
time of his appointment, in receipt of pension (other than
disability pension) in respect of any previous service under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State, his
salary in respect of service as the Chairperson or, as the case
may be, as a Member, be reduced—
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he has, before such appointment, received, in
lieu of a portion of the pension due to him in respect of
such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by
the amount of that portion of the pension:
Provided further that the salary, allowances and pension
payable to, and other conditions of service of, the Chairperson
or a Member shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.
8. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the
Chairperson or any Member shall be removed from his office by
order of the President on the grounds of misbehaviour after the
Supreme Court, on a reference being made to it—
(i) by the President, or
(ii) by the President on a petition being signed by at
least one hundred Members of Parliament, or
(iii) by the President on receipt of a petition made by
a citizen of India and where the President is satisfied that the
petition should be referred,
has, on an inquiry held ill accordance with the procedure prescribed
in that behalf, reported that the Chairperson or such Member, as the
case may be, ought to be removed on such ground.
Salary,
allowances and
other conditions
of service of
Chairperson and
Members.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson and
Member of
Lokpal.

233
(2) The President may suspend from office the Chairperson
or any Member in respect of whom a reference has been made to
the Supreme Court under sub-section ( 1) until the President has
passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on
such reference.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
President may, by order, remove from the office the Chairperson or
any Member if the Chairperson or such Member, as the case may be,—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages, during his term of office, in any paid
employment outside the duties of his office; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue
in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body.
(4) If the Chairperson or any Member is, or becomes, in any
way concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by
or on behalf of the Government of India or the Government of a
State or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any
benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member
and in common with the other members of an incorporated
company, he shall, for the purposes of sub-section ( 1), be deemed
to be guilty of misbehaviour.
9. (1) On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson and every
Member shall be ineligible for—
(i) reappointment as the Chairperson or a Member of
the Lokpal;
(ii ) any diplomatic assignment, appointment as
administrator of a Union Territory and such other assignment
or appointment which is required by law to be made by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal;
(iii) further employment to any other office of profit
under the Government of India or the Government of a State;
(iv) contesting any election of President or Vice
President or Member of either House of Parliament or
Member of either House of a State Legislature or Municipality
or Panchayat within a period of five years from the date of
cessation of holding the office of the Chairperson or Member.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), a
Member shall be eligible to be appointed as a Chairperson, if his
total tenure as Member and Chairperson does not exceed five years.
10. ( 1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the
office of the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or
otherwise, the President may, by notification, authorise the senior-
most Member to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of a
new Chairperson to fill such vacancy.
Restriction on
employment by
Chairperson and
Members after
ceasing to hold
office.
Member to act
as Chairperson
or to discharge
his functions in
certain
circumstances.

234
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence on leave or otherwise, the senior-most Member
available, as the President may, by notification, authorise in this
behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the
date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
11. (1) The appointment of Secretary and other officers
and staff of the Lokpal shall be made by the Chairperson or
such Member or officer of Lokpal as the Chairperson may
direct:
Provided that the President may by rule require that the
appointment in respect of any post or posts as may be specified
in the rule, shall be made after consultation with the Union
Public Service Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, the conditions of service of secretary and other
officers and staff of the Lokpal shall be such as may be
specified by regulations made by the Lokpal for the purpose:
Provided that the regulations made under this sub-section
shall, so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or
pensions, require the approval of the President.
CHAPTER III
I
NVESTIGATION  W ING
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for
the time being in force, the Lokpal shall constitute an
Investigation Wing for the purpose of conducting investigation
of any offence alleged to have been committed by a public
servant punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988:
Provided that till such time the Investigation Wing is
constituted by the Lokpal, the Central Government shall make
available such number of investigation officers and other staff from
such of its Ministries or Departments, as may be required by the
Lokpal, for carrying out investigation under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, after obtaining consent of
the concerned State Government, by notification, extend the powers
and jurisdiction of officers of the Investigation Wing of the Lokpal
in that State and the provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of
section 5 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946, shall
apply as if the members of the Investigation Wing were members of
the police force of that State.
13. ( 1) No investigation shall be made by an investigation
officer of the Investigation Wing below the rank of a Deputy
Superintendent of Police or by any other officer of equivalent rank.
(2) The investigation officers of the Investigation Wing shall
have, in relation to the investigation of such offences referred to in
Secretary,
other officers
and staff of
Lokpal.
Investigation
Wing.
Investigation
officer to have
powers of police.
49 of 1988.
25 of 1946.

235
sub-section ( 1) of section 12, all the powers, duties, privileges and
liabilities which police officers have in connection with the
investigation of such offences under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
14. (1) The Lokpal may, before ho 1ding any inquiry under
this Act, by an order, require the investigation officer of its
Investigation Wing to make, or cause to be made, a preliminary
investigation in such manner as it may direct and submit a report to
the Lokpal, within such time as may be specified by the Lokpal, to
enable it to satisfy itself as to whether or not the matter requires to
be inquired into by the Lokpal.
(2) The investigation officer on receipt of an order under sub-
section ( 1) shall complete the investigation and submit his report
within the time specified under that sub-section.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROSECUTION  W ING
15.  ( 1) The Lokpal may, by notification, constitute a
prosecution wing and appoint a Director of prosecution and such
other officers and employees to assist the Director of Prosecution
for the purpose of prosecution of public servants in relation to any
complaint by the Lokpal under this Act.
(2) The Director of prosecution shall, after having been so
directed by the Lokpal, file a complaint before the Special Court,
and take all necessary steps in respect of the prosecution of public
servants in relation to any offence punishable under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988.
CHAPTER V
E
XPENSES OF INSTITUTION  OF L OKPAL TO BE CHARGED ON
CONSOLIDATED F UND OF I NDIA
16. The expenses of the Lokpal, including all salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the
Chairperson, Members or secretary or other officers or staff of the
Lokpal, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and any
fees or other moneys taken by the Lokpal shall form part of that
Fund.
CHAPTER VI
J
URISDICTION  IN RESPECT OF INQUIRY
17. ( 1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Lokpal
shall inquire into any matter involved in, or arising from, or
connected with, any allegation of corruption made in a complaint in
respect of the following, namely:—
49 of 1988.
Investigation
officer to inquire
on direction of
Lokpal.
Prosecution wing
and appointment
of Director of
Prosecution.
Expenses of
Lokpal to be
charged on
Consolidated
Fund of India.
Jurisdiction of
Lokpal.
49 of 1988.

236
(a) a Prime Minister, after he has demitted the office of
the Prime Minister;
(b) any other person who is or has been a Minister of
the Union;
(c) any person who is or has been a Member of either
House of Parliament;
(d) any Group “A” officer or equivalent or above, from
amongst the public servants defined in sub-clauses ( i) and ( ii)
of clause ( c) of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruptions
Act, 1988 when serving or who has served, in connection
with the affairs of the Union;
(e) any person who is or has been a chairperson or
member or officer equivalent to Group “A” officer referred to
in clause ( d) or equivalent or above in any body or Board or
corporation or authority or company or society or trust or
autonomous body (by whatever name called) established by
an Act of Parliament or wholly or partly financed by the
Central Government or controlled by it:
Provided that in respect of such officers referred to in
clause ( d) who have served in connection with the affairs of
the Union or in any body or Board or corporation or
authority or company or society or trust or autonomous
body referred to in this clause but are working in connection
with the affairs of the State or in any body or Board or
corporation or authority or company or society or trust or
autonomous body (by whatever name called) established by
an Act of the State Legislature or wholly or partly financed
by the State Government or control1ed by it, the Lokpal and
the officers of its Investigation Wing or prosecution Wing
shall have jurisdiction under this Act in respect of such
officers only after obtaining the consent of the concerned
State Government;
(f) any person who is or has been a director, manager,
secretary or other officer of every other society or
association of persons or trust (whether registered under any
law for the time being in force or not) wholly or partly
financed or aided by the Government and the annual income
of which exceeds such amount as the Central Government
may by notification specify;
(g) any person who is or has been a director, manager,
secretary or other officer of every other society or
association of persons or trust (whether registered under any
law for the time being in force or not) in receipt of any
donation from the public and the annual income of which
exceeds such amount as the Central Government may by
notification specify:
49 of 1988.

237
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply in
relation to the Prime Minister, in whatever capacity he may be
holding an office as a public functionary:
Provided further that any person referred to in this
clause shall be deemed to be a public servant under clause ( c)
of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and
the provisions of that Act shall apply accordingly:
Provided also that nothing in clauses ( e) and ( f) and
this clause shall apply to any society or association of persons
or trust constituted for religious purposes.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter involved in, or arising from,
or connected with, any such allegation of corruption against any
Member of either House of Parliament in respect of anything said or
a vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof covered
under the provisions contained in clause ( 2) of article 105 of the
Constitution.
(3) The Lokpal may inquire into any act or conduct of any
person other than those referred to in sub-section ( 1), if such
person is associated with the allegation of corruption under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988:
Provided that, no action under this section shall be taken in
case of a person serving in connection with the affairs of a State,
without the consent of the State Government;
(4) No matter in respect of which a complaint has been made
to the Lokpal under this Act, shall be referred for inquiry under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that a complaint under this Act shall only relate to a period
during which the public servant was holding or serving in that
capacity.
18. In case any matter or proceeding related to allegation of
corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 has been
pending before any court or committee of either House of
Parliament or before any other authority prior to commencement of
this Act or prior to commencement of any inquiry after the
commencement of this Act, such matter or proceeding shall be
continued before such court, committee or authority.
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is herby declared
that continuance of such matter or proceeding before any court or
committee of either House of Parliament or before any other
authority, except for such matters as are protected under clause ( 2)
of article 105 of the Constitution or are pending before a court,
shall not affect the power of the Lokpal to inquire into such matter
under this Act.
49 of 1988.
Matters pending
before any court
or committee or
authority for
inquiry before
Lokpal not to
be affected.
49 of 1988.
60 of 1952.
49 of 1988.

238
19. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,—
(a) the jurisdiction of the Lokpal may be exercised by
Benches thereof;
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson with
two or more Members as the Chairperson may deem fit;
(c) every Bench shall ordinarily consist of at least one
Judicial Member;
(d) where a Bench consists of the Chairperson, such
Bench shall be presided over by the Chairperson;
(e) where a Bench consists of a Judicial Member, and
a non-Judicial Member, not being the Chairperson, such bench
shall be presided over by the Judicial Member;
(f) the Benches of the Lokpal shall ordinarily sit at New
Delhi and at such other places as the Lokpal may, by
regulations, specify.
(2) The Lokpal shall notify the areas in relation to which each
Bench of the Lokpal may exercise jurisdiction.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the
Chairperson shall have the power to constitute or reconstitute
Benches from time-to-time.
(4) If at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter it
appears to the Chairperson or a Member that the case or matter is
of such nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of
three or more Members, the case or matter may be transferred by
the Chairperson or, as the case may be, referred to him for transfer,
to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit.
20. Where Benches are constituted, the Chairperson may,
from time-to-time, by notification, make provisions as to the
distribution of the business of the Lokpal amongst the Benches and
also provide for the matters which may be dealt with by each
Bench.
21. On an application for transfer made by the complainant or
the public servant, the Chairperson, after giving an opportunity of
being heard to the complainant or the public servant, as the case
may be, may transfer any case pending before one Bench for
disposal to any other Bench.
22. If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members
differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ, and make a reference to the Chairperson who
shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for
hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other
Members of the Lokpal and such point or points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the
Lokpal who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
Constitution of
Benches of
Lokpal.
Distribution of
business amongst
Benches.
Power of
Chairperson to
transfer cases.
Decision to be
by majority.

239
CHAPTER VII
PROCEDURE  IN RESPECT  OF INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION
23. (1) The Lokpal, on receipt of a complaint, may either
make a preliminary inquiry or direct its Investigation Wing, to
make a preliminary investigation to ascertain whether there exists
a prima facie  case for proceeding in the matter.
(2) Every preliminary inquiry or preliminary investigation
referred to in sub-section (1) shall ordinarily be completed within
a period of thirty days and for reasons to be recorded in writing,
within a further period of three months from the date of receipt
of the complaint.
(3) Upon completion of the preliminary investigation, the
investigating authority shall submit its report to the Lokpal.
(4) Before the Lokpal comes to the conclusion in the course
of a preliminary inquiry and after submission of a report referred
to in sub-section ( 3) that a prima facie  case is made out against
the public servant pursuant to such a preliminary inquiry, the
Lokpal shall afford the public servant an opportunity of being
heard.
(5) Where the Lokpal, after receiving the report of the
investigating authority pursuant to a preliminary investigation or
conclusion of the preliminary inquiries as referred to in sub-
section ( 1) is satisfied that no prima facie  case is made out for
proceeding further in the matter, the complaint shall be closed and
the decision thereon be communicated to the complainant and the
public servant.
(6) Where the Lokpal is of the opinion that prima facie  case
is made out and refers the matter for investigation, upon
completion of such investigation and before filing the charge
sheet, the public servant against whom such investigation is being
conducted shall be given an opportunity of being heard.
(7) Every inquiry conducted by the Lokpal, upon being
satisfied that a prima facie case is made out, shall be open to the
public provided that in exceptional circumstances and for reasons
to be recorded in writing by the Lokpal, such inquiry may be
conducted in camera.
(8) In case the Lokpal proceeds to inquire into the
complaint under sub-section ( 7) it shall hold such inquiry as
expeditiously as possible and complete the inquiry within a period
of six months from the date of receipt of the complaint which,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, may be extended by a
further period of six months.
(9) The public servant against whom an inquiry is being
conducted under sub-section ( 8) shall be given an opportunity of
being heard.
Provisions
relating to
complaints and
inquiry and
investigation.

240
(10) Where in a case the Lokpal is of the opinion and for
reason to be recorded in writing that it is not in the interest of
justice to either hold a preliminary inquiry or preliminary
investigation, it may refer the matter for investigation.
(11) Upon completion of such investigation but before filing a
charge sheet, the investigating authority shal1 place the records in
its possession along with its prima facie  conclusion before the
Lokpal who shall before directing that a charge sheet be filed afford
the public servant concerned an opportunity of being heard.
(12) If the Lokpal proposes to inquire into a complaint, it
may, at any stage,—
(a) pass appropriate orders for safe custody of the
documents relevant to the inquiry as it deems fit; and
(b) forward a copy of the complaint to the public
servant concerned along with all relevant material relied upon
and afford him an opportunity to represent his case.
(13) The website of the Lokpal shall, from time-to-time and
in such manner as may be specified by regulations, display to the
public, the status of number of complaints pending before it or
disposed of by it.
(14) The Lokpal may withhold the records and evidence
which are likely to impede the process of inquiry or conduct of a
case by it or by the Special Court.
(15) Save as otherwise provided, the manner and procedure
of conducting an inquiry or investigation under this Act, shall be
such as may be specified by regulations.
24.  In cases where, an investigation or inquiry into a
complaint is proposed to be initiated by the Lokpal, every person
against whom such inquiry or investigation is proposed to be
conducted, shall be entitled to inspect any record in connection with
the commission of any alleged offence and take an extract
therefrom, as is considered necessary to defend his case.
25. If, at any stage of the proceeding, the Lokpal—
(a) considers it necessary to inquire into the conduct
of any person other than the prospective accused; or
(b) is of opinion that the reputation of any person other
than an accused is likely to be prejudicially affected by the
inquiry,
the Lokpal shall give to that person a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the inquiry and to produce evidence in his defence,
consistent with the principles of natural justice:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply where the
credibility of a witness is being questioned.
Inspection of
document and
furnishing copies
thereof to
persons against
whom
complaints have
been made.
Persons likely to
be prejudicially
affected to be
heard.

241
26. Subject to the provisions of this Act, for the purpose of
any inquiry or investigation, the Lokpal or the investigating authority,
as the case may be, may require any public servant or any other
person who, in its opinion, is able to furnish information or produce
documents relevant to such inquiry or investigation, to furnish any
such information or produce any such document.
27. (1) No sanction or approval shall be required by the
Lokpal or its Investigation Wing under section 197 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or section 19 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 for the purpose of making inquiry by the
Lokpal or investigation by its Investigation Wing into any complaint
against any public servant or for filing of any complaint in respect
thereof before the Special Court under this Act.
(2) A Special Court may, notwithstanding anything contained
in section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or section
19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, on a complaint filed
by the Lokpal or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, take
cognizance of offence committed by any public servant.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall apply
in respect of the persons holding the office in pursuance of the
provisions of the Constitution and in respect of which a procedure
for removal of such person has been specified therein.
(4) The provisions contained in sub-sections ( 1), ( 2) and ( 3)
shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions
contained in article 311 and sub-clause ( c) of clause ( 3) of article
320 of the Constitution.
28.  ( 1) Where, after the conclusion of the inquiry or
investigation, the findings of the Lokpal disclose the commission of
an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 by a public
servant referred to in clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 17, the Lokpal may
(a) file a case in the Special Court and send a copy of
the report together with its findings to the competent authority;
(b) recommend to the competent authority the initiation
of disciplinary proceedings under the rules of disciplinary
proceedings applicable to such public servant;
(c) provide a copy of the report to the public servant
or his representative.
(2) The competent authority shall, within a period of thirty
days of the receipt of recommendation under clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 1), initiate disciplinary proceedings against the delinquent
public servant accused of committing offence under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 and forward its comments on the report,
including the action taken or proposed to be taken thereon, to the
Lokpal ordinarily within six months of initiation of such disciplinary
proceedings.
Lokpal may
require any
public servant or
any other person
to furnish
information etc.
2 of 1974.
49 of 1988.
Previous
sanction not
necessary for
investigation and
initiating
prosecution by
Lokpal in
certain cases.
2 of 1974.
49 of 1988.
Action on
inquiry in
relation to public
servants not
being Ministers
or Members of
Parliament.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.

242
29. (1) Where, after the conclusion of the inquiry or
investigation, the findings of the Lokpal disclose the commission of
an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 by a public
servant referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 17, the Lokpal may file a case in the Special Court and shall
send a copy of the report together with its findings to the
competent authority.
(2) The Prime Minister, in the case of the Minister, the
Speaker in the case of a Member of the House of the People, and
the Chairman of the Council of States; in the case of a Member of
that Council shall, as soon as may be, after the receipt of report
under sub-section ( 1), cause the same to be laid before the House
of the People or the Council of States, as the case may be, while
it is in session, and if the House of the People or the Council of
States, as the case may be, is not in session, within a period of one
week from the reassembly of the said House or the Council, as the
case may be.
(3) The competent authority shall examine the report
forwarded to it under sub-section ( 1) and communicate to the
Lokpal, within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of
the report, the action taken or proposed to be taken on the basis of
the report.
Explanation .—In computing the period of ninety days
referred to in this sub-section, any period during which Parliament
or, as the case may be, either House of Parliament, is not in
session, shall be excluded.
CHAPTER VIII
P
OWERS OF L OKPAL
30. (1) If the Lokpal has reason to believe that any document
which, in its opinion, shall be useful for, or relevant to, any
investigation or inquiry under this Act, are secreted in any place, it
may authorise any officer of the Investigation Wing, to search for
and to seize such documents.
(2) If the Lokpal is satisfied that any document seized under
sub-section ( 1) would be evidence for the purpose of any
investigation or inquiry under this Act and that it would be
necessary to retain the document in its custody or in the custody
of such officer as may be authorised, it may so retain or direct
such officer authorised to retain such document till the completion
of such investigation or inquiry:
Provided that where any document is required to be returned,
the Lokpal or the authorised officer may return the same after
retaining copies of such document duly authenticated.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
relating to searches shall, so far as may be, apply to searches under
Action on
inquiry against
public servant
being Ministers
or Members of
Parliament.
49 of 1988.
Search and
seizure.
2 of 1974.

243
this section subject to the modification that sub-section ( 5) of
section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if for the word
“Magistrate”, wherever it occurs therein, the words “Lokpal or any
officer authorised by it” were substituted.
31. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, for the
purpose of any inquiry, the Lokpal shall have all the powers of a
civil court, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying
a suit in respect of the fol1owing matters, namely:—
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person and examining him on oath;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(iii) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(iv) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof
from any court or office;
(v) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses
or documents:
Provided that such commission, in case of a witness,
shall be issued only where the witness, in the opinion of the
Lokpal, is not in a position to attend the proceeding before the
Lokpal; and
(vi) such other matters as may be prescribed.
(2) Any proceeding before the Lokpal shall be deemed to be
a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 of the Indian
Penal Code.
32. ( 1) The Lokpal may, for the purpose of conducting
any inquiry, utilise the services of any officer or investigation
agency of the Central Government or any State Government,
as the case may be.
(2) For the purpose of investigating into any matter pertaining
to the inquiry, any officer or agency whose services are utilised
under sub-section ( 2) may, subject to the direction and control of
the Lokpal,—
(a) summon and enforce the attendance of any person
and examine him;
(b) require the discovery and production of any
document; and
(c) requisition any public record or copy thereof from
any office.
(3) The officer or agency whose services are utilised under
sub-section ( 2) shall investigate into any matter pertaining to the
inquiry and submit a report thereon to the Lokpal within such period
as may be specified by the Lokpal in this behalf.
5 of 1908.
Lokpal to have
powers of civil
court in certain
cases.
45 of 1860.
Power of Lokpal
to utilise
services of
officers of
Central or State
Government.

244
33. (1) Where the Lokpal or any investigation officer
authorised by it in this behalf, has reason to believe, the reason for
such belief to be recorded in writing, on the basis of material in its
or his possession, that—
(a) any person is in possession of any proceeds of
corruption;
(b) such person is accused of having committed an
offence relating to corruption; and
(c) such proceeds of offence are likely to be concealed,
transferred or dealt with in any manner which may result in
frustrating any proceedings relating to confiscation of such
proceeds of offence,
the Lokpal or such investigation officer may, by order in writing,
provisionally attach such property for a period not exceeding ninety
days from the date of the order, in the manner provided in the
Second Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Lokpal or
such investigation officer, as the case may be, shall be deemed to
be an officer under sub-rule ( e) of rule 1 of that Schedule.
(2) The Lokpal shall, immediately after attachment under sub-
section ( 1), forward a copy of the order, along with the material in
his possession, referred to in that sub-section, to the Special Court,
in a sealed envelope, in the manner as may be prescribed and such
Court may extend the order of attachment and keep such material
for such period as the Court may deem fit.
(3) Every order of attachment made under sub-section ( 1)
shall cease to have effect after the expiry of the period specified in
that sub-section or after the expiry of the period as directed by the
Special Court under sub-section ( 2).
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the person interested
in the enjoyment of the immovable property attached under sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), from such enjoyment.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, “person
interested”, in relation to any immovable property, includes all
persons claiming or entitled to claim any interest in the property.
34. (1) The Lokpal, when it provisionally attaches any
property under sub-section ( 1) of section 33 shall, within a period
of thirty days of such attachment, direct its prosecution wing to file
an application stating the facts of such attachment before the
Special Court and make a prayer for confirmation of attachment of
the property till completion of the proceedings against the public
servant in the Special Court.
(2) The Special Court may, if it is of the opinion that the
property provisionally attached had been acquired through corrupt
means, make an order for confirmation of attachment of such
property till the completion of the proceedings against the public
servant in the Special Court.
Provisional
attachment of
assets.
43 of 1961.
Confirmation of
attachment of
assets.

245
(3) If the public servant is subsequently acquitted of the
charges framed against him, the property, subject to the orders of
the Special Court, shall be restored to the concerned public servant
along with benefits from such property as might have accrued
during the period of attachment.
(4) If the public servant is subsequently convicted of the
charges of corruption, the proceeds relatable to the offence under
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall be confiscated and vest
in the Central Government free from any encumbrance or leasehold
interest excluding any debt due to any bank or financial institution.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the
expressions “bank”, “debt” and “financial institution” shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( d), ( g) and ( h)
of section 2 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993.
35. (1) Where the Lokpal, while making an inquiry into
allegations of corruption, is prima facie  satisfied, on the basis of
evidence available, that—
(a) the continuance of the public servant referred to in
clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 17 in his
post while conducting the inquiry is likely to affect such
inquiry adversely; or
(b) the public servant referred to in clause ( a) is likely
to destroy or in any way tamper with the evidence or
influence witnesses,
then, the Lokpal may recommend to the Central Government for
transfer or suspension of such public servant from the post held by
him till such period as may be specified in the order.
(2) The Central Government shall ordinarily accept the
recommendation of the Lokpal made under sub-section ( 1), except
for the reasons to be recorded in writing in a case where it is not
feasible for administrative reasons.
36. The Lokpal may, in discharge of its functions ulnder this
Act, issue appropriate directions to a public servant entrusted with
the preparation or custody of any document or record—
(a) to protect such document or record from destruction
or damage; or
(b) to prevent the public servant from altering or
secreting such document or record; or
(c) to prevent the public servant from transferring or
alienating any assets allegedly acquired by him through
corrupt means.
37. The Lokpal may, by general or special order in writing,
and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified
49 of 1988.
51 of 1993.
Power of Lokpal
to recommend
transfer or
suspension of
public servant
connected with
allegation of
corruption.
Power of Lokpal
to give
directions to
prevent
destruction of
records during
inquiry.
Power to
delegate.

246
therein, direct that any administrative or financial power conferred
on it may also be exercised or discharged by such of its Members
or officers or employees as may be specified in the order.
CHAPTER IX
S
PECIAL  C OURTS
38. ( 1) The Central Government shall constitute such number
of Special Courts, as recommended by the Lokpal, to hear and
decide the cases arising out of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 or under this Act.
(2) The Special Courts constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall
ensure completion of each trial within a period of one year from the
date of filing of the case in the Court:
Provided that in case the trial cannot be completed within a
period of one year, the Special Court shall record reasons therefor
and complete the trial within a further period of not more than
three months or such further periods not exceeding three months
each, for reasons to be recorded in writing, before the end of each
such three months period, but not exceeding a total period of two
years.
39. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 if, in the course of an inquiry
or investigation into an offence or other proceeding under this Act,
an application is made to a Special Court by the Investigation
Officer of the Lokpal that any evidence is required in connection
with the inquiry or investigation into an offence or proceeding
under this Act and he is of the opinion that such evidence may be
available in any place in a contracting State, and the Special Court,
on being satisfied that such evidence is required in connection
with the inquiry or investigation into an offence or proceeding
under this Act, may issue a letter of request to a court or an
authority in the contracting State competent to deal with such
request to—
(i) examine the facts and circumstances of the case;
(ii) take such steps as the Special Court may specify
in such letter of request; and
(iii) forward all the evidence so taken or collected to
the Special Court issuing such letter of request.
(2) The letter of requests shall be transmitted in such manner
as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf.
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received
under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be evidence collected
during the course of the inquiry or investigation.
Special Courts to
be notified by
Central
Government.
49 of 1988.
Letter of request
to a contracting
State in certain
cases.
2 of 1974.

247
CHAPTER X
COMPLAINTS  AGAINST C HAIRPERSON , M EMBERS AND OFFICIALS  OF L OKPAL
40. (1) The Lokpal shall not inquire into any complaint made
against the Chairperson or any Member.
(2) Any complaint against the Chairperson or Member shall be
made by an application by the party aggrieved, to the President.
(3) The President shall, in case there exists a prima facie
case for bias or corruption, make a reference to the Chief Justice
of India in such manner as may be prescribed for inquiring into the
complaint against the Chairperson or Member.
(4) The President shall decide the action against the
Chairperson or Member on the basis of the opinion of the Chief
Justice of India and in case the President is satisfied, on the basis
of the said opinion that the Chairperson or the Member is biased or
has indulged in corruption, the President shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-section ( 1) of section 8, remove such
Chairperson or Member and also order for initiation of prosecution
in case of allegation of corruption.
41. (1) Every complaint of allegation or wrongdoing made
against any officer or employee or investigation agency under or
associated with the Lokpal for offence punishable under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall be dealt with in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
(2) The Lokpal shall complete the inquiry into the complaint
or allegation made, within a period of thirty days from the date of
its receipt.
(3) While making an inquiry into the complaint against any
officer or employee of the Lokpal or agency engaged or associated
with the Lokpal, if the Lokpal is prima facie  satisfied on the basis
of evidence available, that—
(a) continuance of such officer or employee of the
Lokpal in his post or agency engaged or associated while
conducting the inquiry is likely to affect such inquiry
adversely; or
(b) an officer or employee of the Lokpal or agency
engaged or associated is likely to destroy or in any way
tamper with the evidence or influence witnesses,
then, the Lokpal may, by order, suspend such officer or employee
of the Lokpal or divest such agency engaged or associated with
the Lokpal of all powers and responsibilities hereto before exercised
by it.
(4) On the completion of the inquiry, if the Lokpal is satisfied
that there is prima facie  evidence of the commission of an offence
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or of any wrongdoing,
49 of 1988.
Complaints
against
Chairperson and
Members not to
be inquired by
Lokpal.
Complaints
against officials
of Lokpal.
49 of 1988.

248
it shall, within a period of fifteen days of the completion of such
inquiry, order to prosecute such officer or employee of the Lokpal
or such officer or employee of agency engaged or associated with
the Lokpal and initiate disciplinary proceedings against the official
concerned:
Provided that no such order shall be passed without giving
such officer or employee of the Lokpal or officer or employee of
agency engaged or associated, a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
CHAPTER XI
A
SSESSMENT  OF LOSS AND RECOVERY THEREOF BY S PECIAL C OURT
42. If any public servant is convicted of an offence under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 by the Special Court,
notwithstanding and without prejudice to any law for the time being
in force, it may make an assessment of loss, if any, caused to the
public exchequer on account of the actions or decisions of such
public servant not taken in good faith and for which he stands
convicted, and may order recovery of such loss, if possible or
quantifiable, from such public servant so convicted:
Provided that if the Special Court, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, comes to the conclusion that the loss caused was
pursuant to a conspiracy with the beneficiary or beneficiaries of
actions or decisions of the public servant so convicted, then such
loss may, if assessed and quantifiable under this section, also be
recovered from such beneficiary or beneficiaries proportionately.
CHAPTER XII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
43. The Lokpal shall prepare, in such form and at such time
in each financial year as may be prescribed, its budget for the next
financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the
Lokpal and forward the same to the Central Government for
information.
44. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 16, the
Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Lokpal grants of such
sums of money as are required to be paid for the salaries and
allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the
administrative expenses, including the salaries and allowances and
pension payable to or in respect of officers and other employees of
the Lokpal.
45. (1) The Lokpal shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Assessment of
loss and
recovery
thereof by
Special Court.
49 of 1988.
Budget.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Annual
statement of
accounts.

249
(2) The accounts of the Lokpal shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India at such intervals as may
be specified by him.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Lokpal under this Act shall have the same rights,
privileges and authority in connection with such audit, as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has, in
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and
to inspect any of the offices of the Lokpal.
(4) The accounts of the Lokpal, as certified by Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him
in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
46. (1) The Lokpal shall furnish to the Central Government,
at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or
as the Central Government may request, such returns and
statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Lokpal, as the Central Government may, from
time to time, require.
(2) The Lokpal shall prepare, once every year, in such form
and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a
summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the
report  shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 2) shall
be laid by the Central Government, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTEER XIII
D
ECLARATION  OF ASSETS
47. ( 1) Every public servant shall make a declaration of his
assets and liabilities in the manner as provided by or under this Act.
(2) Every public servant shall, within a period of thirty days
from the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or
affirmation to enter upon his office, furnish to the competent
authority the information relating to—
(a) the assets of which he, his spouse and his
dependent children are, jointly or severally, owners or
beneficiaries;
(b) his liabilities and that of his spouse and his
dependent children.
Furnishing of
returns, etc., to
Central
Government.
Declaration of
assets.

250
(3) Every public servant holding his office as such, at the
time of the commencement of this Act; shall furnish information
relating to such assets and liabilities, as referred to in sub-
section ( 2) to the competent authority within thirty days of the
coming into force of this Act.
(4) Every public servant shall file with the competent
authority, on or before the 31st July of every year, an annual return
of such assets and liabilities, as referred to in sub-section ( 2), as on
the 31st March of that year.
(5) The information under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3)
and annual return under sub-section ( 4) shall be furnished to the
competent authority in such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(6) The competent authority in respect of each office or
Department shall ensure that all such statements are published on
the website of such office or Department by 31st August of that
year.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “dependent
children” means sons and daughters who have no separate means of
earning and are wholly dependent on the public servant for their
livelihood.
48. If any public servant willfully or for reasons which are
not justifiable,—
(a) fails to declare his assets; or
(b) gives misleading information in respect of such
assets and is found to be in possession of assets not
disclosed or in respect of which misleading information was
furnished,
then such assets shall, unless otherwise proved, be presumed to
belong to the public servant and shall be presumed to be assets
acquired by corrupt means:
Provided that the competent authority may condone or exempt
the public servant from furnishing information in respect of assets
not exceeding such minimum value as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER XIV
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
49. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
whoever makes any false and frivolous or vexatious complaint under
this Act shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a
term which shal1 not be less than two years but which may extend
to five years and with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five
thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Presumption as
to acquisition of
assets by corrupt
means in certain
cases.
Prosecution for
false complaint
and payment of
compensation,
etc., to public
servant.

251
(2) No Court, except a Special Court, shall take cognizance of
an offence under sub-section ( 1).
(3) No Special Court shall take cognizance of an offence
under sub-section ( 1) except on a complaint made by a person
against whom the false, frivolous or vexatious complaint was made.
(4) The prosecution in relation to an offence under sub-
section ( 1) shall be conducted by the public prosecutor and all
expenses connected with such prosecution shall be borne by the
Central Government.
(5) In case of conviction of a person [being an individual or
society or association of persons or trust (whether registered or
not)], for having made a false complaint under this Act, such person
shall be liable to pay compensation to the public servant against
whom he made the false complaint in addition to the legal expenses
for contesting the case by such public servant, as the Special Court
may determine.
50.  ( 1) Where any offence under section 49 has been
committed by any society or association of persons or trust (whether
registered or not), every person who, at the time the offence was
committed, was directly in charge of, and was responsible to, the
society or association of persons or trust, for the conduct of the
business or affairs or activities of the society or association of
persons or trust as well as such society or association of persons or
trust shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society
or association of persons or trust (whether registered or not) and
it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of such society or
association of persons or trust, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
CHAPTER XV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
51. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings under this
Act shall lie against any public servant, in respect of anything which
is done in good faith or intended to be done in the discharge of his
official functions or in exercise of his powers.
False complaint
made by society
or association of
persons or trust.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith by
any public
servant.

252
52. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against the Lokpal or against any officer, employee, agency or any
person, in respect of anything which is done in good faith or
intended to be done under this Act or the rules or the regulations
made thereunder.
53. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees
of the Lokpal shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
54. The Lokpal shall not inquire or investigate into any
complaint, if the complaint is made after the expiry of a period of
seven years from the date on which the offence mentioned in such
complaint is alleged to have been committed.
55. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter
which the Lokpal is empowered by or under this Act to determine.
56. The Lokpal shall provide to every person against whom a
complaint has been made, before it, under this Act, legal assistance
to defend his case before the Lokpal, if such assistance is requested
for.
57. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment
other than this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of
any enactment other than this Act.
58. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
59. The enactments specified in the Second Schedule shall be
amended in the manner, specified therein.
60. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the form of complaint referred to in clause ( d) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 2;
(b) the term of the Search Committee, the fee and
allowances payable to its members and the manner
of selection of panel of names under sub-section ( 5) of
section 4;
(c) the procedure of inquiry into misbehaviour for
removal of the Chairperson or any Member under sub-
section ( 1) of section 8;
Protection of
action taken in
good faith by
others.
45 of 1860.
Members,
officers and
employees of
Lokpal to be
public servants.
Limitation to
apply in certain
cases.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Legal
assistance.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Provision of
this Act to be
in addition to
other laws.
Amendment of
certain
enactments.
Power to make
rules.

253
(d) the post or posts in respect of which the
appointment shall be made after consultation with the Union
Public Service Commission under the proviso to sub-
section ( 1) of section 11;
(e) other matters for which the Lokpal shall have the
powers of a civil court under clause ( vi) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 31;
(f) the manner of sending the order of attachment along
with the material to the Special Court under sub-section ( 2)
of section 33;
(g) the manner of transmitting the letter of request
under sub-section ( 2) of section 39;
(h) the manner of making reference to the Chief Justice
of India under sub-section ( 3) of section 40;
(i) the form and the time for preparing in each financial
year the budget for the next financial year, showing
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Lokpal under
section 43;
(j) the form for maintaining the accounts and other
relevant records and the form of annual statement of accounts
under sub-section ( 1) of section 45;
(k) the form and manner and the time for preparing the
returns and statements along with particulars under sub-
section ( 1) of section 46;
(l) the form and the time for preparing an annual report
giving a summary of its activities during the previous year
under sub-section ( 2) of section 46;
(m) the form of annual return to be filed by a public
servant under sub-section ( 5) of section 47;
(n) the minimum value for which the competent
authority may condone or exempt a public servant from
furnishing information in respect of assets under the proviso
to section 48;
(o) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed,
61. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder, the Lokpal may, by notification make regulations
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the conditions of service of the secretary and other
officers and staff of the Lokpal and the matters which in so
far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions,
Power of Lokpal
to make
regulations.

254
require the approval of the President under sub-section ( 2) of
section 11;
(b) the place of sittings of Benches of the Lokpal under
clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 19;
(c) the manner for displaying on the website of the
Lokpal, the status of all complaints pending or disposed of
along with records and evidence with reference thereto under
sub-section ( 13) of section 23;
(d) the manner and procedure of conducting an inquiry
or investigation under sub-section ( 15) of section 23;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified under this Act.
62. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or regulation.
63. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement
of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Laying of rules
and regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

255
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 3(5)]
I, A.B.........................., having been appointed Chairperson
(or a Member) of the Lokpal, do swear in the name of God/
solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment
perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or
ill-will.
255

256
256
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 59)
AMENDMENT  TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART I
AMENDMENT  TO THE C OMMISSIONS  OF I NQUIRY A CT, 1952
(60 OF 1952)
In section 3, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “The
appropriate Government may”, the words and figures “Save as
otherwise provided in the Lokpal Act, 2011, the appropriate
Government may” shall be substituted.
PART II
A
MENDMENTS  TO THE P REVENTION  OF C ORRUPTION  A CT, 1988
(49 OF 1988)
1. In section 13, in sub-section ( 2), for the words “seven
years”, the words “ten years” shall be substituted.
2. In section 14, for the words “seven years”, the words “ten
years” shall be substituted.
3. In section 19, in sub-section ( 1), after the words “except
with the previous sanction”, the words and figures “save as
otherwise provided in the Lokpal Act, 2011” shall be inserted.
PART III
A
MENDMENT  TO THE C ODE OF C RIMINAL P ROCEDURE , 1973
(2 OF 1974)
In section 197, after the words “except with the previous
sanction”, the words and figures “save as otherwise provided in the
Lokpal Act, 2011” shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 19.
Amendment
of section
197.

257
257
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The need to have a strong and effective institution of Lokpal
has been felt for quite sometime. The Administrative Reforms
Commission, in its interim report on the “Problems of Redressal of
Citizens’ Grievances” submitted in 1966, inter alia, recommended
the setting up of an institution of Lokpal at the Centre in this
regard. To give effect to this recommendation of the
Administrative Reforms Commission, eight Bills on Lokpal were
introduced in the Lok Sabha in the past, namely in the years 1968,
1971, 1977, 1985, 1989, 1996, 1998 and 2001. However, these
Bills had lapsed consequent upon the dissolution of the respective
Lok Sabha except in the case of 1985 Bill which was withdrawn
after its introduction.
2. A need has been felt to constitute a mechanism for dealing
with complaints on corruption against public functionaries in high
places. In this regard, the Central Government constituted a Joint
Drafting Committee (JDC) on 8th April, 2011 to draft a Lokpal Bill.
3. Based on the deliberations and having regard to the need
for establishing a strong and effective institution of Lokpal to inquire
into allegations of corruption against certain public functionaries, it
has been decided to enact a stand alone legislation, inter alia, to
provide for the following matters, namely:—
(i) to establish an Institution of Lokpal with a
Chairperson and eight Members of which fifty per cent shall
be Judicial Members;
(ii) to set up Lokpal’s own Investigation Wing and
Prosecution Wing with such officers and employees as felt by
it to be necessary;
(iii) the category of public functionaries against whom
allegations of corruption are to be inquired into, namely:—
(a) a Prime Minister, after he has demitted office;
(b) a Minister of the Union;
(c) a Member of Parliament;
(d) any Group “A” officer or equivalent;
(e) a Chairperson or member or officer equivalent
to Group “A” in any body, Board, corporation,
authority, company, society, trust, autonomous body

258
established by an Act of Parliament or wholly or partly
financed or controlled by the Central Government;
(f) any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of a society or association of persons or trust
wholly or partly financed or aided by the Government
or in receipt of any donations from the public and
whose annual income exceeds such amount as the
Central Government may by notification specify but the
organisations created for religious purposes and
receiving public donations would be outside the purview
of the Lokpal.
(iv) to provide for a mechanism to ensure that no
sanction or approval under section 197 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or section 19 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988, will be required in cases where
prosecution is proposed by the Lokpal;
(v) to confer on the Lokpal the power of search and
seizures and certain powers of a Civil Court;
(vi) to empower the Lokpal or any investigation officer
authorised by it in this behalf to attach property which, prima
facie, has been acquired by corrupt means;
(vii) to lay down a period of limitation of seven years
from the date of commission of alleged offence for filing the
complaints before the Lokpal;
(viii) to confer powers of police upon Lokpal which
the police officers have in connection with investigation;
(ix) to charge the expenses of Lokpal on the Consolidated
Fund of India;
(x) to utilise services of officers of Central or State
Government with the consent of the State Government for the
purpose of conducting inquiry;
(xi) to recommend transfer or suspension of public
servants connected with allegation of corruption;
(xii) to constitute sufficient number of Special Courts
as may be recommended by the Lokpal to hear and decide the
cases arising out of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
under the proposed enactment;
(xiii) to make every public servant to declare his assets
and liabilities, and in case of default or furnishing misleading
information, to presume that the public servant has acquired
such assets by corrupt means;

259
(xiv) to provide for prosecution of persons who make
false or frivolous or vexatious complaints.
4. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW D ELHI; Y . NARAYANASAMY
The 1st August, 2011.
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 40407/44/2011-A VD. IV, dated the
1st August, 2011 from Shri Y . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of
the Lokpal Bill, 2011 recommends the introduction and consideration
of the Bill in Lok Sabha  under article 117(1) and (3) of the
Constitution.

260
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This clause of the Bill seeks to provide for the
short title, extent and commencement of the proposed Lokpal
legislation. It provides that it shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may appoint by notification in the Official
Gazette and the Central Government may appoint different dates for
different provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause defines the various expressions used
in the Bill which, inter alia, include the expressions — “Bench”,
“competent authority”, “complaint”, “inquiry”, “Judicial Member’:,
“Lokpal”, “Member”, “Minister”, “public servant”, “Special Court”,
etc. The court of Special Judge appointed under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall be the
Special Court.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the aforesaid clause provides that any
reference in the proposed legislation to any other Act or provision
thereof which is not in force in any area to which the proposed
legislation applies shall be construed to have a reference to the
corresponding Act or provision thereof in force in such area.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to provide for the establishment
of Lokpal consisting of a Chairperson and eight Members. It also
provides that fifty per cent of the Members shall be Judicial
Members. The Chairperson shall be a person who is or has been the
Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court. The Judicial
Member shall be a person who is or has been the Judge of the
Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court. The Members
shall be the persons who are of impeccable integrity, outstanding
ability and standing having special knowledge and experience of not
less than twenty-five years in the matters relating to anti-corruption
policy, public administration, vigilance, finance including insurance
and banking, law and management. It further provides that the
Chairperson or a Member of the Lokpal shall not be a Member of
Parliament or a Member of a Legislature of any State or Union
territory and shall not hold any office of trust or profit or be
connected with any political party or carry on own business or
practice any profession.
It further provides that the person appointed as Chairperson
or a Member before he enters upon his office shall resign from the
office of trust or profit held by him or sever his connection with
the conduct and management of any business carried on by him or
cease to practice if he is practicing any profession.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for appointment of
Chairperson and other Members and constitution of a Selection
260

261
Committee for that purpose. The Chairperson and Members shall be
appointed after obtaining the recommendations of a Selection
Committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the
House of the People, the Leader of Opposition in the House of the
People, the Leader of Opposition” in the Council of States, one
Union Cabinet Minister, one sitting Judge of the Supreme Court, one
sitting Judge of a High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of
India, one eminent jurist and one person of eminence in public life
with wide knowledge and experience in anti-corruption policy, public
administration, vigilance, policy making, finance including insurance
and banking, law or management to be nominated by the Central
Government. For the purpose of selecting the Chairperson and other
Members of the Lokpal and for preparing a panel of persons to be
considered for appointment, the Selection Committee may constitute
a Search Committee consisting of such persons of standing having
special knowledge and expertise in the matters relating to anti-
corruption policy, public administration, vigilance, policy making,
finance including insurance and banking, law and management or in
any other matter which in the opinion of the Selection Committee
may be useful for making the selection of a Chairperson and
Members of the Lokpal.
Clause 5.—This clause provides that all necessary steps for
appointment of a new Chairperson or Members shall be taken at
least three months before the expiry of the term of such
Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, in accordance with the
procedure laid down in the proposed legislation.
Clause 6.—This clause deals with the terms  of office of the
Chairperson and Members. It provides that the Chairperson and
every Member shall be appointed by the President by warrant under
his hand and seal and hold office as such for a term not exceeding
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until
he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
Clause 7.—This clause deals with salary, allowances and
other conditions of services of Chairperson and Members. It
provides that the salary, allowances and other conditions of services
of the Chairperson shall be the same as that of a Chief Justice of
India. The salary, allowances and other conditions of services of the
Members shall be the same as that of a Judges of the Supreme
Court. Further, after a person is appointed as a Chairperson or a
Member, his conditions of service, allowances and pension payable
to him shall not be varied to his disadvantage.
Clause 8.—This clause provide for the removal and
suspension of Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal. The
Chairperson and Members may be removed from his office by an
order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour after the
Supreme Court held an inquiry in accordance with a prescribed
procedure on a reference being made to it by the President suo
motu, or on a petition of at least one hundred Members of

262
Parliament or on a petition of a citizen referred to the Supreme
Court by the President.
Sub-clause ( 2) provides that the Chairperson or a Member in
respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court
may be suspended by the President until orders on receipt of a
report from the Supreme Court on the reference made to it. Sub-
clause ( 3) provides that the Chairperson or any Member may be
removed from office if he is adjudged as insolvent or if, during his
term of office engages in paid employment outside his duties or if
in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason
of infirmity of mind or body. Sub-clause ( 4) provides certain
grounds in which the Chairperson or Member shall be deemed to be
guilty of misbehaviour.
Clause 9.—This clause provides for restriction on
employment by Chairperson and Members after ceasing to hold the
office. It provides that the Chairperson or Member shall not be
eligible for reappointment in the Lokpal or any diplomatic assignment
or appointment as Administrator of Union territory or further
employment to any other office of profit. It also provides that the
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal shall be ineligible to contest
any election of President or Vice-President or Member of either
House of Parliament or Member of either House of a State
Legislature or Municipality or Panchayat within a period of five
years from the date of relinquishing the post. However, a Member
shall be eligible to be appointed as a Chairperson if his total tenure
as Member and Chairperson does not exceed five years.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to provide that in the event of
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of Chairperson, by reason
of his death, resignation or otherwise, the President may authorise
the senior-most Member to act as the Chairperson until a new
Chairperson is appointed to fill the vacancy and when a Chairperson
is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence or leave or
otherwise, the President may authorise the senior-most Member to
discharge his functions.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to provide that the secretary or
other officers and staff of the Lokpal shall be appointed by the
Chairperson or the Member or officer of Lokpal as the Chairperson
may direct. The President may make rules that the appointment in
respect of any post or posts shall be made after consultation with
the Union Public Service Commission.
Clause 12.—This clause provides for setting up of an
Investigation Wing of the Lokpal for the purpose of conducting
investigation of any offence alleged to have been committed by a
public servant punishable under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988. It further provides that till such time the Investigation
Wing is constituted by the Lokpal, the Central Government will
make available the services of its investigation officers and other
staff required by the Lokpal. It also provides for extension of

263
powers and jurisdiction of officers of the Investigation Wing of the
Lokpal to the States with the consent of the concerned State
Government and on such extension the members of the Investigation
Wing of the Lokpal will have jurisdiction and powers under certain
provisions of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 to act
as if they were members of the Police Force of the concerned
State.
Clause 13.—This clause stipulates that the Investigating
Officers shall be of the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or
any other officer of equivalent rank.
Clause 14.—This clause lays down that the Lokpal may
require the Investigating Officer of its Investigation Wing to make
a preliminary investigation and submit a report within a specified
time so as to specify itself as to whether or not the matter requires
to be inquired into further by the Lokpal.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to provide that the Lokpal may
constitute a Prosecution Wing under a Director of Prosecution with
such other officers and employees as required to assist him for the
purpose of prosecution of public servants in relation to offences
punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, such
prosecution shall be on complains to be made by the Lokpal before
the Special Court.
Clause 16.—This clause lays down that the expenses of the
Lokpal including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in
respect of Chairperson, Members, Secretary or other officers or
staff of the Lokpal shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India. It also provides that any fees or other moneys taken by the
Lokpal shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
Clause 17.—This clause deals with the jurisdiction of
Lokpal. Sub-clause (1) seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall
inquire into any matter involved in or arising from or connected
with any allegation of corruption made in a complaint in respect of
Prime Minister, after he has demitted the office of the Prime
Minister, a Minister, a Member of either House of Parliament, any
Group “A” officer or equivalent or above from against the public
servants as defined in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (c) of
section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 who was
serving or has served in connection with the affairs of the Union,
and Chairperson or Member or officers of certain boards,
corporations, authority, company, society, trust, etc., established
by an Act of Parliament or wholly or partly financed or controlled
by the Central Government; director, manager, secretary or other
officers of certain societies, association of persons etc. and
director, manager, secretary or other officer of every other
society, etc. wholly or partly financed or aided by the Government
and the annual income of which exceeds such amount as may be
notified by the Central Government which are for non-religious
purpose and are in receipt of public donations. However, the

264
various offices held by the Prime Minister shall not come within
the purview of this provision.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Lokpal shall not inquire into
any matter against any member of either House of Parliament in
respect of anything said or vote given by him in Parliament or any
Committee thereof covered under the provisions of clause (2) of
article 105 of the Constitution.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the Lokpal may inquire into any
act or conduct of any person if such person is associated with the
allegation of corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
Sub-clause (4) seeks to provide that in the matters in respect
of which a complaint has been made under the proposed legislation
shall not be referred for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry
Act, 1952. The Explanation to clause 17 clarifies that a complaint
under the proposed legislation shall relate only to a period during
which the public servant was holding or serving as a public servant.
Clause 18.—This clause lays down the matters pending
before any Court or Committee or Authority prior to commencement
of the proposed legislation shall be continued before such Court,
Committee or Authority, as the case may be. However, such
continuance of proceedings will not affect the powers of the Lokpal
to inquire into such matter under the proposed legislation.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to provide that the jurisdiction
of the Lokpal may be exercised by Benches thereof. A Bench of the
Lokpal may be constituted by the Chairperson with two or more
Members. Every Bench shall ordinarily consist of at least one
Judicial Member in it. The Benches of Lokpal shall ordinarily be at
New Delhi and at such places as the Lokpal may, by regulations,
specify.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to empower the Chairperson to
distribute the business of Lokpal amongst its Benches and also
specify the matters which may be dealt with by each Bench.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to provide that the Chairperson
may transfer any case pending before one Bench for disposal to any
other Bench on receipt of an application for such transfer from the
complainant or the public servant.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to provide that the decision of
the Lokpal shall be according to the opinion of the majority of the
Members of Lokpal. However, if the Members of a Bench consisting
of two Members differ in opinion on any point or points shall be
referred to the Chairperson. The Chairperson may either hear such
point or points himself or refer the same for hearing by one or more
other Member and it shall be decided accordingly to the opinion of
the majority of the Members who have heard the case including
those who first heard it.

265
Clause 23.—This clause makes provision relating to complaint
and inquiry and investigation by Lokpal. It provides that on receipt
of a complaint, the Lokpal may either make preliminary inquiry or
direct its Investigation Wing to make a preliminary inquiry to
ascertain whether there exist a prima facie case for proceeding in
the matter. A preliminary inquiry or preliminary investigation should
ordinarily be completed within thirty days. However, this period
could be extended for a further period of three months from the
date of receipt of the complaint after recording the reasons for
extension. It also provides that in cases where the Lokpal is of the
opinion that it is not in the interest of justice to either hold
preliminary inquiry or preliminary investigation it may for reasons to
be recorded in writing refer the matter for investigation. Sub-
clause (4) provides that the Lokpal before coming to a conclusion
in the course of a preliminary inquiry that a prima facie case is
made out against a public servant, the Lokpal shall give an
opportunity to the public servant of being heard. It further provides
that where the Lokpal is of the opinion that prima facie case is
made out against the public servant, the public servant against
whom such investigation is being conducted shall be given an
opportunity to be heard before filing the charge sheet.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide that the persons
against whom any inquiry or investigation is proposed to be
conducted shall be allowed to inspect any record in connection with
the commission of any alleged office which are necessary for him
to defend his case and take extracts therefrom.
Clause 25.—This clause provides that persons likely to be
prejudicially affected are to be provided a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the inquiry and to produce evidence in his defence
consistent with the principles of natural justice. However, this will
not apply where the credibility of a witness is being questioned.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide that Lokpal may
require any public servant or any other person to furnish information
or produce documents relevant to inquiry or investigation.
Clause 27.—This clause makes provision that no previous
sanction or approval shall be required by the Lokpal or its
Investigation Wing under section 197 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 or section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
Clause 28.—This clause makes provision for the action to be
taken by the Lokpal on conclusion of inquiry or investigation in
relation to public servants who are not Ministers or Members of
Parliament. It further provides that on conclusion of inquiry or
investigation, where it is found that there is commission of offence
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 by a public servant,
the Lokpal may file a case in the Special Court and send a copy of
the report and its findings to the competent authority, recommend to
the competent authority initiation of disciplinary proceedings and

266
also provide a copy of the report to the public servant or his
representative.
Clause 29.—This clause makes provision for action to be
taken by the .Lokpal on conclusion of inquiry or investigation
against public servants being Ministers or Members of Parliament. It
provides that where the commission of offence under Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 by such public servants has-taken place, the
Lokpal may file a case in the Special Court and send a copy of the
report along with its findings to the competent authority as defined
in the proposed legislation. It also provides that the competent
authority shall examine the report and communicate to the Lokpal
within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of the
report, the action taken or proposed to be taken on the basis of the
report. However, in computing the period of ninety days, the period
during which the Parliament will not be in session shall be excluded.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to confer power of search and
seizure of documents on the Lokpal.
Clause 31.—This clause provides that the Lokpal shall have all
the powers of a Civil Court in certain matters and the proceedings
before the Lokpal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within
the meaning of Section 193 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to make provision that the
Lokpal may utilize the services of any officer or investigating
agency of the Central Government or the State Government, as the
case may be. It also enables the Lokpal to confer certain powers on
such officers.
Clause 33.—This clause makes provision for provisional
attachment of assets by the Lokpal or any investigation officer
authorised by it if such assets are any proceeds of corruption.
Clause 34.—This clause makes provision for confirmation of
provisional attachment of assets made by the Lokpal under clause
33 by the Special Court.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to provide that the Lokpal may
recommend transfer or suspension of any public servant connected
with allegation of corruption. This clause also provides that
ordinarily the recommendation of the Lokpal shall be accepted by
the Government.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to provide that the Lokpal may
give directions to prevent destruction of records during inquiry.
Clause 37.—This clause provides that the Lokpal may, by
general or special order in writing, and subject to such conditions
and limitations as may be specified therein, direct that any
administrative or financial power conferred on it may also be
exercised or discharged by such of its Members or officers or
employees as may be specified in the order.

267
Clause 38.—This clause provides for constitution of Special
Courts by the Central Government as recommended by the Lokpal
to hear and decide the cases arising out of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 or under the proposed legislation. It also
provides that the Special Courts shall ensure completion of each trial
within a period of one year from the date of filing the case in the
court, However, in case the trial cannot be completed within a-
period of one year, the Special Court shall record reasons therefor
and complete the trial within a further period of not more than three
months or such further periods not exceeding three months each,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, before the end of each such
three months period, but not exceeding a total period of two years.
Clause 39.—This clause makes provision for issue of letter of
request to a court or an authority in the contracting State in certain
cases.
Clause 40.—This clause makes provisions for handling of
complaints against the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal.
Clause 41.—This clause provides for the provisions for
dealing the complaints against officials of Lokpal.
Clause 42.—This clause provides that when a public servant
has committed an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988, the Special Court may make an assessment of loss, if any;
caused to the public exchequer on account of actions or decisions
of such public servant not taken in good faith and for which he
stands convicted, and may order recovery of such losses.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to provide that the Lokpal shall
prepare its budget showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of
the Lokpal and forward the same to the Central Government for
intervention.
Clause 44.—This clause provides that without prejudice to the
provisions of clause 16, the Central Government may make grants
of such sums of money to the Lokpal as are required to be paid for
salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members
and the administrative expenses, including the salaries and
allowances and pension payable to or in respect of  officers and
other employees of the Lokpal.
Clause 45.—This clause provides for maintaining the accounts
and other relevant records and annual statement of accounts by the
Lokpal. It further provides that accounts of the Lokpal shall be
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. It also
provides that the accounts of Lokpal together with the Audit Report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and
the Central Government shall lay the same before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 46.—This clause provides that the Lokpal shall furnish
to the Central Government such returns or statements and such

268
particulars with regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of
Lokpal as the Central Government may prescribe from time-to-time.
Clause 47.—This clause provides that the public servants
shall make a declaration of their assets and liabilities in the manner
as provided in this Act.
Clause 48.—This clause provides that any wilful failure on
the part of a public servant to declare his assets shall amount to
presumption that the assets have been acquired by corrupt means.
Clause 49.—This clause provides that if any person makes
false or frivolous or vexatious complaint under this Act, he shall
be liable for prosecution and on conviction he may be punished
with imprisonment for a minimum term of two years and a
maximum term of five years and with fine minimum of which shall
be twenty-five thousand rupees and maximum of two lakh rupees.
Clause 50.—This clause provides that if false complaint is
made by the Society or association of persons or trust, in that case
every person who, at the time of commission of offence, was
directly in-charge of the affairs or activities of such society etc.
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence under clause 48 and
liable Jar punishment.
Clause 51.—This clause provides for protection of public
servant from legal proceedings, etc., for the action taken in good
faith.
Clause 52.—This clause provides for the protection of action
taken in good faith by Lokpal, any officer, employee, agency or any
person in respect of anything done or intended to be done under the
proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
Clause 53.—This clause provides that the Chairperson,.
Members, Officers and other employees of the Lokpal shall be
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.
Clause 54.—This clause lays down the period of limitation for
filing of complaints before the Lokpal as seven years from the date
of commission of the alleged offence.
Clause 55.—This clause provides that no civil court shall
have jurisdiction in the matters for which Lokpal is empowered
under the proposed legislation.
Clause 56.—This clause provides that legal assistance for
defending a case before the Lokpal shall be provided to every
person against whom complaint has been made before it, if such
assistance is requested for.
Clause 57.—This clause seeks to provide that the provisions
of the proposed legislation shall have overriding effect.

269
Clause 58.—This clause provides that the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall be in addition to any other law for the time
being in force.
Clause 59.—This clause seeks to amend certain enactments
as specified in Second Schedule to the proposed legislation.
Clause 60.—This clause seeks to empower the Central
Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates
the various matters in respect of which such rules may be made.
Clause 61.—This clause seeks to confer power on the Lokpal
to make regulations for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation consistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation
and the rules made by the Central Government under clause 60.
Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various matters in respect of which
such regulations may be made.
Clause 62.—This clause provides that every rule and every
regulation made under the proposed legislation shall be laid before
each House of Parliament.
Clause 63.—This clause relates to the power of the Central
Government to remove difficulties. In case any difficulty arises in
giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the
Central Government may make such provisions as may be necessary
in removing the difficulties by order published in the Official
Gazette. However, no such order shall be made under this clause
after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement
of the proposed legislation and every such order shall also be
required to be laid before each House of Parliament.
The First Schedule to the proposed legislation lays down the
form of oath or affirmation which may be taken by any person
before entering upon the office of Chairperson or Member of the
Lokpal.
The Second Schedule contains the details of amendments in
certain enactments which are consequential to the enactment of the
proposed legislation.

270
270
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the
establishment of an institution to be called the Lokpal for the
purpose of making inquiries in respect of complaints as may be
made under the proposed legislation.
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 3 provides for the appointment
of the Lokpal consisting of a Chairperson and eight Members.
Clause 7 of the Bill envisages that the salary, allowances and other
conditions of service of, the Chairperson of the Lokpal shall be the
same as those of the Chief Justice of lndia and the Members as
those of the Judges of the Supreme Court. This clause also provides
that the salary payable to the Chairperson and Members shall be
reduced by any pension and pension equivalent to other pensionary
benefits to which the Member may be entitled to in respect of any
previous service under the Government of India or under the
Government of a State.
3. Clause 11  of the Bill provides for the appointment of a
Secretary and such other officers and employees for the Lokpal.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the conditions of
service of Secretary and other officers and staff of the Lokpal shall
be such as may be specified by regulations made by the Lokpal for
the purpose.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 12 provides that the Lokpal shall
constitute an Investigation Wing for the purpose of conducting
investigation of any offence alleged to have been committed by a
public servant punishable under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988. Sub-clause (1) of clause 15 of the Bill provides that the
Lokpal shall constitute a Prosecution Wing under a Director of
Prosecution and such other officers and staff for the purpose of
prosecution of public servants in relation to any complaint by the
Lokpal. Sub-clause (1) of clause 32 empowers the Lokpal to utilise
the services of any officer or investigating agency of the Central
Government or any State Government for the purpose of conducting
any inquiry.
5. C1ause 16 of the Bill provides that the expenses of the
Lokpal including the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or
in respect of the Chairperson, Members or Secretary or other
officers or staff of the Lokpal shall be charged on the Consolidated
Fund of India and any fees and other moneys taken by the Lokpal
shall form part of that fund.
6. At this stage, it is not possible to give precise details of the
expenditure to be incurred on the Lokpal. It is, however, expected
that the Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve a

271
non-recurring expenditure of fifty crores of rupees and a recurring
expenditure of hundred crores of rupees in a financial year. In case
it becomes necessary to construct a building to house the
establishment of the Lokpal, additional expenditure of a non-
recurring nature of the order four hundred crores of rupees may
also be involved.
7. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other
recurring or non-recurring expenditure.

272
272
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 60 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause specifies the
various matters in respect of which the rules may be made. These
matters, inter alia, relate to the form of complaint referred to in
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 2; the tem of Search
Committee, fee and allowances payable to the members of Search
Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names; procedure
of inquiry into misbehaviour for removal of the Chairperson or any
Member; the posts in respect of which appointments shall be made
after consultation with the Union Public Service Commission; matters
for which the Lokpal shall have the powers of a Civil Court; the
manner of sending an order of attachment to a Special Court; the
manner of transmitting the letter of request under sub-section (2) of
section 39; the manner of making reference to the Chief Justice of
India; the form and the time for preparing the budget; the form for
maintaining accounts and other relevant records and the form of
annual statement of accounts; the form and manner and time for
preparing the returns and statements under sub-section (1) of section
46; the form and the time for preparing the annual report; the form
of annual return to be filed by a public servant under sub-section (5)
of section 47; the minimum value for which the competent authority
may condone or exempt a public servant from furnishing information
in respect of assets under the proviso to section 48.
2. Clause 61 of the Bill empowers the Lokpal to make, by
notification, regulations for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Such regulations should be consistent with the
provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder.
The matters in respect of which the Lokpal may make regulations,
inter alia, include the conditions of service of the secretary and other
officers and staff of the Lokpal and the matters which in so far as
relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, the place of sittings
of Benches of the Lokpal, the manner for displaying the status of all
complaints pending or disposed of on the website of the Lokpal, and
the manner and procedure of conducting an inquiry or investigation.
3. The rules and regulations made under the proposed legislation
shall be required to be laid before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may
be made under the proposed legislation are matters of procedure or
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

273
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE C OMMISSIONS  OF I NQUIRY A CT, 1952
(60 OF 1952)
* *** *
3. (1) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion
that it is necessary so to do, and shall, if a resolution in this behalf
is passed by each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, the
Legislature of the State, by notification in the Official Gazette,
inquiry into any definite matter of public importance and performing
such functions and within such time as may be specified in the
notification, and the Commission so appointed shall make the inquiry
and perform the functions accordingly:
Provided that where any such Commission has been appointed
to inquire into any matter—
(a) by the Central Government, no State Government
shall, except with the approval of the Central Government,
appoint another Commission to inquire into the same matter
for so long as the Commission appointed by the Central
Government is functioning;
(b) by a State Government, the Central Government
shall not appoint another Commission to inquire into the same
matter for so long as the Commission appointed by the State
Government is functioning, unless the Central Government is
of opinion that the scope of the inquiry should be extended to
two or more States.
* *** *
E
XTRACT FROM THE P REVENTION  OF C ORRUPTION  A CT, 1988
(49 OF 1988)
* *** *
13. (1) * *** *
(2) Any public servant who commits criminal misconduct
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be not
less than one year but which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine.
* *** *
273
Appointment
of Commission.
Criminal
misconduct
by a public
servant.

274
14. Whoever habitually commits—
(a) an offence punishable under section 8 or section 9; or
(b) an offence punishable under section 12,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be not
less than two years but which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine.
** * * *
CHAPTER V
SANCTION  FOR PROSECUTION  AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS
19. (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
under sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 alleged to have been committed
by a public servant, except with the previous sanctions,—
(a) in the case of a person who is employed in
connection with the affairs of the Union and is not removable
from his office save by or with the sanction of the Central
Government, of that Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is employed in
connection with the affairs of a Sate and is not removable
from his office save by or with the sanction of the State
Government, of that Government;
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority
competent to remove him from his office.
** * * *
EXTRACT FROM THE C ODE OF C RIMINAL P ROCEDURE , 1973
(2 OF 1974)
** * * *
197.  ( 1) When any person who is or was a Judge or
Magistrate or a public servant not removable from his office save
by or with the sanction of the Government is accused of any
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, no Court shall
take cognizance of such offence except with the previous
sanction—
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the
case may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged
offence employed, in connection with the affairs of the
Union, of the Central Government;
Habitual
committing of
offence under
sections 8, 9
and 12.
Previous
sanction
necessary for
prosecution.
Prosecution of
Judges and
public servants.

275
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the
case may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged
offence employed, in connection with the affairs of a State,
of the State Government:
Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a
person referred to in clause ( b) during the period while a
Proclamation issued under clause ( 1) of article 356 of the
Constitution was in force in a State, clause ( b) will apply as if for
the expression “State Government” occurring therein, the expression
“Central Government” were substituted.
* *** *

276
276
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the institution of Lokpal to inquire into allegations
of corruption against certain public functionaries and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions)

277
ANNEXURE B
[vide para 2.2 of the Report]
Gist of debates held in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 27 th August, 2011 on  the statement
made by the Finance Minister on the issues relating to setting up of a Lok Pal
The Minister of Finance made a Statement in both the Houses requesting Shri Anna Hazare
to end his fast in view of the appeal made by the Prime Minister in his statement and the
sentiments expressed by the Leader of the Opposition and the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, on 25th
August, 2011. He then gave an update of the events covering the deliberations of the Joint Drafting
Committee followed by enumeration of the issues on which there was disagreement in the Joint
Drafting Committee. He stated that the Government had assured the representatives of Shri Anna
Hazare that if a consensus in House emerges over these issues, the Standing Committee would be
requested to take into account the same while recommending upon the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
Accordingly, Shri Pranab. Mukherjee, Honorable Finance Minister apprised Parliament of the
negotiations held with Shri Anna Hazare and developments that occurred since the formation of the
Joint Drafting Committee comprising of the representatives of the Government and Civil Society.
Thereafter, discussions were raised in both Houses to elicit the opinion of the Members vis-a-vis
issues arising out of the Lokpal Bill in general and over the following three points of discussion
in particular. These three points were:–
• Whether the jurisdiction of the Lokpal should cover all employees of the Central
Government?
• Whether it will be applicable through the institution of the Lokayukta in all States?
• Whether the Lokpal should have the power to punish all those who violate the
‘grievance redressal mechanism’ to be put in place?
4.2 Members, during discussions in Parliament, demonstrated serious commitment to evolve
effective mechanisms to deal with the menace of the corruption. They were of the opinion that
the supreme legislative body should convey a cogent message to the Government to ensure the
constitution of a strong and effective institution of Lokpal to root out the widespread corruption.
Members acknowledged that the three specific issues raised by Shri Anna Hazare were relevant and
they deserved attention while examining the Lokpal Bill.
4.3 Majority of the Members expressed their unanimous and in-principle association with these
three issues
1. For instance, Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha conveying
a representative view of her party stated:
“I hereby register the consent of my party on  all the three points raised by the hon. Leader
of the House”.
4.4 However, several ideas were floated by the Members about how to proceed while evolving
the required legislative frameworks to address the demands of civil society vis-a-vis these three
277
1However, most of the Members who participated in debates were not in  agreement with many provisions of
Jan Lokpal Bill like Prime Minister be brought within the ambit of Lokpal without safeguards and extension of the
authority of Lokpal vis-a-vis the Members’ conduct in relation to the maters of the House etc.

278
issues. The Members were of the opinion that the spirit of the Constitution should not be
undermined while providing statutory shape to these three issues. Members, though lauded the need
to include the three issues in appropriate legislations but, they cautioned that such legislative
initiative must not be inconsistent with the principle enshrined in the Constitution.
4.5 With regards to the issue of Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism and the Citizens
Charter, Members unanimously acknowledged the necessity of establishment of such mechanisms
in all Government of India’s Departments/organizations if the objective of good governance was to
be attained. However, instead of creating provision in the Lokpal Bill for the purpose, the Members
favoured a separate law to deal with these issues. Some Members also drew the attention of the
House towards the laws enacted by some State Governments in this regard and suggested that such
laws may be considered while legislating upon a central legislation to deal with the issue. Shri V
Narayanaswamy, Minister of S tate for Personal, Public Grievances and Pensions apprised the House
that the Government is planning to unveil a separate Bill to provide for an effective public grievance
redressal machinery along with making the Citizens Charter a statuary obligation for Government
departments/organizations.
4.6 On the establishment of the institutions of Lokayuktas in States through a single Act,
Members did acknowledge the need for establishing effective institutions of Lokayuktas in all of
the States. Notwithstanding so, Members were of the view that establishment of Lokayuktas in
States should be in accordance with the spirit of our federal polity.
4.7 Apprising the House about the responses of State Governments over the said issue, Union
Finance Minister, Shri Mukherjee shared the seriousness and concerns of the Government in this
regard with the Members. Also, he candidly requested the Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha,
Shri Arun Jaitley, who is also an eminent lawyer, to share his opinion over the issue of providing
for Lokayuktas in the States in the Central Legislature. Shri Jaitley suggested two alternatives to
overcome the federal dilemma over the issue. He put his views as:–
“…One possible option is  that you can legislate on areas where the Central legislature has
jurisdiction. Where you find that the Central Legislature has no jurisdiction, you hove two
options–either you leave that part to the States or under Article 252,  with the consent of
two States, the Central Legislature can bring an enabling law compatible with the
Constitutional Scheme …”
4.8 Most of the Members were of the view that a model Bill should be framed in this regard
and the States should be given the authority to constitute the Lokayuktas. Members were hopeful
that this federal dimension would be earnestly examined by the Standing Committee in the light of
relevant constitutional provisions.
4.9 Over the inclusion of lower bureaucracy within the ambit of the Lokpal, Members admitted
the need to make all classes of bureaucracy more accountable to the people of this country.
However, the question before the Parliament was what would be the appropriate legislative
framework for the purpose. There were apprehensions that if all classes of the bureaucracy are
brought under the Lokpal, the institution will become overburdened and it will not be able to
discharge its responsibilities effectively. Likewise, the Members also pointed out that constitutional
protections given to the bureaucrats under articles 311 and 320 should also be taken into account
while making provisions in this regard in the Lokpal Bill.
4.10 Shri Sitaram Yechury, Member, Rajya Sabha suggested a very lucid solution in this regard.
He put his point as:
“…For the lower bureaucracy, existing vigilance machinery, which is there to oversee them,
can be brought under the supervision of the Lokpal. You already have existing vigilance

279
machinery. That can be brought under the supervision of Lokpal. If the existing machinery
is not delivering then the Lokpal can be approached…”
4.11 He and other Members were of the view that while legislating upon the issue of inc1usion
of lower bureaucracy, the aspects of constitutionality and practical feasibility need to be considered
in detail.
4.12 While giving the reply to the debate the Minister of Finance concluded that the House
discussed various issues relating to setting up of a strong and effective Lokpal in these words:
“This House agrees in principle on the Citizens Charter, Lower Bureaucracy to be brought
under Lokpal through appropriate mechanism and Establishment of Lokayuktas in the States. I will
request you to transmit the proceedings to the Department-related Standing Committee for its
perusal while formulating its recommendations for a Lokpal Bill.”

280
ANNEXURE-C
(Vide para 1.11 of the Report)
COMMENTS OF DOPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of the Comments/Suggestions Comments of DOPT
No. Organisation/
individual
12 3 4
National Campaign
for People’s Right to
Information
Clause 2(1)(i) NCPRI is of the view that there is no
legal or moral justification in excluding the Prime Minister
from the purview of the Lokpal Bill. Therefore, they have
suggested the following:
(i) ”Minister” means an Union Minister and includes the
Prime Minister;
1. Provided that no investigation would be launched
against the Prime Minister unless a reference has
been made by a full bench of the Lokpal to the Chief
Justice of India and that the Chief Justice of India
has constituted a full bench of the Supreme Court
which has examined the complaint and the relevant
grounds and evidence and come to the conclusion that
such an investigation is warranted;
2. Provided further that complaints regarding actions
done by others where the Prime Minister is not directly
involved but can be held responsible as the Head of
the Government or cabinet would not be entertained
(no vicarious liability).
In the context of the Indian polity, the Prime
Minister occupies a pivotal position in the
Governments’ set up. To ensure that Prime
Minister is able to discharge his functions
without any interference from any quarter, it
is felt that the Prime Minister may be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal. However,
after the Prime Minister has demitted the
office, he will come within the purview of
the Lokpal.
1.

281
3. Also provided that where the Prime Minister is of the
opinion that some information that is asked for by
the Lokpal as a part of an investigation is such that
its disclosure might compromise national security or
other critical national interests, the prime Minster
would in confidence brief the CJI, whose decision on
whether the information should be disclosed to the
Lokpal, and if so, under what conditions, would be
final.
Clause 17 (1)
The NCPRI has suggested that in clause 17(1)(a) the
words, “after he has demitted the office of the Prime
Minister” should be deleted and the revised clause
should read as:
17(1)(a) a Prime Minister;
Clause 3(1)
There is no justification in restricting the position to
judges, especially as the law provides for an adequate
number of judicial members. Therefore, NCPRI has
suggested to amend Clause 3(2)(a) as  follows:
“A Chairperson, who is or has been a Chief Justice of
India or a Judge of the Supreme Court: or is otherwise
qualified to be a  member of the Lokpal.”
Clause 4(1) – Selection Committee
NCPRI has stated that in the Selection committee five
out of nine members : the PM, the Speaker, the cabinet
minister and the two eminent persons would all be part
of/appointed by the central government.  This is not
Same as at Sl. No. I above
In the light of the duties and responsibilities
of the Lokpal, it is felt that a person with
judicial background would be more suitable
to hold the position of Chairman of Lokpal.
The proposed Selection Committee in the
Lokpal Bill, 2011 consists of people of
eminence with vast experience in public life.
Further, the Selection Committee, if it considers
necessary, may also set up a Search Committee
to assist in selection of the candidates

282
acceptable. Therefore, they have suggest that the selection
committee be a balance between the Government, the
opposition and the judiciary, as follows.
4. (1) The Chairperson and Members shall be appointed
by the President after obtaining the recommendations of
a Selection Committee consisting of-—
(a) the Prime Minister — chairperson;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People
— member;
(e) one sitting Judge of the Supreme Court to be nominated
by the Chief Justice of India — member;
Clause 4(3)
NCPRI has stated that the high powered selection
committees do not have the time to search out appropriate
candidates. Therefore, the final selection is invariable
decided by the dealing department which often puts before
the selection committee an inadequate and/or inappropriate
set of choices (as seem in the appointments of the CVC
and various information commissioners and chief
information commissioners). Therefore, they feel that there
must be a search committee, as follows:
Replace by:  (3)  The selection committee shall select out
of a panel of not less than three and not more than five
eligible candidates for each vacancy. This panel of eligible
candidates shall be finalised by a search committee set up
for the purpose; provided that the selection committee
can require the search committee to submit up to two
additional names for any vacancy, over and above those
initially suggested, if they so deem necessary.
The Lokpal Bill 2011 provides that the
Selection Committee may set up a Search
Committee to assist in selection of
candidates. The provisions provided in the
Bill appears to be adequate.
12 3 4

283
(a) The search committee shall comprise of five members
appointed by the selection committee.
(b) Members of the search committee would be selected
from among former:
i. Chief Justices of India
ii. Judges of the Supreme Court of India
iii. Comptroller and Auditor Generals of India
iv. Chief Election Commissioners of India
v. Chief Information Commissioners of India
vi. Former or outgoing Chief Lokpals (after the
appointment of the first Chief Lokpal)
vii. Former Lokpals (for appointment of Lokpals only)
Provided that not more than two members should
belong to anyone of the categories listed above.
Provided further that the following persons shall not
be eligible for becoming members of the search
committee:
i. Any person who has joined any political party.
ii. Any person who is still in the service of the
Government in any capacity
iii. Any person who took up a Government assignment
after retirement, barring those assignments which
are reserved for the post from which the person
retired.
(c) In addition, the search committee will consist of another
five members who would be selected by the five
members, appointed under (a) above, from among the
civil society and could include activists, academics,
journalists, professionals, etc.

284
(d) The search committee shall devise its own procedures to
develop a short list of names that could be considered
for recommending to the selection committee.
(e) The search committee shall put up on a website the
names and relevant details of all the candidates being
considered. The public would be given sufficient time
(not less than a month) to send in their views, if any,
pertinent to the candidature of any one or more of
these candidates, along with relevant material, if any.
(f) The search committee will compile all the comments
so received and, wherever it deems necessary, will
further investigate the comments about, or credentials
of, any of the candidates under consideration.
(g) Based on all this material, the search committee will
recommend not less than three and not more than five
names to the selection committee for each vacancy.
All the material received or considered by the search
committee in order to reach its final recommendation, as
well as the details and documents related to its own
proceedings, would be available for public scrutiny once
the relevant appointments have been made.
Clause 17(1)(g)
NCPRI is of the view that it is a draconian provision to
declare office bearers of NGOs and movements that do
not receive any Government funds as public servants.
Not only would this result in a huge amount of harassment
but also be impractical as such bodies are not bound by
Government rules and procedures, and cannot be held
It is felt that the organisations who are
receiving grants etc. from the Government
should be covered. Similarly, the NGOs which
are getting donations from the public, are
also getting tax relief, thereby, they are also
indirectly funded by the Government, it is
felt that those organisations which are set
up other than for religious purposes, and are
receiving public donations, should come
within the ambit of the Lokpal.
12 3 4

285
accountable to those. If any of these organisations violate
the existing laws relating to the management of funds
etc., there are adequate provision to prosecute them.
Therefore they have suggested to Delete 17(1)(g).
Clause 8(1)
NCPRI is of the view that the current provisions
compromise the independence of the Lokpal by giving the
Central Government various powers related to complaints
against members of the Lokpal. This is not desirable and
they propose that these powers and function be given
instead to the Supreme Court, as suggested below.
“8(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the
Chairperson or any other Member shall be removed from
his office by order of the President on grounds of
misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, on a complaint
made to it has, on inquiry, held in accordance with the
procedure prescribed in that behalf, advised that the
Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be,
ought to be removed on such ground.
8(2)  The President may suspend from office the
Chairperson or any other Member in respect of whom a
complaint has been made to the Supreme Court under
sub-section (1), if the Chief Justice of India so advises,
until the President has passed orders on receipt of the
report of the Supreme Court on such a complaint.”
Clause 40(2)
NCPRI has suggested to amend the given formulation as
follows:
The formulations proposed by NCPRI would
imply that anybody may complain against
the members of Lokpal directly to the
Supreme Court only. It is felt that the
provisions provided in the Lokpal Bill, 2011
are adequate to address the problem, as it is
provided that complaint can be addressed to
the President.
Section 8 of the Lokpal Bill 2011 provides
that the petitions from the citizens are to be
forwarded by the President to the Supreme
Court for an inquiry as per the prescribed

286
“40 (2) Any complaint against the Chairperson or Member
shall be made by an application by the party aggrieved, to
the Chief justice of India.
40 (3) The Chief Justice of India, on receipt of such a
complaint, shall constitute a committee which will examine
whether there exists a prima facie case for bias or
corruption and this committee shall advise the Chief
Justice on whether the complaint merits detailed
investigation. Where the committee advises the Chief
Justice of India that an investigation is merited, the CJI
may have the matter investigated.”
Clause 17(2)
NCPRI has termed the proposed provisions of Clause
17(2) as an unjustified exemption, but as its deletion
would involve amendment of the Constitution, it should
not be dropped at the, moment but there should be a
Government undertaking that it would appropriately move
Parliament with such a proposal for the amendment of
the Constitution within a year. For the moment, the
Lokpal bill could more faithfully reflect the constitutional
position as follows:
“17(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), the Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter in
respect of anything said or any vote given by him in
Parliament or any committee thereof.
Provided that this exemption applies only to the Members
of the Parliament while attending Parliament on the
floor of the House and/or in Parliament Committees
during session.”
procedure and report. It is felt the proposed
formulations in Section 40 are adequate to
deal with the complaints against the
Chairperson or Members of the Lokpal.
The Article 105 (2) of the Constitution, inter
alia, provides that no Member of Parliament
shall be liable to any proceedings in any
court in respect of anything said or vote
given by him in Parliament.
It is a matter for examination whether the
inquiry by the Lokpal in respect of anything
said or vote given by a Member of Parliament
would fall under the category ‘proceedings
before a court of law’. If  so, the MPs
would certainly have to be kept outside the
purview of the Lokpal.
12 3 4

287
Clause 41(2)
In keeping with the philosophy behind the independent
Lokpal that no institution should be solely responsible for
investigating and prosecuting its own officers in matters
related to corruption, NCPRI is of the view that it is only
appropriate if the Lokpal does not deal with corruption
complaints against its own officers. Therefore, an alternate
system is being suggested.
“41(2) :  The Lokpal shall refer the matter to the
Ombudsman appointed for the purpose by an independent
committee, who will complete the inquiry into the complaint
or allegation made, within a period of thirty days from
the date of its receipt. Towards this end, the Ombudsman
would be empowered to utilise the services of any
investigating agency with the central government or that
of the Lokpal.
In 41 (3) and 41(4) replace “Lokpal” with “Ombudsman”
appropriately.
Clause 21: Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.
NCPRl is of the view that this clause would give enormous
power to the chairperson, which could be used arbitrarily
to the detriment of justice or of members of the Lokpal.
They are of the view that this power needs to be qualified,
as below:
Clause 21. On an application for transfer made by the
complainant or the public servant, the Chairperson, after
The writer has not amplified the concept of
“Independent Committee” empowered to
appoint Ombudsman. However, the suggestion
implies that an Ombudsman ( i.e. Lokpal)
appointed under the Lokpal will look into the
complaint or allegations made against the
officer or employee of the Lokpal; thereby
the suggestion sounds to be contradictory.
The provisions provided in the Lokpal
Bill 2011 are sufficient to deal with the
complaints against the officers or employees
of Lokpal.
The provisions provided Section 21 of the
Lokpal Bill 2011 appears to be adequate.
There is no need to put any restrictions on
the Lokpal in this regard.

288
giving an opportunity of being heard to the complainant
or the public servant, as the case may be, may transfer
any case pending before one bench for disposal to any
other bench; provided that no such transfer would be
made unless the chairperson is satisfied that there are
good reasons to believe that the ends of justice could not
be met without such a transfer. Provided, further, that the
reasons for such a transfer must be, within a week of the
transfer being ordered, put into the public domain.
Clause 23 : Provisions relating to complaints and
inquiry and investigations.
NCPRI is of the view that there is no need to provide the
right of being heard to the accused at this stage, especially
as this is not provided under any other criminal procedure.
However, there is nothing to stop the Lokpal from hearing
an accused at any stage, if the Lokpal feels that this is
required in the interest of justice. This need not be a
statutory right of the accused. Therefore, they have
suggested to “Delete 23(4)”.
Clause 24: Inspection of documents
It must be ensured that the provision of this right does
not compromise the interests of “whistleblowers”, witnesses
and other vulnerable persons connected with the complaint
or the investigation. Therefore, they have suggested to
Add: Provided that where the complaint involves allegations
or information from a whistleblower or a witness who
wishes to have his identity protected, the Lokpal shall
ensure that advance notice is given to such whistleblower
and/or witness and they are given an opportunity of being
12 3 4
There appears to be no reason to deny the
opportunity of being heard to the public
servant at this stage.
The inquiries to be held under the Lokpal
would be public inquires. However, the Lokpal
may frame its rules and regulations to deal
with the complaints and such protection may
be provided by the Lokpal in its rules and
regulations. It is felt that there is no need to
specifically provide this provision in the
Lokpal Bill, 2011.

289
heard prior to the accused being given access to any
records: provided further that in no case would the identity
and/or witness be revealed without their prior consent in
writing.
Contempt Powers
Whereas the earlier ministerial draft of the Lokpal bill had
given the Lokpal ‘contempt powers’ in Section 31. This
section has been dropped from the bill introduced in the
Lok Sabha.
Whereas, we were not in favour of giving broad criminal
contempt powers to the Lokpal, and we even think that
those with the upper judiciary should be significantly
curbed, after dropping this section, it is unclear how the
Lokpal would ensure that its directions under this Act are
complied with. Therefore, some specific provisions should
be added for this, in the form of civil contempt powers.
Clause 38 : Special Courts
NCPRI has stated that whereas there must be a time
frame for the trial of cases, the law should not create a
situation where if there is a delay that becomes a basis
for the case being closed. Also, there must be some
adverse consequences on the judge responsible for
unreasonable delays. They have suggested that Clause
38(2) should be modified as follows:
“38 (2) The Special Courts constituted under sub-section
(1) shall ensure completion of each trial within a period
of one year from the date of filing of the case in the
Court:
Provided that in case the trial cannot be completed within
a period of one year, the Special Court shall record
The Lokpal would be exercising the police
powers. Therefore, it is felt that the contempt
powers may not be required for the Lokpal.
The condition that the trials are to be
completed within a maximum period of two
years do not imply that on that basis the
trial can be closed. The proposed provisions
in the Lokpal Bill 2011 appear to be adequate
and there is no need to make reference to
the High Courts where the trial cannot be
completed within the prescribed period of
two years.

290
reasons therefor and complete the trial within a further
period of not more than three months or such further
periods not exceeding three months each, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, before the end of each such three
month period, but ordinarily not exceeding a total period
of two years; provided that no case would be closed on
the basis of the trial not having been completed within
two years. However, wherever a trial continues beyond
two years, a mandatory reference would be made to the
High Court which shall examine the matter and pass such
directions as it might deem necessary to bring the trial to
an early conclusion and, where the High Court thinks it
appropriate, pass strictures against the trial judges(s).”
Clause 49: Prosecution for false complaints
This is a draconian provision, especially as it is impossible
to objectively define “frivolous” or “vexatious”. This would
strongly discourage most people from making any
complaints. Therefore, they have suggested to modify it
as follows:
“49(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
whoever makes any malafide and false complaint, with
malicious intent, under this Act, shall, on conviction, be
punished with fine which shall not be less than five
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.”
Clause 56: Legal Assistance.
Though this might be fair in order to ensure that the
innocent among the accused do not have to spend large
amounts of money that they cannot afford to defend
themselves against malicious or false allegations, this should
12 3 4
The intention of the provisions provided in
the Lokpal Bill 2011 is to discourage malafide
and false complaints.
This suggestion appears to be logical.

291
not end up subsidising the corrupt on public expense.
Therefore, NCPRI has suggested the following proviso
“Provided that where the accused is finally found guilty
of any of the charges made against him, by the special
court provided for in the Act, and subject to further
appeals, the accused would be requires to refund the total
cost of the assistance so provided. In exceptional
circumstances where the Lokpal so determines that the
recovery of such dues might result in unwarranted hardship
to the accused or his family, the amount can be adjusted
against confiscation of property as specified under sections
33 and 34.”
Covering the Private Sector
Add: (appropriately amend the PCA to include) Where
any private body, corporation or profit seeking entity
receives from any public authority any concession or
dispensation, including but not restricted to licences,
subsidies, contracts, orders, quotas, allocations, clearances,
grants, etc, that is in violation of the law or of any
prevailing rules, it would be deemed to have indulged in
corrupt practices unless it can show that it was
unreasonable to expect the corporation to know that a
law or a rule had been violated.
The Rashtriya Mukti Morcha has opposed the inclusion
of Prime Minister or judges of higher judiciary from the
ambit of Lokpal.
Clause 49 & 50 regarding prosecution for false
complaint and demand of compensation etc., to the
public servant; and false complaint made by the society
or association of persons or trust.
This is relating to widening the scope of the
definition of the corruption. This needs to
be examined separately.
The views of the Rashtriya Mukti Moarcha
are the same as that of the Government.
The apprehensions of the author are ill-
founded. The intention of incorporating
clause 49 and 50 provide for prosecution
for false complaints. It is felt that such
provisions are required to discourage false
complaints.
Rashtriya Mukti
Morcha, New Delhi
2.

292
The Rashtriya Mukti Morcha is of the view that these
provisions are very harsh in nature and are nothing but an
attempt to kill the messenger. It is further stated that
similar provisions exist in various Lokayuktas in various
states and that is the reason that citizens never approach
the Lokayuktas and just to register their presence
Lokayuktas initiated inquiry suo motto . It is further stated
that the proposed provision is nothing but a warning to
all the citizens not to peep into the dirty business of
corrupt people; keep mum and do not have courage to
question any questionable thing in the corrupt world. This
Lokpal is nothing but an attempt to provide safeguard to
the corrupt
The Jan Lokpal Bill prepared by Shri Anna Hazare and
team should be adopted in its present form and the Prime
Minister should be put under the purview of the Lokpal.
The writer has sent a chart depicting drafting errors of
the Bill.
Shri Ashok Kumar
Kakkar
Justice A.K.
Srivastava
No separate comments on Jan Lokpal Bill
are needed.
The drafting errors will be taken care of by
Legislative Department while finalizing the
final draft of the Bill.
12 3 4
3.
4.

293
COMMENTS OF DoPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of the Comments/Suggestions Comments of DOPT
No. Organisation/
individual
12 3 4
Shri Manoj Kumar,
National General
Secretary, All India
Community Health
Worker Association
(Regd.)
Clause 17
(i) Judiciary :
The Judiciary should be kept out of the ambit of
Lokpal. There should be constitution of a Judicial
Commission in consultation with the Supreme Court
or Judicial Accountability Act should be made for this
purpose.
(ii) Office of the Prime Minister:
There must be some Special circumstances under
which the office of the Prime Minister while he is
holding office, should be brought within the ambit of
Lokpal and these circumstances should specifically be
mentioned under section 2(1) of Chapter 4 and section
17(1) of Chapter 6 of the Lokpal Bill. In other matters,
office of the Prime Minister should be included in the
ambit of Lokpal after he demits his office.
(iii)Trust, Society, Organization, NGO:
Not in favour of keeping Trusts, Societies,
Organizations, NGOs in the ambit of Lokpal. However,
the organizations created for religious purposes and
receiving public donations as well as all Corporate
Institutions, Financial Companies, Trading & Business
Houses, Placement Agencies, Interest Mafias in cities
(i) Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is
already before the Parliament.
(ii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal
position in the Governments’ set up.
To ensure that Prime Minister is able
to discharge his functions without any
interference from any quarter, it is felt
that the Prime Minister may be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal.
However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(iii) The provisions made in clause 17 of
the Bill appear to be adequate. If lower
bureaucracy and other institutions
suggested by the author are also
brought within the purview of the
Lokpal, it will over burden the Lokpal.
5.

294
6.
12 3 4
Shri Ashok Arya, Dr.
Ambedkar Jan Sewak
Samaj, Lucknow
& small urban areas, Property Dealers and all officials in
Group “B” category should be brought within the
purview of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(i) Every citizen of the Country including the Prime
Minister, Chief Ministers, Members of Parliament,
Legislators, all Officials should be included within the
ambit of Jan Lokpal.
(ii) CBI be an independent Unit, but the appointment of
CVC should be made in consultation with the Prime
Minister, Opposition and Lokpal.
CLAUSE 32
(iii)Lokpal can use the CBI for investigating a matter.
CLAUSE 19
(iv) The Head Office of the Jan Lokpal should be located
in Delhi. There should be Up-Lokpal in the State
Capitals and a Assistant (Sahayak) Lokpal at the District
level so that corruption of the general public and
officials can be investigated easily and general public
can also lodge its complaints to the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 23-29
(v) The Lokpal should have power to investigate a case
of corruption against the Prime Minister and after
completion of enquiry, he should have power to make
request to the President to take further action in the
matter. The same process should be adopted in the
case of Chief Ministers also.
(i) Jurisdiction as provided in Clause 17
of the Bill is adequate. If all officials
are brought within the purview of
Lokpal, it will over burden it.
(ii) The Lokpal Bill do not provide for
putting CVC under Lokpal. The
Selection process of CVC is to be
followed as per the CVC Act.
(iii) Clause 32 of the Lokpal Bill provides
that the Lokpal may utilise services of
officers of Central or State Governments.
(iv) The Bill seeks to provide Lokpal at the
Centre and it may constitute Benches
which shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi.
[Clause 19]. At State level, the
concerned State Government has to
consider setting of Lokayuktas.
(v) The procedure for investigation has been
given in Clauses 23 to 29 of the Bill,
and it appears to be adequate.
(vi) This is beyond the scope of Lokpal.

2957. Shri Ajay Pratap
Singh (Sr. Teacher),
Dadri (Gautam Budh
Nagar), Uttar
Pradesh.
(vi) The following computer based technical measures
should be taken by the Lokpal to keep check on
corruption:
(a) Citizen Identification Card (CIC), on the lines of
A TM Card, containing details of the person
concerned, his family details as well as details
of his movable/immovable property, should be
issued to all the citizens of the country.
(b) All transactions of Rs.5000/- & above as well
as transactions of all movable/immovable property
should be allowed to be made through the CIC,
so that record of all these transactions is made
in the CIC account of the person concerned.
(c) The CIC account of all the citizens should be
investigated by the Lokpal/Up-Lokpal/Asstt.
Lokpal from time to time.
(i) 60% of the amount earned by corrupt means &
recovered should be transferred to the bank account
of the complainant secretly as a incentive and the
rest 40 % should be used to meet the expenses of
the Government.
(ii) Confidentiality of the complainant should be
maintained.
(iii) Constitution of the Lokpal Committee: There should
be Central & State level Lokpal Committees. In the
Central level Committee, there should be retired IAS,
IPS, PCS Officers and retired High Court/Supreme
Court Judges of impeccable integrity, holding office
in Lokpal Committee for period not more than five
years. There should a committee at the level of each
State
(i) The system of reward is not envisaged
under the Lokpal.
(ii) The Lokpal may frame its regulations
in this regard.
(iii) The concept of Lokpal Committee is
not clear.

296
12 3 4
Shri Om Prakash,
New Roshanpura
Extension, Najafgarh,
New Delhi.
8. (i) The Lokpal Bill should be made in consonance with
the provisions of the Constitution, without hurting
the Parliamentary system.
(ii) There should not be any political interest involved in
formulation of the Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) The conduct of Parliament should not be included
within the ambit of Lokpal.
(iv) The Judiciary should not be included within the
ambit of Lokpal. However, the Parliament should
ensure the accountability of the Judiciary.
(v) If the Offices of the Prime Minister and Chief
Minister are brought within the ambit of Lokpal,
then it should be ensured that this does not adversely
affect their efficiency and capacity to take policy
decisions for the general public as a whole or for
some specific sections of the society.
CLAUSE 23-29
(vi) Lokpal should have complete power to initiate action
against the Administration. He should have Judicial
powers as per the Constitution of India.
CLAUSE 49-50
(vii) Protection be given to the Complainant and there
should not be any penalty imposed against him.
CLAUSE 3 &  19
(viii) The appointment of Lokpal should be at the district,
state and centre level.
(i) The Lokpal Bill 2011 introduced in the
Parliament is in consonance with the
provisions of the Constitution.
(ii) The Lokpal Bill is being examined by
the Standing Committee.
(iii) The conduct of MPs on the floor of
the House is not within the purview of
Lokpal.
(iv) The Judiciary has not been included
within the purview of Lokpal.
(v) The Prime Minister will come under
the purview of Lokpal after he/she
demits the office. The office of Chief
Ministers would be covered under the
Lokayukta for which the Legislative
Assembly of the respective State will
have to take a decision.
(vi) As per the procedure prescribed in
Clauses 23 to 29, the Lokpal after the
investigations will file report with the
Special Courts and also send it to the
respective appointing authority for
further action in the matter.
(vii) Protection to complainant is part of the
Whistleblowers Bill. However, for false
complaints, provisions of Clause 49 and
50 would be applicable.
(viii) The structure as prescribed in Clause 3
and 19 appears to be adequate.

297
CLAUSE 4
(ix) The person appointed as Lokpal should not be a
citizen from the same region or union territory. He
should not ever be associated with any political
party. Should be acquainted with the Indian
Constitution, i.e. a lawyer of Supreme Court or a
High Court, having minimum 10 years’ experience
or a reputed Judge or an administrative officer of
impeccable integrity and outstanding ability.
CLAUSE 12
(x) All the top investigating agencies of the Country
should be independent of the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(i) Religious trusts, their trustees and custodian to be
brought under the ambit of Lokpal to ensure their
right to respose faith/trust with authenticity.
(ii) Assets of people which are beyond the scaling of
gambling should come under the scrutiny of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 28-29
(i) Officer/Politician found guilty in Investigations under
Lokpal/Lokayukta should go to jail within two years.
(ii) Lokpal/Lokayukta with complete powers to order
dismissal of a corrupt officer.
(ix) The Selection procedure as contained
in Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
(x) The Bill do not propose to bring any
investigating agency under the Lokpal.
However, Clause 12 of the Bill provide
that the Lokpal shall constitute an
Investigation Wing.
(i) The religious trusts are to be kept
outside the purview of Lokpal.
(ii) The Lokpal is not to do normal policing
functions. It will have to investigate
the allegations of corruption against
public servants.
(i)&(ii) After the investigations, the Lokpal
has to file a case in the Special Court and
also recommend to the competent authority
for initiation of disciplinary proceedings under
the relevant rules. [Clause 28 & 29].
9.
10.
Shri Umesh Babu,
South Patel Nagar,
New Delhi - 08
Honey Sharma,
honeysharma@gmail.com

298
CLAUSE 17
(iii) Lokpal/Lokayukta with powers to investigate and
prosecute any judge without needing anyone’s
permission
CLAUSE 23
(iv) Lokpal/Lokayukta with powers to enquire into and
hear every complaint.
(v) All investigations in Lokpal/Lokayukta should be
transparent and on probe of complain against any
staff of Lokpal/Lokayukta punishment to be
announced within two months.
CLAUSE 4
(vi) No interference of politicians in selections of
chairperson and members of Lokpal/Lokayukta.
(vii) Time bound redressal of public grievances.
CLAUSE 42
(viii) Provision for the recovery of loss from accused.
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART-II
(ix) Punishment should be minimum 5 years to maximum
life imprisonment.
(i) Establishment of Lokpal/Lokayukta with the criteria
given in Janlokpal bill V .1.8.
12 3 4
11.
(iii) The Judiciary is not under the purview
of Lokpal.
(iv) Clause 23 of the Bill provide for
investigation/inquiry by the Lokpal.
(v) Clause 23 of the Bill provide that the
Lokpal shall from time to time display
to the public the status of number of
complaints pending before it or disposed
of by it. Further, the Lokpal will
also come under the purview of RTI
Act, 2005.
(vi) The Selection process as given in Clause
4 appears to be adequate.
(vii) For redressal of public grievances, the
Government proposes to bring a
separate legislation before the Parliament.
(viii) Clause 42 provides for recovery of loss.
(ix) The punishment as prescribed in the
Bill appears to be adequate. The life
imprisonment appears to be harsh.
(i) The Lokpal Bill 2011 has been
introduced and the same may be
considered by the Parliament.
Ghumbre S.U., Asst.
Professor COEP,
Pune

299
(ii) The jurisdiction as provided in Clause
17 of the Bill appears to be adequate.
Further, if the lower bureaucracy is
also included it will over burden the
Lokpal.
(iii) The territorial jurisdiction of the Lokpal
extends to the whole of India and also
applies to public servants outside India.
(iv) This matter relates to protection to
Whistleblowers Bill.
(v) The quantum of the punishment has to
be decided by the Courts as prescribed
in the relevant laws.
(vi) Clause 42 of the Bill provides for
recovery of loss to exchequer.
(i) The Lokpal will be discharging quasi
judicial functions, therefore, the
Chairperson has to be from judiciary.
The provisions made in Clause 3 are
adequate.
(ii) This will violate Article 105(2). The
proposed formulation in the Bill is
necessary.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) Bottom to top procedure to be followed in Lokpal/
Lokayukta for smooth, efficient and transparent
handling of all public complaints.
CLAUSE 1
(iii) All Indians/NRIs/any person involved directly or
indirectly in any Govt. Organisation should come
under Lokpal/Lokayukta
(iv) Provision of efficient law for protection of
complainants against Public or Govt. servant.
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART-II
(v) Provision for more severe punishment, i.e. minimum
10 years for all cases and may be vary from person
to person.
CLAUSE 42
(vi) R ecovery from accused should start immediately
along with penalty cost (20% of recovery cost) and
expenditure cost towards investigation can be taken
from this fund.
The suggested amendments in Lokpal Bill 2011 are as
follows:–
(i) Clause 3(2) The lokpal shall consist of a Chairperson,
who is or has been A PERSON OF EMINENCE in
public administration, policy science, law, anti-
corruption policy, vigilance, finance, banking or
EMINENT JURIST
(ii) Clause 17(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section(l), the Lokpal MAY WITHOUT
PRJUDICE TO ANY ACT OR PROVISON CONT
AINED IN THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA,
inquire into any matter involved in, or arising against
any Member of either House of Parliament in respect
12. Dr. Anil Dev G, No.
38, 2nd Cross road,
loth block, Bdalayout,
Bangalore-72

300
of anything said or a vote given by him in Parliament
or any committee thereof covered under clause (2)
of article 105 of the Constitution.
(iii) Clause 32(1) the Lokpal may, for the purpose of
conducting any inquiry, ESTABLISH THROUGH
NOTIFICATION IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE AN
INDEPENDENT TEAM OF INVESTIGATORS AND
OFFICERS RECRUITTED BY THE UPSC CIVIL
SERVICES EXAMINATION AND ACCONTABLE TO
LOKPAL ALONE OR IN CASE OF SHORTFALL
utilise the services of any officer or investigation
agency of the Central/State Govt. as the case may
be.
(iv) Clause 54. The Lokpal shall not inquire or investigate
into any complaint after the expiry of Fifteen (15)
years of the offence.
(i) In Clause 3 Sub Clause (1) 'arrest and prosecution',
as per code of criminal procedure to be in inserted.
(ii) In Clause 3 Sub Clause (a) and (b)  at least 5
instead of 4 judicial members.
(iii) In Clause 3 Sub Clause (a) Audit, Accounts and
taxation fields to be added.
12 3 4
(iii) Clause 12 of the Bill provide for setting
up of Investigation Wing by the Lokpal.
The Clause 32 of the Bill provide for
utilisation of services of officers of
Central or State Government.
(iv) The limitation period as proposed in
Clause 54 appears to be reasonable.
(i) Clause 28 and 29 of the Bill provides
that after investigations, the Lokpal, if
the findings disclose the commission
of offence, will file a case in the Special
Court. The existing formulation of
Clause 3(1) appears to be adequate.
(ii) The Bill provides for maximum of 50%
of the Members to be Judicial
Members, and it appears to be adequate
[Clause 3(2)(b)]
(iii) The clause no. given by the author
appears to be incorrect. As far as
Judicial Members are concerned, they
13. Andrew D’ Silva,
dsilvaandrew@yahoo.
com

301
have to be with judicial background
[Clause 3(3)(a)]. For otherMembers, the
formulation given in Clause 3(3)(b)
appears to be adequate.
(iv) The suggestion would imply that a large
number of persons would become
ineligible for appointment as Lokpal. The
provision proposed in the Bill [sub
clause (4) of Clause 3] appears to be
adequate.
(v) The composition of Selection Committee
as given in Clause 4 appears to be
adequate.
(vi) The appointment procedure proposed
in the Bill is adequate [Clause 4]
(vii) The provisions as contained in Clause 8
of the Bill which deals with the removal
of the Chairperson or any Member of
Lokpal appear to be adequate.
(viii) Clause 5 of the Bill provides the President
to take action to fill up the vacancies of
Chairperson or Members of Lokpal, and
this seems to be adequate.
(ix) The Special Courts are to be set up by
the Central Government as recommended
by the Lokpal [Clause 38]
(iv) In Clause 3 Sub Clause (4) – Chairperson or
Lokpal member shall not be a member of any political
party for the past 15 years.
CLAUSE 4
(v) In the selection committee of Lokpal, the leader of
opposition, Home Minister and Cabinet Secretary
should be replaced with C & AG of India, President
of Bar Council of Supreme Court, President of
Institute of Chartered Accounts if India or Attorney
General of India.
(vi) Appointment of chairperson of Lokpal by its members
only without any Govt. interference.
CLAUSE 8
(vii) The removal of chairperson by Lokpal only with the
majority of not less than 7 members of Lokpal
Bench and in case of removal of member not less
than 5 members.
CLAUSE 5
(viii) The lokpal/committee shall make an arrangement to
fill the vacancy of Lokpal not the President.
Chairperson or member of Lokpal ceases his office
on completion of 5 years term.
CLAUSE 38
(x) Provision for Lokpal jury/Special courts under Lokpal
at every state capital and District Headquarters along
with provision of appeal in SC for aggrieved party

302
and SC order is final. Lokpal jury/Spl. courts should give
its decision within 6 months with the 30 days appeal
time in SC.
CLAUSE 17
(x) All ministers including PM, all public servants
including Cabinet Secretary except peon and clerk,
employees of PSUs, National Banks except peons
and clerks and all judicial members of courts upto
High Court except Supreme Court.
CLAUSE 28, 29 & 42
(xi) Dismissal of guilty from service and all his assets
amassed through corruption to be attached by Lokpal
and to be credited into Consolidated Fund of India.
Permanent bar from Elections and Public Office and
imprisonment as per quantum of corruption.
(xii) Disqualification of guilty MP/Minister with permanent
bar from contesting elections and holding public
office and other procedure as mentioned in (xi).
(xiii) Clause 55  – “except Supreme Court of India” to
inserted. All special courts shall be subordinate to
SC.
(x) The jurisdiction as provided in Clause
17 of the Bill is adequate.
(xi) On completion of investigations, if the
findings disclose commission of offence,
the Lokpal shall file a case in the Special
Court and also recommend to
competent authority to initiate
disciplinary proceedings under the
applicable rules [Clause 28 and 29].
Further, loss to the exchequer is also
recoverable under Clause 42.
(xii) Based on the report of the Lokpal, the
competent authority shall examine it and
communicate to the Lokpal the action
taken or proposed to be taken on the
basis of the report [Clause 29].
(xiii) The suggestion is not clear. However,
the hierarchical structure of the judiciary
will have to be followed.
12 3 4

303
(i) In the Jan Lokpal Bill of Shri Anna Hazare, the
legislature, executive and the judiciary are included
within the ambit of Lokpal, which is undesirable and
dangerous for the future of this country.
(ii) “Public Hearing” as mentioned in the Jan Lokpal Bill
is not desirable.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) The Prime Minister should not be included within
the ambit of Lokpal.
(iv) Lower bureaucracy should not be included within
the ambit of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 3
(v) There should be three separate institutions of Lokpal,
one for legislature, one for executive and one for
judiciary.
CLAUSE 17
(vi) The conduct of MPs and Legislative Members within
the Parliament/Legislative Assemblies should not be
included within the ambit of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(i) The Prime Minister is the part of the Council of
Ministers as its head. Since the Ministers of the
Union Cabinet are included within the ambit of Lokpal,
the Prime Minister should also be included within
the ambit of Lokpal.
(i) Since the Lokpal Bill, 2011 has already
been introduced, the same may be
considered by the Parliament.
(ii) The hearings of the cases are to held
as per the judicial norms in the matter.
(iii) In the Lokpal Bill, 2011, after the Prime
Minister demits the office, he/she will
come under the purview of the Lokpal.
(iv) The Lokpal Bill 2011 does not include
the lower bureaucracy within the ambit
of Lokpal.
(v) The structure of Lokpal as given in
Clause 3 appears to be adequate. For
judiciary, a separate Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is already under the
consideration of the Parliament. And
for the legislature and the executive,
the proposed Bill seems to be adequate.
(vi) The proposed Bill does not include the
conduct of MPs on the floor of the
House [Clause 17(2)], as it will violate
the provision of Article 105(2) of the
Constitution.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal
position in the Governments' set up.
To ensure that Prime Minister is able
to discharge his functions without any
interference from any quarter, it is felt
that the Prime Minister may be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal.
14.
15.
Shri Santosh Kumar,
Sant090975@gmail.
com
Shri Prahladrai L.
Avasatthi

304
(ii) Independence of the Judiciary should be maintained
and there should be a separate authority to deal with
the corruption of higher judiciary.
(iii) There are many service cadres under IT, CBI,
Passport offices, Railways, Air Ports and so many
others where the case of corrupt practices in
subordinate services may also arise. So there has to
be an authority of Lokayukta status for dealing with
corruption cases of central subordinate services
because the State Lokayuktas have jurisdiction only
within State services and its PSUs.
(iv) Conduct and actions of MPs within the Parliament
should be included within the ambit of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 4
(i) Selection Committee for Chairman and Members of
Lokpal institution should include elected Members of
Parliament. There should not be any NRI member.
Minimum Qualification should be fixed. There honesty
and integrity should be judged before appointment.
Right to appoint/remove or punish for any misconduct
of the members and Chairman of Lokpal institution
should be with Parliament.
(ii) CLAUSE 17: All the Heads of Educational Institutions
(Private/Government), Private/Government Industries
including Contractors, Social, Educational, Religious
However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(ii) For judiciary, a separate Judicial
Standards Accountability Bill is before
the Parliament.
(iii) The Lokpal Bill 2011 proposes to cover
all the Central institutions and all Group
‘A’ and above officers are covered.
For the States, the institution of
Lokayukta is to be set up by the
concerned State Legislature. Therefore,
the jurisdiction as provided in Clause
17 is adequate.
(iv) The proposed Bill does not include the
conduct of MPs on the floor of the
House [Clause 17(2)], as it will violate
the provision of Article 105(2) of the
Constitution.
(i) The Selection Committee as proposed
in Clause 4 of the Bill appears to be
adequate.
(ii) The public servants as covered by
Clause 17 of the Bill will be within the
purview of the Lokpal.
16. Shri Rajesh Verma,
Kapurthala (Punjab)
12 3 4

305
Trusts, etc., Government offices and all other
Organizations (Private/Govt.), where money/properties
are involved, should be covered under Lokpal Bill.
President, Prime Minister, Chief Justice of India
should be excluded from preview of Lokpal.
(iii) Nationalization of religious institutions, temples and
Ashrams etc. to abolish corruption: All these
institutions should be nationalized. Priest/Pujari and
other officials should be appointed by Government.
Money/property of the Institutions should be utilized
by Govt. for developing public utility infrastructure,
children's education, etc.
(iv) Ceiling of Wealth to prevent corruption: Money/
property having value more than five crores of
individuals should be acquired by Government, as
unlimited possession of wealth by individuals is a
main cause of corruption. Ceiling limit of wealth
may be revised as per inflation on annual basis.
(v) Minimum wages of labourers should be fixed @
Rs.2000/- per day. It should be revised as per inflation
on half yearly basis as in case of Govt. employees.
Person violating these rules should be treated as
corruption under Lokpal.
She has submitted a version of Lokpal Bill, which is same
as that of Civil Society’s version of the Jan Lokpal Bill,
for consideration of the Committee.
CLAUSE 4
(1) The Selection Committee should be chaired by Speaker
of Lok Sabha and the Prime Minister should a
member of the Committee.
(2) The Composition of the Selection Committee should
be
(iii), (iv) & (v)  These are beyond the scope
of Lokpal.
Since the Lokpal Bill, 2011 has already been
introduced, the same may be considered by
the Parliament.
1. The selection process proposed in
Clause 4 of the Bill appears to be
adequate.
2. This appears to be a vague.
Ms. Sanjana Agarwal,
Sanjana@newslaundry.
com
Shri Amit Banerjee
17.
19.

306
(a) three members including Chairman from judiciary;
(b) three members from Parliament;
(c) three members from administration
(d) three members either from the upper house or
from the lower house to be decided by members
of Both the Houses.
CLAUSE 3
(3) No sitting ministers should be considered for election
of the members of the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 4(3)
(4) If needed the Search Committee should be headed
by Cabinet Secretary.
CLAUSE 8
(5) Regarding removal of Chairperson or any member
the author has suggested that any resident, any
citizen of India can give complaint before the
Selection Committee for removal of Selection
Committee Members/removal of Lokpal and after
due consideration if the Selection Committee deem
fit with the majority opinion can recommend the
removal and the President should abide by such
recommendation.
(1) Jan Lokpal Bill for the Centre and Lokayukta for the
State be made compulsory.
CLAUSE 17
(2) All MPs, office bearers of trusts, NGGs, Contractors,
Prime Ministers, Chief Judges of Supreme Court,
Ministers, Central Government officers and employees
be brought under Jan Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 3
(3) The Jan Lokpal office bearers must be double
graduate and not above 65 years of age. Prime
Minster, Speaker of Lok Sabha, Chairman of Rajya
12 3 4
20. Shri Mallikarjun
Biradar
3. As per Clause 3(4) of the Lokpal Bill,
the Chairperson and Members shall not
be an MP or MLA.
4. Already the provision exists in the
Lokpal Bill 2011 to form suitable Search
Committee.
5. The Bill provides for making a complaint
to the President, and it is felt that the
existing provisions are adequate.
1. India Against Corruption has also
submitted a copy of the Jan Lokpal Bill
to the Standing Committee.
2. to 8. The provisions provided in the Bill
to deal with these matters are adequate.

307
Sabha, opposition party members, Chief Justices of
Supreme Court, Chief Justice of High Court have to
recommend the names of the officer bearers.
(4) Lokpal has to express views in writing why they
agree/not agree to receive the complaints.
(5) Prime Minster and Chief Justice of Supreme Court
be exempted from attending the hearing of Lokpal
sitting.
CLAUSE 23-29
(6) Complaint to be disposed off within six months on
day-today basis hearing and the appellate authority
must dispose off the appeal within three months.
CLAUSE 49-50
(7) For false complaint the complainant to be punished
for rigorous imprisonment of minimum one year.
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART -II
(8) If the charges are proved minimum imprisonment of
two years and maximum of 20 years and also
attachment of property acquired through corrupt
means.
1. Clause 2(d) – the complaint should be on a plain
paper by ordinary personnel.
2. Clause 2 (i) – In the definition of Ministers, Prime
Minister should be included. The writer has also
suggested to include judiciary.
3. Clause 17(a) – Prime Minister should be included
and that Government officers from top to bottom
should be covered. The author has also suggested
that for religious trusts also rules and regulations be
framed.
4. Clause 19(e) – The author has suggested that for
sittings of benches of the Lokpal if it is hearing the
21. Shri G.P. Singh 1. The rules are to be framed by the
Lokpal in this regard.
2. The existing provisions are adequate.
3. The existing jurisdiction provided in the
Lokpal Bill 2011 is adequate. It is
beyond the scope of Lokpal to frame
rules for religious trusts.
4. Judiciary is not covered by the Lokpal
Bill.

308
5. In the interest of natural justice, it is
necessary to provide an opportunity to
the public servant of being heard.
6. Lokpal may frame rules in this regard.
7. On a complaint, after investigation, the
Lokpal files a report in the Special
Court.
8. Lokpal has powers to provisionally
attach the property of the accused and
the proposed provisions appear to be
adequate.
9. For false complaints, action has to be
taken even if the complainant is an
individual to deter false and motivated
complaints only filed to harass the
public servants. But, DOPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
10. The existing provisions are adequate.
12 3 4
case against judicial officials, it should be chaired by
non-judicial.
5. Clause 23(11) – The author is opposed to provide
an opportunity to the public servant of being heard
before filing the charge sheet.
6. Clause 23 (12)  – It is suggested that the name of
the complainant should not be disclosed if the
complainant so desires.
7. Clause 28(1)  – The author has suggested that the
Lokpal should have right to file FIR in serious
cases.
8. Clause 33  – The author has suggested that
attachment of assets should happen immediately or
at least freezing orders should come on receipt of
complaint.
9. Clause 49 & 50  – No action should be taken
against the complainant if the complainant is
individual. However, if the complainant is a society,
trust or association of persons and it is established
with such act was politically motivated, mischievous
to dent the reputation of public servant, punitive
action may be taken.
10. Individual should also be given the help to fight the
case and Public servant should be refunded the legal
expenses only when he comes clear.

309
11. Clause 54  – There should not be a limitation period
for inquiry of case for Lokpal. However, there should
be monetary limit for the case to be tried by Lokpal.
CLAUSE 42
12. The corporate houses benefited by existing corruption
should also be covered.
CLAUSE 4
13. The Lokpal to have maximum two Government
recommended officers and the rest from other centres
which are totally independent i.e. judiciary, CAG ,
Civil Society recommended, people of high moral
values and integrity. Government interference should
be minimal.
14. The punishment should be based on the gravity of
seriousness of the case.
CLAUSE 42
15. Loss is to be recovered by attachment of property.
CLAUSE 17
16. The public servant should include the Prime Minister,
Member of Parliament; Government aided NGO and
public undertakings.
17. CBI, CVC and other such investigating agencies
should be under the Lokpal. Like Supreme Court,
High Courts, District Courts, the Lokpal should also
be divided into three levels to deal with public servants
and the complaints pouring in.
11. It is felt that there should be limitation
period; hence the provision has been
made in the Bill.
12. The corporate houses are also liable for
recovery of loss to the exchequer caused
in connivance with the convicted public
servant. (Clause 42).
13. The suggestion is not clear. However, it
may be stated that the Selection
Committee as proposed in the Bill is
quite representative of different strata
of society. [Clause 4]
14. The punishment is always as per the
gravity of the case would be decided
by the Special Court.
15. Clause 42 of the Bill provides for this.
16. The jurisdiction as provided in the Bill is
adequate. [Clause 17]
17. In the Bill it is proposed that the Lokpal
will have its own Investigation Wing
and Prosecution Wing (Clause 12-15) .
The, Therefore, there is no need to put
CBI, CVC under the Lokpal. Clause
19 of the Bill provides for setting up of
Benches by the Lokpal.

310
CLAUSE 3
(1) Lokpal should consist of Chairman plus two Members.
(2) The CVC and CBI should be under the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(3) No public functionary including Prime Minister should
be kept out of the purview of the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 27
(4) Sanction of approval under Cr.PC and IPC should
not be required in the case of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 30
(5) Lokpal should be conferred with power of search
and seizure of both the civil and criminal courts.
CLAUSE 33-34
(6) Lokpal should be empowered to attach any property
acquired by corrupt means to prevent its alienation.
CLAUSE 54
(7) The period of limitation should extend to 10 years.
(8) The investigation team should be enhanced
substantially.
1. Keeping in view the nature of functions
to be performed by the Lokpal, the
composition as proposed in the Bill is
necessary.
2. Lokpal will have its own Investigation
Wing and Prosecution Wing (Clause 12-
15). Therefore, there is no need to put
CBI, CVC under the Lokpal.
3. Jurisdiction as provided in the Bill is
adequate.[Clause 17]
4. Clause 27 already provides that no
previous sanction will be required for
investigation/prosecution by Lokpal.
5. Clause 30 of the Bill provides such
powers.
6. Clause 33 and 34 of the Bill provide
provision for attachment of property.
7. The proposed provisions are adequate.
[Clause 54]
8. The suggestion is not clear. However,
the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing [CLAUSE 12]
22. Shri Nagesh Kini
12 3 4

311
CLAUSE 16
(9) The charge of expenses of the Lokpal should be
only on the consolidated fund.
CLAUSE 32
(10) Lokpal should be empowered to draw upon the
service of any Central or State Government officials
without having to obtain the consent of the State
Governments.
CLAUSE 35
(11) Lokpal’s order for transfer or suspension shall not
be recommendations but final and conclusive.
CLAUSE 38
(12) The Lokpal should be empowered to constitute fast
track courts to hear and decide cases within six
months.
CLAUSE 47
(13) All public functionaries should compulsorily declare
their assets and liabilities and failure to do so should
be considered as serious criminal offence.
CLAUSE 49-50
(14) The punishment for frivolous and vexatious complaints
should be RI for as long as five years not subject
to appeal in any court of law.
CLAUSE 17: It is suggested that the officers of public
institutions should also be brought within the ambit of the
Bill. Institutions which necessarily bound to have
Government funding to have Government shareholding
directly or indirectly or through other PSUs have also a
crucial role to play in public accountability and these
should also be brought under the purview of the Lokpal.
23. Shri S. Ramanathan
9. Clause 16 of the Bill already provides
for the same.
10. The provisions provided in Clause 32
are adequate.
11. The provisions provided in Clause 35
are adequate as it is felt appointing
authority must have control.
12. Clause 38 of the Bill provides for setting
up of Special Court by the Central
Government on the recommendation of
Lokpal.
13. Clause 47 of the Bill provides for
declaration of assets by public servants
and the provisions made appear
adequate.
14. Provisions to deal with the false
complaints as contained in Clause 49
and 50 are adequate.
Clause 17 of the Bill provides the jurisdiction
of the Lokpal and it appears to be adequate.

312
CLAUSE 17
(1) Lokpal should inquire into the conduct of MPs on
the floor of the House.
(2) It should look into the malpractice of NGO, media
and other private bodies like hospital.
(3) Maximum punishment for corrupt should be limited
to 10 years but should extend to life imprisonment
and death for big scam.
(4) Prime Minister should be within the ambit of the
Lokpal.
(5) Judiciary should be under the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 31
(6) Civil court’s power should be given to the Lokpal.
(7) Judicial Accountability Bill should be passed by the
Government at the earliest.
(8) Each department should have Citizen’s Charter for
grievance redressal giving timeline.
24. Shri Prasad
12 3 4
1. The proposed Bill does not include the
conduct of MPs on the floor of the
House [Clause 17(2)], as it will violate
the provision of Article 105(2) of the
Constitution.
2. Clause 17 of the Bill defines the
jurisdiction of the Lokpal which appears
to be adequate.
3. The punishment is to be awarded
by the Special Court as per the PC
Act, 1988.
4. It is felt that the Prime Minister should
be within the ambit of Lokpal after he/
she has demitted the office.
5. For Judiciary, Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is already before the
Parliament.
6. Clause 31 of the Bill provides for
powers of Civil court in certain cases.
7. This is a separate Bill which is being
examined by the Standing Committee.
8. For grievance redressal, Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances are in the process of
introducing a separate Bill in the
Parliament.

313
CLAUSE 16
(9) Lokpal budget should be charged from the
consolidated fund of India and independent of
Ministry of Finance for its financial independence.
(10) Lokpal should be given phone tapping powers.
CLAUSE 40
(11) Complaint against Lokpal should be handled by an
independent authority which should include bench
comprising retired Chief Justice of India as its
Chairman and other competent Supreme Court judges.
CLAUSE 23
(12) Lokpal should have suo motto  powers to investigate
matters.
CLAUSE 19
(13) Lokpal should have hierarchy structure like Centre –
State – District – Village – so that issue of different
regions can be tackled at this level itself.
(14) The Parliament should decide whether or not to
remove officer through appropriate procedure like
discussion and voting of 2/3 members present voted
against the officer and seek removal of officer from
service.
CLAUSE 17
(15) All the public servant should come under the ambit
of Lokpal and there should not be any exclusion.
(16) Whistleblower protection can be carried out in a
separate law as Whistleblower Protection Bill has
been passed recently.
9. Clause 16 of the Bill already provides
for the same. However, the demands
have to be routed through Ministry of
Finance.
10. This is beyond the scope of Lokpal.
11. The provisions made in Clause 40 of
the Bill are adequate.
12. The provisions in Clause 23 regarding
complaints and inquiry are adequate.
13. Clause 19 provides for Benches of the
Lokpal, and the provision appears to be
adequate.
14. The suggestion appears to be ambiguous
and not practicable.
15. The jurisdiction as provided in Clause
17 is adequate.
16. A separate Bill for protection to
Whistleblowers had been introduced in
Parliament. The recommendation of the

314
Standing Committee of Parliament is under
consideration.
17. The Selection procedure provided in
the Bill (Clause 4) is adequate.
18. The suggestion appears to be not
practicable. The procedure provided in
Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
1. Same as provided in the Lokpal Bill
2011.
2. There appears to be no need to make
a particular age group only eligible for
appointment as Chairperson.
3. The suggestion for appointment of
Chairperson is not practicable. Further
the eligibility conditions of persons to
be appointed as Chairperson and
Members of Lokpal as contained in
Clause 3 of the Bill are adequate.
4. The term of two years for Lokpal is
too short a period.
5. & 6. The suggestion is not practicable.
25. Shri Manish Kapoor
12 3 4
CLAUSE 4
(17) Selection of Lokpal Member can be carried out
through panel comprising of legislators, judiciary,
civil society, media and bureaucrats.
(18) The selection of members should be through voting
and members will chose chairperson among
themselves through voting.
CLAUSE 3
(1) Lokpal should consist of Chairman plus eight
members.
(2) The Chairperson should be a citizen of India and the
age should not be less than 50 years and not more
than 65 years.
(3) Appointment of Chairperson will be through election
and the Government servant, Member of Parliament,
Member of Legislative Assembly, Zila Parishad,
Panchayats or elected/appointed member of any
constitutional institution or person who is getting
remuneration from the Government or a member of
arm forces of India and also any person who is a
member of any political party in about last 15 years
from the date, of nomination should not be eligible.
CLAUSE 6
(4) The term of office of Chairperson and Lokpal shall
be two years from the date on which he enters
upon his office and shall not be eligible for re-
appointment.
(5) The selection of Chairperson should be through the
process of election by the Members of Parliament.

315
The Chairperson can be removed through the process of
impeachment on a complaint made to Supreme Court
of India.
(6) The elected Chairperson according to his discretion
can appoint any citizen of India as member of Lokpal.
Such member should not be less than 50 years and
not more than 65 years of age and must be a legal
practioner, Chartered Accountant ore retired judge
from any judicial court of India. The Chairman can
remove any member of Lokpal with the consent of
five members.
CLAUSE 23
(7) Any person who is citizen of India or organization
working within the territorial limits of India can file
a complaint with the Lokpal.
FUNCTIONS & POWERS OF LOKPAL:
CLAUSE 3
(8) The Chairperson of Lokpal shall appoint all eight
Lokpal but no investigation shall be conducted by
the Chairperson.
(9) Every appeal against the order or decision made
against the Lokpal shall before the Chairperson.
CLAUSE 23-29
(10) All eight Lokpals shall have powers to hear complaint,
take cognizance, lodge FIR and start investigation
against any person who comes under this Act. The
Investigating Officer shall work as an agent of the
Lokpal.
CLAUSE 12-15
(11) Every Lokpal shall have power to appoint the
Investigating Officer, other members to investigating
team and judge of special court and public prosecutor
as deemed fit for the case.
7. The complaint can be filed by anybody.
8. The structure of Lokpal given in Clause
3 is adequate.
9. This will concentrate all powers at one
place.
10. The provisions as contained in Clause
23 to 29 are adequate.
11. & 12. The Lokpal Bill 2011 provides for
setting up of Investigation Wing and
Prosecution Wing (Clause 12-15). There
is no merit in the suggestion.

316
(12) Lokpa1 can conduct investigation and appoint
investigating officer, public prosecutor and special
judges. But no Lokpa1 shall have any punitive
powers.
CLAUSE 17
(13) The Lokpa1 can inquire against any public servant,
judiciary, and members of armed forces. No person
or organization can be inquired into by Lokpal which
is not getting any aid, grant, salary, allowances or
remuneration from any Government or institution
which falls under the definition of Government.
CLAUSE 31
(14) The Lokpal can compel any person within the
territorial limits of India following the procedure to
compel appearance before the Lokpal.
(15) No Chief Minister, Prime Minister, judges of High
courts and the Supreme Court of India, Election
Commissioners can be compelled to appear before
the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 26
(16) The Lokpal can compel any person within the
territorial limits of India or outside India to produce
the evidence before the Lokpal following the
procedure as prescribed in Chapter VII and Chapter
VII-A Section 91 to 105L  of the Cr.PC, 1973.
CLAUSE 23-29
(17) On the basis of available evidence and information a
member of Lokpal including Chairperson can take
cognizance of offence related to corruption.
(18) No FIR shall be lodged against the Prime Minister,
any Chief Minister or any Governor without the
approval of Supreme Court of India.
12 3 4
13. The jurisdiction of Lokpal as contained
in Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.
14. Clause 31 of the Bill provides such
powers to Lokpal.
15. No such specific provision is made in
the Lokpal Bill, 2011. However, the
Prime Minister during his/her tenure as
Prime Minister and the Judiciary is not
within the ambit of Lokpal.
16. Powers of Lokpal for furnishing
information are provided in Clause 26,
which appear to be adequate.
17. to 19. The procedure in respect of
inquiry and investigations is provided in
Clause 23 to 29, and appears to be
adequate.

317
(19) No FIR shall be lodged against any judge of Supreme
Court of India or High Courts without the approval
of the President of India.
CLAUSE 12
(20) The Lokpal shall appoint the investigating officer and
the post shall be filled by the person who is working
with any State or central investigative agency or
police who shall not be less than the rank of Sub-
Inspector. Any serving police officer appointed or
equal to the rank of ACP or above in any State
Government or Union Territory shall not be appointed
as an investigating officer.
(21) No Government can remove/ suspend/ dismiss or
call back any officer working under the Lokpal or
appointed as investigating officer.
CLAUSE 32
(22) Lokpal can also appoint any person working with
the Indian armed or para military forces as a rank
of equal to sub-inspector or above as investigating
officer.
(23) Lokpal can remove/suspend and start criminal
investigation against any investigating officer.
(24) The person who has been serving as a Judicial
Magistrate of first class or Metropolitan Magistrate
for at least five years or a Sessions Judge or an
Additional Sessions Judge or an Assistant Sessions
Judge can be appointed as a Special Judge by the
Lokpal.
20. As per Clause 12, the Lokpal will have
its own Investigation Wing.
21. Deputation and disciplinary matters of
the officers and employees on
deputation will have to be done as per
the extant rules.
22. Services of Central and State
Government can be utilised by the
Lokpal as per provisions of Clause 32.
23. Lokpal may take action against its
officers and staff as per Clause 42 of
the Bill for offences punishable under
the PC Act, 1988. For other matters,
the extant service rules are to be
followed.
24. to 26 The Special Courts are set up by
the Central Government as per the
extant rules on the subject.

318
(25) Chairperson can also appoint a legal practitioner having
20 years experience of court.
(26) Every judge appointed by the Lokpal shall be deemed
equal to the rank of Sessions Judge.
CLAUSE 15
(27) The Lokpal may appoint any legal practitioner as a
public prosecutor who has at least 15 years
expenence.
CLAUSE 23-29
(28) No accused shall be arrested by the Lokpal or
investigating officer during the investigation unless
he denies joining the investigation.
CLAUSE 33-34
(29) No property shall be attached by the Lokpal except
the property which can be produced as evidence
before the special court.
CLAUSE 35
(30) No recommendation can be made by the Lokpal to
suspend or transfer a person against whom the
investigation is on unless it proves potential threat of
the distraction or temper with the evidence by the
accused.
CLAUSE 21
(31) The Lokpal can transfer any case in any court
established under this Act anywhere in India.
CLAUSE 28. 29 & 42
(32) Upon conviction the Lokpal may punish the accused
with imprisonment for a period which may extend
12 3 4
27. Clause 15 of the Bill provides for setting
up of Prosecution Wing by the Lokpal.
28. Investigation procedure as provided in
Clause 23 to 29 is to be followed.
29. The property can be attached as per
the provisions of Clause 33 and 34.
30. Provisions as provided in Clause 35
regarding transfer or suspension of
public servants are adequate.
31. This has to be done as per Clause 21.
32. After completion of investigation, the
Lokpal has to sent report to competent

319
for life imprisonment and with fine which may extend
ten times of the value of the assets which are
received in the form of bribe or gratification.
(33) Anyone found guilty under the provision of this Act
shall be immediately dismissed from the post and no
bail shall be granted by any court to that person.
CLAUSE 1
(34) The Lokpal can investigate any case of corruption
anywhere in India.
CLAUSE 54
(35) No case shall be investigated by the Lokpal after
passing of 10 years after commission of alleged
offence.
CLAUSE 4
1. The Lokpal should be elected/selected by a team
where Government representatives are not in majority.
2. For false complaints, the punishment should be penalty
of Rs.500/- to a maximum of Rs.5,000/-
CLAUSE 42. 33 & 34
3. On conviction, the accused should be punished with
minimum of 6 months and maximum life
imprisonment along with attachment of property
acquired through corrupt means.
4. The convicted person should be debarred for ever
from contesting any elections or joining Govt. service.
authority and if required, file a report
with the Special Courts. [Clause 28 &
29]. Further as per Clause 42, the loss
to exchequer can also be recovered
from the convicted public servant and
other beneficiaries.
33. Action for dismissal has to be taken by
the competent authority on the basis of
the report of the Lokpal. [Clause 28
& 29]
34. The territorial jurisdiction of the Lokpal
extends to whole of India and also to
public servants outside India.
35. The limitation as provided in Clause 54
is adequate.
1. The Bill provides for elaborate selection
mechanism.
2. Clause 49 and 50 provide for
punishment for false complaints.
However, if deterrent punishment is not
imposed, it may lead to a large number
of false complaints. But, DOPT is open
to suggestions in this regard.
3. The maximum imprisonment of life
term is too harsh. The Bill already
provide for recovery of loss and
attachment of ill gotten property (Clause
42, 33 and 34)
4. This is a matter to be examined as part
of electoral reforms.
26. Dr. Ashok Gupta
C-168, Lohia Nagar,
Ghaziabad 201001
dr.ashok.ghaziabad@
gmail.com

320
12 3 4
CLAUSE 17
5. The Lokpal should have jurisdiction over all public
servants from Patwari to Prime Minister.
6. The conduct of Members of Parliament on the floor
of the House should be within the purview of Lokpal.
7. Except Supreme Court, the remaining judiciary should
be within the purview of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 3
8. The eligibility criteria for selection of the Lokpal
should be as suggested in the Jan Lokpal Bill.
9. The CBI and similar institutions should be under the
Lokpal.
SECOND SCHEDULE. PART-II
1. The Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act
should be amended to remove the provision of
sanction.
2. The punishment under the PC Act should be on the
lines of Section 409 of IPC which is maximum of
ten years and the accused is also liable to fine.
5. The Jurisdiction of Lokpal as provided
in Clause 17. If lower bureaucracy is
also brought under the ambit of Lokpal
it will over burden the Lokpal.
6. The proposed Bill does not include the
conduct of MPs on the floor of the
House [Clause 17(2)], as it will violate
the provision of Article 105(2) of the
Constitution.
7. For Judiciary, a separate Bill is already
under consideration of the Parliament.
8. The eligibility criteria as provided in
Clause 3 of the Bill appears to be
adequate.
9. The Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing and Prosecution
Wing (Clause 12-15), hence the CBI
and similar institution need not be
brought under the Lokpal.
1. The Lokpal Bill [Second Schedule]
provides for amending the Section 19
of the PC Act.
2. The Lokpal Bill provides for amendment
to Section 13 and 14 of the PC
Act, 1988.
27. Arvind A. Aghav,
204, Om Sai Shradja
CHS, Ramachandra
Nagar-3 Thane,
Maharashtra

321
CLAUSE 17
3. By limiting the coverage of Lokpal to Group ‘A’
Officers, a large number of people will be left out.
4. The provisions for attachment of property should
also be included in the PC Act.
5. The author is not in favour of proviso to sub-clause
(3) of Clause 17.
6. There should be provision of filing appeal by the
original complainant directly in the High Court.
7. The PC Act should be amended to include various
societies within its purview.
CLAUSE 31
8. The Lokpal should have provision with regard to the
witnesses and the PC Act should also be amended.
9. Clause 48 provides for presumption as to acquisition
of assets by corrupt means in certain cases, then
why not if misappropriation is proved then
presumption should be that public servant act was
intentional and no need of proving intention/motive.
CLAUSE 15
10. Director of Prosecution should have permanent Legal
Advisors and Public prosecutors.
CLAUSE 56
11. The provision of legal assistance under Clause 56
not agreeable.
3. The Lokpal intends to tackle corruption
at higher places. Further by including
lower bureaucracy the Lokpal will be
over burdened.
4. This relates to amending the PC
Act, 1988 which needs to be examined
separately.
5. Due to the federal structure of the
Constitution it is felt that such a
provision should be provided.
6. Normal legal remedies are available to
the complainants; hence it is felt that
there is no need to provide such
provision in the Bill.
7. This relates to amending the PC Act,
1988 which needs to be examined
separately.
8. Clause 31 if Bill provides such powers.
PC Act, 1988 is a altogether different
legislation.
9. The intention of the author is not clear.
10. Prosecution Wing is to be set up by
the Lokpal as per Clause 15.
11. It is felt that legal assistance needs to
be provided to defend the case if such
assistance is requested for.

322
12. Reward to the informers should be there.
CLAUSE 23-29
13. Enquiry documents after completion or decision taken
should be made available.
CLAUSE 54
14. No limitation as prescribed in Clause 54 should be
there.
15. In PC Act, there should be special provision for
abetment in Section 13.
CLAUSE 26
16. The Investigating officer can demand from Income
Tax Authorities the IT Return of the accused in DA
cases.
CLAUSE 23-29
17. In MCOCA the statement made before Investigation
Officer. Therefore, necessary changes should be
made in the Evidence Act or Provision in Lokpal Bill
and PC Act, 1988.
18. Protection should be provided to the complainant
and witnesses.
SECOND SCHEDULE. PART-II
19. Punishment up to ten years imprisonment should be
there for fabricated evidence or forgery by the
accused.
20. The habitual offenders should be given punishment
of life imprisonment.
21. Punishment of imprisonment up to 7 years be there
for ‘perjury’.
12. It is felt that the reward scheme for
informers under Lokpal Act is not
required.
13. The Lokpal has to submit its report as
per procedure prescribed in Clause 23-
29. Further, RTI Act will also be
applicable.
14. It is felt that limitation as proposed in
Clause 54 is required.
15. This relates to amending the PC Act,
1988 which needs to be examined
separately.
16. Clause 26 of the Bill provide for
production of documents.
17. The procedure for investigation provided
in the Lokpal Bill, 2011 appears to be
adequate. [Clause 23 to 29]
18. This matter relates to Whistleblowers
Bill which is already under consideration
of the Parliament.
19. The punishment as per applicable
legislations is to be decided by the
appropriate courts.
20. The life imprisonment is too harsh in
such cases.
21. The Lokpal Bill does not provide for
any such eventuality.
12 3 4

323
22. The judiciary should be within the purview of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 23-29
23. Under Section 13 (1) (D) once it is proved wrongful
loss to Government and wrongful gain to anyone by
act of public servant (will act or omission), no
requirement to prove his intention/motive in cases of
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
24. Lokpal should have special powers to intercept
telephones.
CLAUSE 35
25. Once case is registered against public servant,
immediately he should be suspended till acquittal of
case.
26. If contractor is found guilty under corruption act he
and his direct or indirect firms should be black listed
for whole life time.
27. For substandard construction, a report must be sent
to Lokpal or State agency ACB units to deal with it.
28. No court to reduce the sentence of accused. If
more than 5 cases are acquitted, Senior Judges
Committee including any Lokpal Member will suo
moto check such judgments.
29. CBI should be kept independent and there is no need
to keep it under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 49-50
30. Penalty for false complaints must be reduced to
reasonable level.
22. A separate bill for judicial accountability
is under consideration of the Parliament.
23. Upon finalisation of its investigations,
the Lokpal makes a report to the Special
Court and/or to the competent authority.
The intention of the author is not
understood.
24. This is beyond the Scope of legislation
Lokpal
25. Decision on suspension etc. has to be
taken on case to case basis by the
competent authority on the
recommendations of the Lokpal.
26. and 27. There is no provision in the Bill
to black list such firms.
28. Lokpal is not supposed to supervise
the functioning of the courts.
29. The Lokpal Bill does not envisage
placing CBI under the Lokpal.
30. The penalty for false complaints as
provided in Clause 49 and 50 appears

324
31. Cognizance of anonymous complaints should be taken.
32. There should be provision in the PC Act where the
Government policy is framed to give benefit
to private companies.
33. Benami Transaction Act, 1988 should be amended to
make the offence non-bailable and more severe
punishment equal to section l3(1)(c).
1. The Jan Lokpal Bill should be notified.
CLAUSE 17
2. The Chairperson, Members and officers of the
regulators such as SEBI, Insurance Regulatory and
Development Agency, Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority, Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India, etc. and other quasi judicial bodies should
also be brought under the purview of the Lokpal Bill
or Judicial Accountability Bill.
CLAUSE 3
1. Chairman should be an elected member. 60% of the
members should be selected and 40% members
elected.
2. For members of Lokpal (elected) – The former,
judge of Supreme Court, Chief Justice of High Court
with minimum 15 years Government service, former
to be reasonable. But, DoPT is open to
suggestions.
31. This will overburden the Lokpal.
32. This relates to amending the PC Act,
1988 which needs to be examined
separately. However, as an accomplice
of public servant, the private parties
are also liable for recovery of loss
suffered by the exchequer.
33. This relates to Benami Transaction Act,
1988.
1. Since Lokpal Bill 2011 has been
introduced, it is felt that the same needs
consideration by the Parliament.
2. The jurisdiction as given in Clause 17
of the Lokpal appears to be adequate.
1. to 3. The suggestions appear to be
impracticable.
12 3 4
28.
29.
N.K. Rupwani
nkrupwani63@yahoo.in
Shri R.V . Kalmekar
Material Science
Centre, IIT
Kharagpur
West Bengal, 721 302

325
Government officers of any department with
minimum 15 years of service, not attached to any
political party and within the age group of 40-75
years will be eligible.
3. For selected Members of Lokpal – Judge of Supreme
Court, Chief Justice of High Court; 25 years in anti
corruption, vigilance, finance regulations in the age
group of 40-75 years.
CLAUSE 4
4. The Selection Committee will be chaired by the
Prime Minister and the Chairperson of Lokpal as
Co-Chairperson. The Speaker of LS, Chairman of
RS, Leader of Opposition in LS, Leader of opposition
in R.S., Chief Justice of Supreme Court, CAG, CEC,
Director CBI and President Press Council of India
shall be members.
5. For any official/staff below Group ‘A’ officer, the
immediate controlling Group 'A' Officer should be
held responsible and accountable for complaints
against any staff working under him.
CLAUSE 27
6. No Sanction required for any prosecution.
CLAUSE 31
7. Power of investigation of Civil Court.
CLAUSE 54
8. On limitation period, it is suggested that if the public
servant is holding any public office, there should not
be any restriction of period of offence. If the person
is not holding any post on date then it should not be
under jurisdiction of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 13
9. The investigating agencies of Lokpal should have,
equal Police powers.
4. The Selection Committee as provided
in the Lokpal Bill appears to be
adequate. [Clause 4]
5. This is an impracticable suggestion
requiring no further comments.
6. Clause 27 already provides for the
same.
7. Clause 31 provides certain powers of
Civil Court to the Lokpal.
8. The limitation period as provided in
Clause 54 of the Bill appears to be
adequate.
9. Clause 13 provides police powers to
the investigation officers of the Lokpal.

326
10. The Lokpal should have powers to cancel transfer/
suspension of dutiful official transferred by corrupt
higher authorities.
CLAUSE 49-50
11. For false complaints, the complainant should not be
prosecuted, but may be blacklisted for future
complaints.
CLAUSE 17
1. The Prime Minister, Judiciary, NGOs, religious trusts
should be under the purview of Lokpal.
2. Lower bureaucracy be within the purview of Lokpal.
3. Jan Lokpal Bill be passed.
PREAMBLE
1. In the preamble the word “public” be deleted.
DEFINITIONS
2. Words like ‘corruption’, ‘functionary’ ‘religious
purpose’ need be defined.
CLAUSE 3
3. Only serving judge of Supreme Court be eligible for
appointment as Chairperson.
4. Serving Chief Justice of a High Court be eligible for
appointment as Judicial Members.
10. This is beyond the scope of scheme of
Lokpal.
11. To deter the false complaints, it is felt
that the punishment as per Clause 49
and 50 is justified. But, DoPT is open
to suggestions in this regard.
1. The jurisdiction as given Clause 17 of
the Bill is adequate.
2. By bringing the lower bureaucracy
within the ambit of the Lokpal, it will
be over burdened thereby it may not
be able to focus on corruption at higher
places.
3. Since Lokpal Bill 2011 has been
introduced, it is felt that the same needs
consideration by the Parliament.
1. The Lokpal Bill intends to fight
corruption at high places.
2. Words and expressions for which
definitions are not given in the Lokpal
Bill, but defined in the PC Act, 1988,
will have the same meaning as assigned
in that Act.
3. and 4. By limiting the selection of the
Chairperson and Members to serving
judges, the field of available candidates
will be reduced considerably.
12 3 4
Rajesh Chandola
142, RPS, DDA
Flats,
Sheikh Sarai, Ph.I,
New Delhi 110 017
Shri Kaushlendra
Prasad
Flat No. 328, Tower
No.1, Mount Kailash,
East of Kailash,
New Delhi - 110 065.
30.
31.

327
CLALSE 6
5. The upper age to hold the office of Lokpal should
be 65 years.
CLAUSE 17
1. All public functionaries should be under the purview
of Lokpal. There should not any exceptions.
CLAUSE 23
2. Time line for disposal of various tasks/activities should
be laid down.
CLAUSE 3
3. The number of members of Lokpal should be increased.
CLAUSE 33-34
4. The Lokpal should be competent to forfeit the
property of a corrupt functionary.
CLAUSE 35
5. The recommendations of Lokpal for transfer or
suspension of a public servant be binding on the
employer.
CLAUSE 47
6. Declaration of assets by public functionary should
be on regular basis and the onus to prove that the
property acquired by him was through his legal and
known resources may lie with him.
5. The upper age of 65 years to hold the
office of Lokpal is too low.
1. The jurisdiction as proposed in Clause
17 of the Bill is to ensure that the
resources of Lokpal are utilised more
efficiently to fight corruption at higher
places.
2. The time line as provided in Clause 23
is adequate.
3. The number of Members of Lokpal
proposed seems to be enough. By
adding more members, it may become
unwieldy body.
4. Attachment of property can be resorted
as per Clause 33 and 34 of the Bill.
5. Clause 35 of the Bill provides that
ordinarily the Government will accept
the recommendation of the Lokpal,
however, if not feasible, then the
Government will have to record the
reasons in writing.
6. Clause 47 provides for this.
Shri Uma Shanker
Tiwari,
294, BJCGHS Ltd.,
Plot No. 22, Sector -
22, Dwarka,
New Delhi - 110 078
32.

328
1. In Clause 4(1)(f)  the CJI by collegiums of Selection
of the CJI.
2. Clause 4(1)(h) may be replaced by an eminent
practicing Lawyer to be nominated by the Bar Council
of India.
3. Clause 4(1)(i)  Central Government may be replaced
by the CAG of India.
4. Clause 23(8)  the first extension be for two months
and the third and the last for one month.
5. Clause 43 to 46  – Central Government may be
replaced by the CAG of India.
6. Chapter XIV  – on Offences and penalties may be
deleted as there is a provision of Preliminary Enquiry.
1. to 3. The composition of the Selection
Committee appears to be adequate.
4. By reducing the period for disposal of
complaints by Lokpal, there may be
undue pressure on the system which in
the long run may prove to be
counterproductive.
5. There appears to be no justification to
accept this suggestion.
6. The situations given in Chapter XIV
(Clause 49 and 50) are not covered
under the provision of Preliminary
Enquiry.
12 3 4
33. Shri S.P. Ashta
F-127, Vikas Puri,
New Delhi 110 018

329
COMMENTS OF DoPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of the Comments/Suggestions Comments of DoPT
No. Organisation/
individual
12 3 4
Shri A.K.
Mukhopadhyaya, Air
Marshal (Retd.),
Chairman, India
Defence Foundation,
Chittaranjan Park,
New Delhi-110 019.
CLAUSE 3, 4, 5 and 6
(i) Selection/Election of Lokpal: He has suggested two
alternative methods of selection of Lokpal. In the
first alternative method, the Lokpal will be elected
by the people of India by direct voting. Election of
Lokpal will be conducted by the Election Commission
of India. In the second alternative method, a panel
of names sent by the President to the Speaker of
Lok Sabha will be voted upon in Parliament. The
name of the candidate who gets 51% of the votes
will be sent to the Supreme Court for its approval
and after approval of the Supreme Court, the President
of India will appoint that person to the office of
Lokpal.
(ii) Panel of candidates for office of Lokpal will be
selected by the President of India from a list of
names suggested by the Government of India, State
Governments, eminent persons in any field, civil
societies and common Indians.
(iii) Qualification of Lokpal: The person to be qualified
to hold the office of Lokpal should be a natural born
Indian, with both biological parents being natural,
born Indians. He should be, in the opinion of the
President, a distinguished and eminent person with
exceptional morality, integrity, honesty and proven
(i) and (ii) The suggestion for appointment
of Chairperson is not practicable. The
eligibility conditions of persons to be
appointed as Chairperson and Members
of Lokpal as given in Clause 3 of the
Bill are adequate.
Further, the appointment procedure as
prescribed in Clause 4, 5 and 6 of the
Bill is adequate, i.e., the Chairperson
and Members of Lokpal shall be
appointed by the President on the
recommendations of the Selection
Committee.
(iii) The eligibility conditions for appointment
as Lokpal and Members as given in
Clause 3 are adequate.
34.

330
records of unblemished achievements in public sphere
with IQ and OLQ (‘Officer Like Quality’, as
measured for Armed Forces Officers) and cultural
consciousness of not less than the average of the
topmost 10% of Indians, with a PhD. (Doctorate)
degree in humanities or sciences or engineering/
technologies or law or management, etc.
CLAUSE 17
(iv) Jurisdiction of Lokpal: The Prime Minister, Ministers
and All State Chief Ministers as well as Judiciary
should be within the ambit of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(i) The Prime Minister and the Supreme Court Judges
including Chief Justice of India should be kept out
of the purview of Lokpal. However, they should
come within the ambit of Lokpal after they demit
their office.
CLAUSE 23
(ii) Investigations in any case will have to be completed
in one year. Trial should be completed in next one
year so that the corrupt politician, officer or judge
is sent to Jain within two years.
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART-II
(iii) Depending upon the gravity of the corruption and
loss to the National exchequer, punishment for
officials should vary from minimum 10 years
imprisonment up to Life Sentence.
12 3 4
35. Shri Anthony Raju,
National President,
All India Council of
Human Rights,
Liberties and Social
Justice.
(iv) Jurisdiction as provided in Clause 17
of the Bill is adequate. Further, Judicial
Standards Accountability Bill is already
under consideration of the Parliament.
(i) In the proposed Bill, the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the
Lokpal once he/she demits the office
(Clause 17). However, the judiciary may
be kept outside the purview of Lokpal
and a separate Bill, Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is already under
consideration of the Parliament.
(ii) The time limits for completion of inquiry
as given in Clause 23(2) and 23(8) are
adequate. For completion of trial, the
time limit as prescribed in Clause 28(2)
is adequate.
(iii) The punishment as prescribed in the
Bill appears to be adequate. The life
imprisonment appears to be harsh.

331
CLAUSE 42
(iv) Loss caused to the Government by corrupt persons
to be recovered from them at the time of conviction,
by attaching their movable/immovable properties.
CLAUSE 4
(v) Selection of Lokpal members to be made by Judges,
citizens and constitutional authorities and not by
politicians, through a completely transparent and
participatory process.
CLAUSE 12-15
(vi) CVC, Departmental Vigilance and Anti-corruption
Branch of CBI to be merged into Lokpal.
CLAUSE 23-29
(vii) Lokpal/Lokayukta to have complete powers and
machinery to independently investigate and prosecute
any officer, judge or politician.
(viii) The Complainants to be provided protection under
the provisions of Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 3
(ix) Only Supreme Court Judges should be appointed as
Lokpal.
CLAUSE 49 and 50
(x) In case of frivolous complaints, there should be
monetary penalty instead of any Jail term and that
monetary penalty should not exceed Rs. one lakh.
(iv) Clause 42 of the Bill provides for
recovery of loss to the exchequer.
(v) The Selection procedure as provided in
the Bill is adequate (Clause 4).
(vi) Since, the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing (Clause 12) and
Prosecution Wing (Clause 15), there is
no need to put CVC and ACB of CBI
under Lokpal.
(vii) The Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing and Prosecution Wing
(CLAUSE 12, 15). After completion of
investigation, if commission of offence
is established, the Lokpal will file a
report in Special Court.
(viii) Protection to complainant is part of the
Whistleblowers Bill.
(ix) The eligibility criterion as given in Clause
3 of the Bill is adequate.
(x) For false complaints, provisions of
Clause 49 and 50 would be applicable.
But, DoPT is open to suggestions in
this regard.

332
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM and Justices of Supreme Court should come
under purview of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 4
(ii) Lokpal must be elected post and the right to elect
the Lokpal should be given to the elected Block
heads (Block Pramukhs) and there should be a
provision to allow only those persons to contest for
Lokpal who are capable to elected be as Judge of
Supreme court.
CLAUSE 23 - 29
(iii) To make the Lokpal Bill free of partiality it should be
ensured that that the Government official would not
be punished until the person who made him corrupt
is not identified and punished with the equal
punishment.
CLAUSE 3 & 4
(iv) Provision of four Vice Lokpals under Lokpal. The
first one should work to punish the bribe receivers,
the second to punish the industrial organisations,
involved in the acts of corruption and the bribe
giving. The third would recommend such legislative
provisions/international laws /treatise to Constitute
international institutions to nullify the laws/agreement
which protect the corrupt people of other countries
(i) In the proposed Bill, the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the
Lokpal once he/she demits the office
[Clause 17]. However, the judiciary may
be kept outside the purview of Lokpal
and a separate Bill, Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is already under
consideration of the Parliament.
(ii) The suggestion is not practicable. The
procedure for selection of Chairperson
and Members of Lokpal, as given in
Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
(iii) The punishment has to be awarded to
the public servants by the appropriate
courts/authorities once the commission
of offence is established. Further, Clause
17(3) provides that Lokpal may also
inquire into any act or conduct of any
person associated with the allegation of
corruption under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988.
(iv) The Bill provides for the institution of
Lokpal comprising of Chairperson and
not more than eight Members out of
whom 50% shall be Judicial Members
[Clause 4]. Further Clause 19 of the
Bill provides that Chairperson may
constitute Benches of the Lokpal as
deemed fit.
12 3 4
36. Federation for
Economic Freedom,
402, New Lawyers
Chamber, Supreme
Court, Bhagwandas
Marg, New Delhi

333
as well as their ill gained money. The fourth Vice
Lokpal should review such laws and values prevalent
in the country. Every Vice Lokpal will appoint two
Lokayuktas each under them which will be called
Central Lokayukta.
(v) Lokpal should be a person who is free from money
desire or allurement of riches and who is free from
the special affection to their children. Therefore,
Lokpal Post should not carry any salary or perks.
(vi) No such Lokpal bill should be accepted in which
there is a role of unelected people in its preparation.
CLAUSE 47 and 48
(vii) Lokpal should have the right to order to individual or
to the institution to declare their property let it be
acquired by any person or institution, which had
deposited the 20% excessive amount in the account
of the property owner and applied for the possession
before the office of the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17, 23-29
(viii) Lokpal will have power to register the complaint
regarding corruption against any staff, officer and
Minister including PM. Lokpal will enquire into the
complaint without any interference/influence from
Executive/legislature/judiciary. In case of any sort of
influence, Lokpal would introduce a Bill in Parliament
to make the attempt null and void.
(ix) Lokpal may recommend to increase the punishments
of IPC in corruption cases and will be entitled to
recommend the required amendments in law/laws.
CLAUSE 16
(x) Provision for creating a parallel fund to Consolidated
Fund of India called ‘Lok Nidhi’ or People’s Fund to
meet the financial requirements of Lokpal.
(v) The suggestion is not practicable.
(vi) The Bill has to be passed by the
Parliament by following the due process.
(vii) This is outside the scope of the Lokpal.
However, Clause 47 and 48 of the Bill
provide for declaration of assets by
public servants.
(viii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal is given
in Clause 17 which appears to be
adequate. The procedure for
investigation is given in Clauses 23 to
29, which seems to be adequate.
(ix) The punishment is to be awarded by
the appropriate court depending upon
the facts and circumstances of the case.
(x) Clause 16 of the bill provides that the
expenses of the Lokpal shall be charged
on the Consolidated Fund of India.
Therefore, there is no need to create
any separate Fund.

334
(a) & (b) The sentence is to be awarded by
the appropriate court. As per the Bill,
the Lokpal has to file a report in the
Special Court if the commission of
offence is established. [Clause 28 &
29]
(c) The suggestion is not clear.
The procedure for removal of Lokpal as
given in Clause 8 & 40 of the Bill is
adequate.
(i) Clause 12 provides for setting up
Investigation Wing by the Lokpal. After
the investigations, if the commission of
offence is established, the Lokpal is to
file report in the Special Court [Clause
28 & 29].
(ii) Clause 1(2) provides the territorial
jurisdiction of the Lokpal which extends
to whole of India and also applies to
public servants outside India.
12 3 4
Powers of Elected Lokpal
CLAUSE 23 - 29
(a) Lokpal can send any accused to jail to prevent the
intervention in the inquiry with immediate effect.
Lokpal cannot award a death sentence to a person
in any case but can give imprisonment for maximum
10 years.
(b) Lokpal will equally punish the accused as well as the
person provoking for corruption. He will also provide
adequate protection to the people working against
the corruption and co-operating in inquiry.
(c) After getting the Post, Lokpal will not be able to
give any kind of property to his progeny inheritance
or to donate to any person or institution.
Removal of Lokpal
CLAUSE 8 & 40
The President of India will have the power to remove
Lokpal. The Parliament will have the right to recommend
about the removal of Lokpal to the President by passing
such resolution with simple majority.
CLAUSE 12
(i) Lokpal should have its own investigation agency and
Specialised Fast Track Court and the decision to be
pronounced within 3 months and total 6 months
time to dispose off the case including the appeal.
CLAUSE 1
(ii) Jurisdiction of Lokpal also to be outside India.
L-7, Adarsh Nagar,
Old Durg (C.G)
37.

335
(iii) Provision of Lokayuktas in all States with the
provision of District Lokpal.
(iv) Provision of common Specialised Appellate Fast Track
court for Judiciary and Lokpal.
CLAUSE 23 - 29
(v) Constitution of an autonomous National Advisory
Council (Third Eye Set up) to review the decisions
of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 4
(vi) V eteran retired judges, officers of CBI, Police/
Prosecutor with clean image to be appointed in
Lokpal. Independent head of Lokpal to be appointed
under the guidance of PM.
CLAUSE 6
(i) Age of the judicial members (retired judges of SC)
and Chairperson (retired CJI) to be incorporated in
Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 32
(ii) Deployment of employees of Investigation Wing of
Lokpal from the special agencies on deputation as
regular employees should be lawful. Investigating
Officers of Lokpal to be given powers similar to CBI.
DEFINITIONS
(iii) The word “Corrupt Means” in Lokpal to be defined.
CLAUSE 32 & 33
(iv) Limitation Act should have no application for attaching
property/recovery regarding limitation of time period
and the “Attachment” should include “forfeiture of
attached property if found guilty”.
(iii) Setting up of the Lokayuktas falls within
the domain of the States.
(iv) The suggestion is not clear.
(v) The Lokpal is to file its report in the
Special Court and further action is to
be taken as per the judicial framework.
(vi) The Selection procedure as prescribed
in Clause 4 of the Bill is sufficient.
(i) Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the
Chairperson or the Member of the
Lokpal shall hold the office for a term
not exceeding five years or until he
attains the age of seventy years,
whichever is earlier.
(ii) Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the
Lokpal to utilise services of officers of
Central or State Government.
(iii) The wo rds and expressions not defined
in this Act but defined in the PC Act
1988 shall have the same meaning as
assigned in that Act.
(iv) The powers for attachment of property
are to be governed by Clause 32 and
33, which seems to be adequate.
38. Surender Pal Singh,
A2/114, Sector 5,
Rohini,
Delhi – 85

336
CLAUSE 31
(v) Lokpal shall have all the powers of a Judicial
Magistrate and all the powers of Anti Corruption
Agencies of State/CBI.
CLAUSE 38
(vi) Chairperson of Lokpal shall have the powers to
recommend sufficient number of Special Courts to
deal with the cases arising out of the PC Act, 1988.
(vii) Word “Public Servant” to be deleted.
CLAUSE 8 and 40
The individual has asked some questions instead of
suggestions regarding protection of the person fighting/
complaining against corruption, proving of the charges
made against the relatives of Lokpal members, why there
is no provision to give a chance to guilty to improve and
why there is no provision of punishing the guilty member
of Lokpal other than removing him from Lokpal.
12 3 4
39. Sravan Kumar Mishra
(v) Clause 31 of the Bill provides for certain
powers of Civil Court. The judicial
powers are to be exercised by the
Special Courts. As the Lokpal will have
its own Investigation Wing [Clause 12]
and Prosecution Wing [Clause 15], the
anti corruption agencies of the State/
CBI need not be placed under the
Lokpal.
(vi) Clause 38 of the Bill provides that the
Central Government shall constitute
such number of Special Courts as
recommended by the Lokpal to deal
with the cases arising out of PC act,
1988.
(vii) It is not clear that from which clause
or phrase the word ‘public servant’ is
suggested to be deleted. However, the
Lokpal Bill is to deal the allegations of
corruption against the public
functionaries. Therefore, the word
‘public servant’ needs to be retained.
The action against the Lokpal and its
Members is to be taken as per the provisions
of Clause 8 & 40 of the Bill which provides
not only the removal by the President but
also for initiation of prosecution in case of
allegations of corruption.

337
(i) Lokpal must be independent, free from all undue
influences, abetments and inducements.
CLAUSE 3
(iii) Lokpal must comprise a Chairperson and 8 members.
Chairperson shall be a serving or retired judge of
SC. Amongst members half should be women. The
tenure of Chairperson and members should be 3
years and 2 years respectively with no eligibility of
reappointment.
CLAUSE 4
(iv) Selection of Chairperson and members will be done
by a Panel comprising Leader of the Majority Party
in LS, leader of opposition in LS, Presidents of the
(a) Bar Council of India (b) Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (c) Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India (d) Institute of Company
Secretaries (e) Institute of Electronics Engineers
(India), New Delhi (f) Institute of Engineers (India),
Kolkata (g) Institute of Surveyors (India), New Delhi
(h) Medical Council of India (j) Institute of Valuers,
Delhi and (k) Indian Science Congress.
(iv) The President of India, on the recommendation of
Selection Panel, will appoint Chairperson and members
of Lokpal. In the same way, on the receipt of
recommendation of removal from this Panel,
President shall remove chairperson and its members.
CLAUSE 16
(v) Lokpal will earn its revenue by collection of fee
from complainants, collecting penalties from culprits,
(i) The Lokpal Bill envisages setting up
the institution of Lokpal which is
independent and free from all undue
influences, etc.
(ii) The Bill envisages selection of persons
on the basis of merit. Further, the
tenure suggested is too short.
(iii) The S election procedure as prescribed
in Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
(iv) Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal
shall be appointed by the President on
recommendations of the Selection
Committee. For removal etc. of the
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal,
the provision has been prescribed in
Clause 8 and 40 of the Bill.
(v) Any fines or penalties collected by the
Lokpal shall form part of the
40. Bharastrachar
Niwaran Samiti,
B5/121, Yamuna
Vihar, N. Delhi-53

338
collection of fee from Media airing its proceedings
etc.
CLAUSE 17
(vi) The Public servants including PM must be in the
ambit of Lokpal.CLAUSE 23 - 29
(vii) Appeal against Lokpal order can be filed in Supreme
Court within 10 days from the receipt of such order
and jurisdiction of Supreme Court shall be limited
for a period of 30 days including final decision and
beyond 30 days this jurisdiction would be expired.
(viii) Every State of India shall adopt and enact law for
appointment of ‘Lokayukta’ within 90 days from the
enactment of Lokpal Bill. Lokayukta Law shall be as
per existing/similar law in force in the State of
Karnataka without any modification.
Consolidated Fund of India. Further, as
per Clause 16 of the Bill, all the expenses
of the Lokpal shall be charged
expenditure on the Consolidated Fund
of India.
(vi) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal
position in the Governments' set up.
To ensure that Prime Minister is able
to discharge his functions without any
interference from any quarter, it is felt
that the Prime Minister may be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal.
However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(vii) On completion of investigations, if the
commission of offence has been
established, the Lokpal shall file a report
in the Special Court. Thereafter, the
Special Court will decide the quantum
of sentence, etc. as per the established
procedure, and normal remedies
available under the judicial system of
the country will be available to the
accused persons.
(viii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States.
Keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for
the States to decide.
12 3 4

339
CLAUSE 3
(i) Lokpal should one chairperson and 10 members to
be appointed by Selection Committee as provision of
Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 6
(ii) The term of Chairperson and members will be for
five years.
(iii) Chairperson or member at his/her on will can submit
its resignation to the President of India or they can
be removed as per the provisions of Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 8 and 40
(iv) Complaints against Chairperson and members of
Lokpal for their acts of corruption, partiality can be
made in the Court.
CLAUSE 1 1 and 12
(v) Lokpal will have the powers of Administrative
authority or Appointing Authority and the power of
issuing investigation warrant.
CLAUSE 49 and 50
(vi) Lokpal shall have the powers to impose penalty
against fake claims or charges made against
Government, or public servant.
(i) The composition of the Lokpal and its
selection process as given Clause 3
and 4 of the Bill are adequate.
(ii) Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the
Chairperson or the Member of the
Lokpal shall hold the office for a term
not exceeding five years or until he
attains the age of seventy years,
whichever is earlier.
(iii) Cla use 6 of the Bill provides for
resignation by Chairperson and Member
of Lokpal. Further, Clause 8 and 40
provide for removal of Chairperson or
Member of Lokpal.
(iv) Clause 8 and 40 of the Bill provide for
complaints against the Lokpal and its
Members.
(v) Clause 11 of the Bill provides for
appointment of Secretary, other officers
and staff of Lokpal by the Chairperson.
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for setting
of Investigation Wing by the Lokpal.
Clause 13 provides that the investigating
officers of the Lokpal shall have powers
of police and Clause 31 provides for
powers of Civil Court to enforce
attendance of any person.
(vi) Clause 49 and 50 of the Bill provide
for prosecution and penalties for false
complaints.
41. Creation and
Projection Dotcom,
74, Lake City
Builders, 2
nd Floor,
Kolar road, Bhopal
(M.P.)

340
CLAUSE 46
(vii) Every year the Chairperson of Lokpal shall submit a
details annual report to the President of India. Also
the matters disposed off by Lokpal shall be uploaded
on the website on monthly basis.
CLAUSE 31
(viii) Lokpal shall have the powers of a special judicial
magistrate.
(ix) Chairperson shall be responsible for administration
as well as inspection of Lokpal.
(x) Complaints can be made to Lokpal on a plain paper
in writing.
(xi) All the records or information of Lokpal shall be
made public.
SECOND SCHEDULE, Pt. II
(xii) A guilty person shall not be punished less than 5
years of imprisonment extendable up to life
imprisonment.
(xiii) Lokpal shall be responsible for the preparation of
Citizens’ Charter and thereafter its implementation.
CLAUSE 12
(xiv) Lokpal shall have an Investigation Wing, which will
be free from any undue pressure or influence from
any other authority.
(vii) Clause 46 of the Bill provides for
furnishing of annual report giving
summary of its activities during the
previous year. Clause 23 (13) provides
that the Lokpal shall display to the public
the status of number of complaints
pending before it or disposed of by it
on its website.
(viii) Clause 31 of the Bill provides for certain
powers of Civil Court. The judicial
powers are to be exercised by the
Special Courts.
(ix) Since the Chairperson will be head of
the institution of Lokpal, he will be
responsible for its functioning as well.
(x) Method of filing complaint will be
provided in regulations.
(xi) The institution of Lokpal will be within
the ambit of RTI Act, 2005.
(xii) The quantum of punishment on
conviction is to be decided by the
Courts as per the prevailing laws.
(xiii) For dealing with the public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be
set up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions
is working on the same.
(xiv) Clause 12 provides for setting up of
Investigation Wing by the Lokpal.
12 3 4

341
42.
43.
CLAUSE 47
(xv) Head of Office in Government offices shall ensure
that all the Government officials have declared their
property in form prescribed by Lokpal on
implementation of Lokpal Act within three months
and thereafter on 30th June every year.
CLAUSE 23
(xvi) All complaints/charges will be investigated within 6
months and in no case later than one year from
receipt of complaint.
(xvii) Lokpal shall be r esponsible for spreading awareness
about this law and ensuring the participation of
people to fight corruption and mismanagement
(i) Working out a detailed plan to incorporate selected
members as recommended by Jan Lokpal civil society
in all the States, Central Government Deptts. to
receive/collate/investigate. Also to monitor effectively
and keep all the latest status on the website for all
to see.
CLAUSE 23 and 28
(ii) It has to be time bound and on failure judiciary to
be accountable.
CLAUSE 4
(i) The Selection Committee for Chairmen and members
of Lokpal should include elected MPs from SC/ST/
OBC and Minorities in their population ratio with
fixed minimum qualification and no NRI in Selection
Committee. Right to appoint/remove or punish should
be with Parliament.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) All the heads of educational institutes/industries, social/
education/religious trusts (Pvt./Govt.), Govt. offices
and all other organisations (Pvt./Govt.) where money/
properties are involved should come under the ambit
(xv) Clause 47 of the Bill provides for
declaration of assets by the public
servants.
(xvi) The time limits for completion of inquiry
as given in Clause 23(2) and 23(8) are
adequate.
(xvii) It will be for the Lokpal to take action
in this regard.
(i) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 has since been
introduced in the Parliament and the
Parliament may to decide the issue.
(ii) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and Clause 28 of the Bill.
(i) This will make the process of selection
cumbersome. The Bill envisages
selection of persons on the basis of
merit.
(ii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
clause 17 of the Bill appears to be
adequate.
Brigadier Vinay
Kumar Chona
R.K. Pal
Zonal Gen. Secretary,
All India OBC Rly
Employee Association,
Rail Coach Factory,
Kapurthala

342
of Lokpal. President, PM, CJI should be excluded
from the purview of Lokpal.
(iii) Religious Institutions, Temples and Ashrams etc. to
be nationalised to abolish corruption and the Preists/
Pujaris including other official to be appointed by
Government and the money of these organisations to
be utilised for public utility.
(iv) Money/property above five crores of individuals
should be acquired by Government Ceiling limit of
wealt may be revised as per inflation on annual
basis.
(v) Minimum wages of labours should be fixed
Rs. 2,000/- day and it may be revised as per inflation
on half yearly basis.
CLAUSE 3
In para No.3 clause (i) “In the institution of Lokpal there
shall be representation from weaker section, i.e. from
SC, BC, Women and minorities.
CLAUSE 3
(i) There shall be three Lokpals with three years tenure;
and every year one of them, by turn, shall act as
Chief Lokpal. Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions
will be the nodal agency for appointment of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 8 and 40
(ii) For making complaint Lokpal, it should be signed by
at least 1000 citizens. Then, Selection Committee
will be responsible for the disposal of complaint
after the Speaker is satisfied with the disposal.
(iii) This is beyond the scope of Lokpal.
(iv) This is beyond the scope of Lokpal.
(v) This is beyond the scope of Lokpal.
The Bill envisages selection on the basis of
merit and criteria prescribed.
(i) The composition of Lokpal as given in
Clause 3 of the Bill is adequate. Further
the tenure suggested is too short.
(ii) It is not clear as which type of
complaint the author is talking about.
However, if the complaint is against
the Lokpal or its Members, then the
complaint mechanism as prescribed in
Clause 8 and 40 is to be followed
which is adequate.
12 3 4
44.
45.
Adhivakta Parishad,
Faridabad
Gulshan Kumar

343
CLAUSE 38
(iii) Lokpal shall be empowered for directing any Fast
Track Court to initiate action.
(iv) Complaints to be made to Lokpal in writing on a
plain paper and be signed by complainant along with
two witnesses with names and addresses and election
cards’ numbers.
(v) CBI shall be placed under the direct command and
control of the “Groups of 3 – Lokpals”.
CLAUSE 17
(i) Any government employee or public representative
elected or selected shall remain in the ambit of
Lokpal, i.e. from a peon/clerk to Group “A” Officer,
upto the PM. President, Vice President and Governor
can be excluded. No permission required for Lokpal
to prosecute any higher office like PM or Cabinet
Minister and they should resign immediately after
allegation.
(iii) The Special Courts will function
independent of Lokpal.
(iv) Complaints handling procedure is given
in Clause 23-29. However, the Lokpal
may make regulations regarding the
format of the complaints etc.
(v) Since the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing (Clause 12), there is
no need to place the CBI under its
control.
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
in Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate. As
far inclusion of Prime Minister within
the purview of the Lokpal is concerned,
it is stated that in the context of the
Indian polity, the Prime Minister
occupies a pivotal position in the
Governments' set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from
any quarter, it is felt that the Prime
Minister has to be kept outside the
purview of the Lokpa1. However, after
the Prime Minister has demitted the
office, he will come within the purview
of the Lokpal. If the lower bureaucracy
is also included in the purview of
Lokpal, it would cause enormous strain
on the resources of the Lokpal and it
may not be able to deal with corruption
effectively at higher places.
46. Jitendra Shantaram
Bhavsar,
A-6, Jay Ganeshayan
Apt., 1
st Floor, Five
Bungalow Road,
Nasik - 01

344
(ii) The judiciary is not within the ambit of
Lokpal.
(iii) and (iv) The public servants as defined
in the Act shall be within the ambit of
the Lokpal.
(v) The Bill provides for setting up of
Investigation Wing and Prosecution Wing
{Clause 12 and 15) by the Lokpal,
hence there is no need to place CBI
under the Lokpal.
(vi) The Bill provides for furnishing of
annual statement of accounts, annual
report etc. by the Lokpal (Clause 45
and 46).
(vii) The eligibility conditions for appointment
as Chairperson and Member of Lokpal
is given in Clause 3 and the Selection
process is given in Clause 4 which are
adequate.
(viii) Having a toll free number by Lokpal, is
a matter to be decided by the Lokpal
itself. Further, the process of removal
of Lokpal is given in Clause 8 and 40
of the Bill, which is adequate.
(ii) Supreme Court and High Court judges should be
kept out of the ambit of Lokpal.
(iii) All Central, State and PSE employees shall remain
under the purview of Lokpal.
(iv) All educational institutions whether private, semi Govt.
or Govt., to come under Lokpal.
(v) CBI to come under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 45 and 46
(vi) Assessment and inspection of Lokpal within and
from outside.
CLAUSE 3 and 4
(vii) Lokpal members should be common citizens. The
Lokpal is to be of the following in the committee:-
(a) One Magasaysay Award winner or a person of
eminence in society
(b) One retired SC CJI
(c) One retired SC Judge
(d) One Ex-Attorney General of India
(e) Five well known citizens of the society (no
entrepreneurs, no corporate, no elected rep., no
religious chiefs).
(viii) Lokpal should have a toll free number and on the
suspension of Lokpal, PM should debate the matter
in Parliament and if need be, suspend the Lokpal. In
case of Lokayukta, by State Assemblies. Further,
suspension to be reviewed by an independent Ex-
12 3 4

345
47.
48.
Shri B. Madhava
Rao, Plot No.108,
H.No.8, R.K.
Enclave, Jyothi
Colony, AOC,
Secunderabad-500015.
Dr. Sarvapal Singh
Rana,
I/B, Menasri Park,
Ujjain-Road,
Dewas (M.P.)
Supreme Court judge supported by two ex-High
Court Judges.
Public Servants and Elected Officials be barred from
having direct or indirect interest in businesses and activities
that directly or indirectly receive funds or contracts from
Government.
CLAUSE 17
(i) All the Government Servants of all the States of
India should be covered by Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) All NGOs should be under the purview of Lokpal.
(iii) The Lokpal should be an independent constitutional
institution.
(iv) CVC, Lok Ayukt and CBI should be merged into
Lokpal.
(v) Lokpal should be represented by the Lok Ayukts in
the State and appointed by the Lokpal.
The import of the suggestion is not clear.
However, it may be stated that the
bureaucrats are governed by the conduct,
rules of the respective services to which
they belong and they are barred to engage in
any other economic activity.
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal is defined
in Clause 17 which is adequate. If the
lower bureaucracy is also included
within the purview of Lokpal, it will
overburden the system. As far as the
employees of the States are concerned,
it is for the respective State Government
to set the institution of Lokayukta.
(ii) Clause 17 provides to cover certain
organisations.
(iii) The proposed institution of Lokpal
would be a statutory body.
(iv) Since the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation and Prosecution Wings
(Clause 12 and 15), the CVC and CBI
need not be placed under the Lokpal.
(v) The institution of Lokayukta falls in the
domain of the States, therefore, it has
to be distinct from the Lokpal.

346
CLAUSE 30, 33, 34 and 35
(vi) Lokpal should have power of seizure, confiscation
and imposing penalty along with termination,
suspension, revoking of increments of the employees.
However, the Prison Term of whatever nature should
be decided by the competent courts of law.
CLAUSE 17
(vii) The sitting Prime Minister and the Chief Justice of
India should be kept outside the purview of Lokpal
CLAUSE 49 and 50
(i) Punishment for false complaints should not be too
severe to even discourage genuine complaints.
(ii) CVC and Anti-corruption Wing of CBI should be
under the Lokpal.
(iii) Judiciary should be out of the purview of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(iv) Prime Minister should be kept out of the purview of
Lokpal in so far as his actions in respect of National
Security, Defence and Treaty Relations with foreign
countries are concerned.
12 3 4
(iii) The powers of search and seizure, and
attachment of property is provided in
Clause 30, 33 and 34. Clause 35
provides that the Lokpal may
recommend transfer or suspension of
public servant connected with allegation
of corruption. Further, on completion
of inquiry, if commission of offence is
proved, the Lokpal may file a report in
the Special Court and send a report to
the competent authority for taking
appropriate disciplinary action in the
matter.
(iv) In the proposed Bill, the sitting Prime
Minister and the judiciary is not under
the purview of the Lokpal.
(i) The punishment for false complaints in
Clause 49 and 50 of the Bill is not too
severe. But, DoPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
(ii) No need to place these organisations
under the Lokpal as it will have its own
Investigation Wing and Prosecution
Wing (Clause 12 and 15).
(iii) The judiciary is out of the purview of
the Lokpal.
(iv) The Prime Minister will be under the
purview of the Lokpal after he/she
demits the office.
49. Shri Krishan Abrol,
krishanabrol@yahoo.
com

347
CLAUSE 4
(v) The Committee for selection of Lokpal should not
have a majority of politicians.
CLAUSE 17
(i) The Prime Minister should be included within the
ambit of Lokpal.
(ii) Judiciary should be included within the ambit of
Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) Members of Parliament should be included within
the ambit of Lokpal.
(iv) Each Department should have a Citizen’s Charter for
Grievance Redressal.
(v) CBI should be merged with the Lokpal.
(v) The Selection Committee as proposed
in Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate and
balanced.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal
position in the Governments’ set up.
To ensure that Prime Minister is able
to discharge his functions without any
interference from any quarter, it is felt
that the Prime Minister has to be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal.
However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(ii) To maintain the independence of the
judiciary, it is necessary that the
judiciary is kept outside the purview of
the Lokpal. Further, Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is already before the
Parliament for its consideration.
(iii) MPs are included within the ambit of
Lokpal. However, their actions on the
floor of the House are outside the
purview of the Lokpal.
(iv) For dealing with the public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be
set up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions
is working on the same.
(v) Since the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing and Prosecution
Wing, there is no need to merge the
CBI with the Lokpa (Clause 12-15).
50. Ms. Silky Jain,
Sily_Jain@mahind
rasatyam.com

348
(vi) Lower Bureaucracy should be included with the ambit
of Lokpal.
(vii) The Lokpal should provide protection to
whistleblowers, witnesses and victims of corruption.
CLAUSE 8
(viii) The accountability of the Lokpal members should be
to the public. Any citizen can file a petition in the
Supreme Court for removal of a corrupt Lokpal
member.
(ix) Lokpal to be completely independent institution.
CLAUSE 42
(x) Entire loss caused to the Government Exchequer on
account of corruption to be recovered from the
assets of the accused.
CLAUSE 47
(xi) Undeclared Assets to be deemed as assets earned
through corruption and these assets to be confiscated
by the Lokpal.
(i) Under 
Clause 1 of the Bill, instead of giving
discretion, for the commencement of the Act, to the
Central Government to notify in the Official Gazettee
on ‘different dates…….for different provisions.’ the
time limit within which the Act is to be notified
should be specified.
(ii) Clause 17: Jurisdiction:
(a) In 
Clause 17(1)(d),  it is mentioned that any
(vi) If the lower bur eaucracy is also
included within the ambit of Lokpal, it
will put undue pressure on the resources
of the Lokpal and it will be
overburdened.
(vii) This is covered under the protection
to Whistleblowers Bill. The
recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on the Bill are under
consideration.
(viii) The procedure for filing a complaint
by any citizen against the Lokpal
Members is given in Clause 8, which
appears to be adequate.
(ix) The Lokpal is independent within the
framework of the Constitution.
(x) Clause 42 of the Bill provides for
recovery of loss caused to the exchequer
from the corrupt public servant.
(xi) Provisions have been incorporated for
declaration of assets the public servants
(Clause 47) failure to do so will amount
to presumption as to acquisition of
assets by corrupt means.
(i) The provision made in Clause 1 (3) is
the common practice and the
Government has to take decision
depending upon circumstances.
(ii) (a) There is no ambiguity in the term
of Group ‘A’ officers as the category
12 3 4
51. Shri P.S. Bawa,
IPS(Retd.), Chairman,
Transparency
International
India, Q.No.4,
Lajpat Bhawan,
Lajpat Nagar-IV,
New Delhi-110024.

349
allegation of corruption in respect of conduct
of public servants of any Group ‘A’ or
equivalent, etc., shall be subject to the purview
of the Lokpal. There is an ambiguity in this
context. Group ‘A’ is not defined in any law. It
is a financial categorization. This cannot serve
as a definition that ought to be more specific.
Salary cannot be criterion for committing an
offence. This is a weak area that required to be
specified as it creates a separate category of
officials and defies equality clause of the
Constitution as the distinction is neither
reasonable nor justified. The Bill should cover
all public servants with discretion of the Lokpal
either to get the matter enquired/investigated by
its institution or pass it on to the already existing
networks of anti-corruption institutions.
(b) In Clause 17(1)(e),  an officer on deputation,
presumably, who reverts to the cadre and whose
conduct is under enquiry for his act of omission
or commission while serving under the Central
Government, the Lokpal shall have to seek the
'consent of the concerned State Government'.
This stipulation appears unreasonable. Once the
conduct of the officer is under scrutiny, he
must be within the purview of the Lokpal,
irrespective of his reversion to the cadre,
because the action was performed when he
was in the central Government.
(c) Clause 17(1)(f) creates an artificial category
of one (company or individual?) whose annual
income ‘exceeds such amount as the Central
Government may by notification specify'. This
is an ambiguous clause and defies clarity of
purpose and interpretation. Same criticism is
valid for sub-clause (g) expressed in the same
expression.
is well defined. Further, by including
the lower bureaucracy within the ambit
of Lokpal, undue strain will be put on
the resources of the Lokpal and it will
be overburdened. The existing
mechanism will continue to cover the
lower bureaucracy.
(b)  We have a federal structure in
which the State Governments are the
Cadre controlling authorities and their
consent is normally obtained before
taking action against the officers of
concerned cadre. Further, this is needed
to avoid victimisation of the public
servants concerned.
(c)   In order to utilise the resources
in the best possible manner, it is
necessary that the Government may
specify the companies or individuals,
based on the annual income, who would
be covered by the Lokpal.

350
(iii) Clause 23: Procedure in respect of enquiry and
investigation:
The proposed Bill appears to be soft on the defaulter
who is given many opportunities to intervene. These
are at the stage of conclusion of the preliminary
enquiry (PE, in CBI’s parlance) when the Lokpal
shall afford the public servant an opportunity of
being heard (Sub-clause 4) and then ‘before filing
the charge sheet’, the defaulter shall again be given
the opportunity of being heard (Sub clause 6). Thus
there is a surfeit of opportunities of being heard,
including two under sub-clauses (9) and (11). It is
not clear whether these are repetitive of the above
or independent for some other category.
Though the defaulter is to be heard, in the interest
of natural law and procedure, giving too many
chances of being heard shall only cause delay in the
process of coming to a conclusion.
(iv) Clause 29: Action against Minister or Member of
Parliament:
(a) The clause implies that the Special Court shall
await the decision of the competent authority
before proceeding in the matter. This amounts
to sanction to prosecute. This stipulation must
be specifically spelled out clearly rather than
being presented in a vague language. It may
read ‘No Special Court shall take cognizance in
the case of..... without the sanction of the
competent authority’ etc.
(b) The Explanation to the Clause is problematic.
Whereas, the report of the Lokpal shall be
placed on the table of the House within seven
days of its receipt, the computing of the period
of ninety days within which the action of the
(iii) In the interest of natural justice,
opportunity has to be provided to the
public servant of being heard, especially
in view of dispensing with prior
sanction for prosecution under the PC
Act and permission under Section 6A
of DSPE Act.
(iv) (a) Clause 29 provides that after
conclusion of inquiry, the Lokpal may
file a case in the Special Court. This
clause does not imply that the Special
Court has to wait the decision of the
competent authority.
(b) The period of 90 days is to be
counted taking into account the period
during which the Parliament is in
session.
12 3 4

351
competent authority is to be taken comes to a
very long time. In the ordinary course, the
House does not assemble for satisfactory
durations. One is not sure also whether
boycotting the proceedings of the House shall
be within the reckoning of the period of
computation of ninety days. As per the proposed
stipulation, the decision of the authority shall
get prolonged.
(c) It is not clear whether the decision of the
‘competent authority’ is to be preceded by a
debate in the House and voted. In case, it is
not to be debated and voted, then the period of
ninety days is too much as the matter is to be
decided by ‘the competent authority’.
(d) There ought to be a provision that if the
proposed action of the ‘competent authority’ is
not available within a stipulated period, it shall
be presumed by the Lokpal or the Special Court,
unless the authority seeks more time and is
permitted by the concerned authority, that there
is a consent for proceeding further in the matter
as proposed earlier.
(v) Clause 56: Legal Assistance: The proposal is too
liberal and surpasses the intention of the Directive
Principles of State Policy that seeks to ‘ensure that
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to
any citizen by reason of economic or other
disabilities’.
(vi)
Clause 49: Deals with prosecution of false complaint
and payment of compensation to the public servant.
The parallel clause 50 is for the civil society. On the
face of it, the clauses appear too harsh and shall
prevent whistleblowers from venturing information
of wrong doing in their spheres of activity. Not only
is the penalty of punishment too heavy, it is also
(c) It is for the Parliament to decide.
(d) There is no requirement for the
Special Court to wait the decision of
the competent authority.
(v) The provisions proposed in Clause 56
are adequate. However, DoPT is open
to suggestions in this regard.
(vi) The provisions made in Clause 49 and
50 to deal with false complaints are
adequate. But, DoPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.

352
accompanied by a financial liability that may extend
to two lakh rupees. This would discourage not only
the individual whistleblower but also the civil society
and a well intentioned citizen who would always be
under threat of severe legal action.
The Lokpal Bill should be made by the Government as
per the Constitutional process and it should be within the
parameters of the Constitution.
CLAUSE 17
(i) All Bureaucracy from top to lowest level should be
included within the ambit of Lokpal. Lokpal should
inquire of corruption cases not against certain but all
public functionaries.
(ii) The Prime Minister should be included within the
ambit of Lokpal without any riders.
The Lokpal Bill, 2011 has been introduced in
the Parliament for its consideration.
(i) If the lower bureaucracy is also
included in the purview of Lokpal, it
would cause enormous strain on the
resources of the Lokpal and it may not
be able to deal with corruption
effectively at higher places.
(ii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal
position in the Governments' set up.
To ensure that Prime Minister is able
to discharge his functions without any
interference from any quarter, it is felt
that the Prime Minister has to be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal.
However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
12 3 4
52.
53.
Shri Anil Kumar,
Social Activist,
MIG-302, Lohiya
Nagar, Kankarbagh
Colony,
Patna-800 020 (Bihar)
Shri J. Satyanarayana,
Secunderabad-500017,
Andhra Pradesh

353
(iii) Election Commission should also be covered in the
Lokpal Bill as they are not recommending recall of
elected MPs/MLAs.
CLAUSE 54
(iv) There should be limitation of ten years(instead of
seven years) from the date of commission of alleged
offence for filing the complaints before the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 3
(v) Eight Members of the Institution of Lokpal should
consist of two persons from Supreme Court Judges,
two from prominent Supreme Court Practicing
Lawyers, one member from Human Rights
Commission, one from Woman Organizations and
the rest with Social Activists. There should not be
any MPs/MLAs.
(iii) The Election Commission is a separate
Constitutional Body, which like judiciary,
cannot be brought under the purview
of the Lokpal.
(iv) The limitation period as prescribed in
Clause 54 of the Bill is adequate.
(v) The composition of the Lokpal as given
in Clause 3 of the Bill is adequate. As
per clause 3(4) of the Bill Chairperson
or Member of Lokpal shall not be an
MP/MLA.

354
COMMENTS OF DoPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of Suggestions/Comments Comments of DoPT
No. Organisation/
individual
12 3 4
Prof. H.C. Dholakia,
Former Member of
Law Commission
Need for a Comprehensive Law of Public Servants
(i) A law in relation to public servants as defined in
Sec 2(c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and
IPC is necessary and such law must be comprehensive in
nature and must also deal with acquisition of assets of
public servants.
(ii) Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 should include
MPs/MLAs and Ministers. Such would be more effective
than a mere criminal prosecution under the IPC or PC
Act.
Necessity of Law to provide for confiscation of illegally
acquired pr operty.
(iii) In the present context of unethical enrichment by
public servants by acquiring property through corrupt
means, it is necessary to enact a law providing for
confiscation of illegally acquired assets of public servants
and the burden of proof should be p]aced on the holders
of such property according to Sec. 106 of Indian Evidence
(i) Section 2(c) of the PC Act, 1988, defines
the public servant. Sub clause (2) of Clause
2 of the Lokpal Bill 2011, provides that the
words and expressions used and not defined
in this Act but defined in PC Act, 1988 shall
have the meaning respectively assigned to
them in that Act. Further Clause 33 and 34
of the Bill provide for attachment of assets
of public servants.
(ii) The definition of public servant as given
in Section 2(c) of the PC Act, 1988, though
do not specifically use the nomenclature of
MPs/MLAs and Ministers, it is comprehensive
enough to include such functionaries.
(iii) 
Clause 33 and 34  of the Lokpal Bill
provides for attachment of illegally acquired
assets of public servants. Further, the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2005
and the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance,
1944 for confiscation/forfeiture/attachment of
54.

355
Act, 1872. In this regard a Bill called “Corrupt Public
Servants Forfeiture of Property” Bill was submitted by
Law Commission along with its 166th Report. This bill as
proposed should be enacted immediately to tackle the
corruption.
Enactment of a Public Inter est Disclosur e Act (The
Whistle Blowers Act).
(iv) This act is aimed at improving accountability within
the govt. or public sector by allowing the employees to
inform the appropriate authority of organization or
individual doing either in a confidential manner of by a
public report. There is a need to make this law to provide
protection to the persons (Whistle Blowers) who give the
information about the illegalities and even may rewarded.
It may be noted that this Bill has been introduced in the
parliament and needs to be passed to fight correction
effectively.
(v) Allegations against civil servants may not come within
the purview of the Lokpal and grievances as distinguished
from misconduct, may be excluded from his jurisdiction.
There should be other effective and efficient mechanism
like CVC and/or Tribunals – with suitable nomenclatures
to look into grievances arising from maladministration or
complaints against civil servants.
(vi) Every state must have Lokayukta that is to with a
uniform Lokayukta Act in force in all the states.
ill gotten property of the corrupt public
servants.
(iv) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(v) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 is to provide the
establishment of the institution of Lokpal to
inquire into allegations of corruption against
certain public functionaries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(vi) Setting up of the Lokayuktas falls within
the domain of the States.

356
Clause 17
(i) Lokpal will have the powers to probe into allegations
of corruption by MPs like taking bribe to vote.
Clause 23-29
(ii) Lokpal will act on complaints against any Govt.
servant and will have the powers to dismiss a corrupt
public servant.
(iii) Lokpal will have the authority to investigate allegations
of corruption against judges as well as PM.
(iv) CBI to be merged with Lokpal.
CLAUSE 49-50
(v) Lokpal to decide regarding a false complaint and to
impose fine against false complaints.
CLAUSE 4
(vi) There should be an independent Search Committee
consisting of retired Judges, eminent IAS officers to
prepare the first list of eligible candidates of Lokpal and
(i) MPs are included within the ambit of
Lokpal. However, their actions on the floor
of the House are outside the purview of the
Lokpal.
(ii) The Lokpal Bill provides for inquiry/
investigations by the Lokpal on receipt of a
complaint. The punishment has to be
awarded to the public servants by the
appropriate courts/authorities once the
commission of offence is established.
Further, Clause 17(3) provides that Lokpal
may also inquire into any act or conduct of
any person associated with the allegation of
corruption under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
(iii) In the proposed Bill, the sitting Prime
Minister and the judiciary is not under the
purview of the Lokpal.
(iv) Since, the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing  [Clause 12]  and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15] , there is no
need to CBI under Lokpal.
(v) Clause 49 and 50 of the bill provide for
prosecution and penalties for false
complaints.
(vi) The Selection procedure as prescribed
in Clause 4 of the Bill is sufficient.
12 3 4
55. Kishor Pandurang
Deshmukh

357
thereafter, an independent Selection Committee comprising
of two politicians, four judges and two retired
constitutional authorities will select the Lokpal.
(vii) Lokpal to grant permission for phone tapping in
corruption cases and will have power to ban corrupt
business entities from future Govt. contracts and black
list them.
(viii) Lokpal will provide protection to complainants &
whistleblowers and to set up for special branches in High
Courts to speed up hearing of corruption cases.
(ix) Establishment of Lokayutas at state level to prove
into corruption cases against Ministers, MLAs and State
Govt. officials.
CLAUSE 23-39
(x) Enquiry to be done as in other criminal cases, i.e.
after preliminary enquiry FIR to be lodged, and then
investigation followed by trial in the court.
CLAUSE 8
(xi) Provision for complaint to remove Lokpal in Supreme
Court in the cases of unaccountability of Lokpal in its
actions.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM, Judges of Supreme court, High Court & lower
courts, all MPs/MLAs and Central/State Govt. Ministries
& officials from Peon to Secretary including village, cities
(vii) As far as the phone tapping is concerned
it has to be done by the appropriate authority
as per the guide lines on the subject. As far
as corrupt business entities are concerned,
these are not covered under the Lokpal
Bill,2011.
(viii) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(ix) Setting up of the Lokayuktas falls within
the domain of the States.
(x) On completion of investigations, if the
commission of offence has been established,
the Lokpal shall file a report in the Special
Court. Thereafter, the Special Court will
decide the quantum of sentence, etc. as per
the established procedure.
(xi) Clause 8 and 40 of the Bill provide for
complaints against the Lokpal and its
Members.
(i) In the proposed Bill, the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the Lokpal
once he/she demits the office [Clause 17].
Anti-Corruption
Council of India,
418, Urban Estate,
56.

358
and municipalities, civil hospitals must come under the
purview of Lokpal.
(ii) Lokpal should be absolutely independent and
autonomous body.
CLAUSE 4
(iii) The appointment panel of Lokpal should have 50%
Supreme Court/High Court Judges and 50% non judicial
members of integrity in the field of jurisprudence, legal
experts, top level social workers, High Intelligentsia and
totally non-political personalities.
CLAUSE 23-29
(iv) Lokpal should have absolute rights to punish the
guilty by imprisonment upto 6 years without referring the
case to judiciary or should seek permission from Govt.
CLAUSE 49-50
(v) False complainants should be punished with fines
worth Rs. one lakh or one month imprisonment instead
of 6 years imprisonment as in Govt.’s Lokpal Bill draft.
However, the judiciary may be kept outside
the purview of Lokpal and a separate Bill,
Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is already
under consideration of the Parliament. As
regards lower bureaucracy, if the same is
also included within the purview of Lokpal,
it will overburden the system. As far as the
employees of the States are concerned, it is
for the respective State Government to set
up the institution of Lokayukta.
(ii)The proposed institution of Lokpal will
be a statutory body.
(iii) The procedure for appointment of
Chairperson and Members as prescribed in
Clause 4 is adequate.
(iv) On completion of investigations, if the
commission of offence has been established,
the Lokpal shall file a report in the Special
Court. Thereafter, the Special Court will
decide the quantum of sentence, etc. as per
the established procedure.
(v) Clause 49 and 50 of the bill provide for
prosecution and penalties for false
complaints. But, DoPT is open to suggestion
in this regard and can be modified suitably.
12 3 4
Phase-I, Dugri Road,
Ludhiana–02(PB)

359
CLAUSE 23
(vi) Lokpal should have disposed off all the complaints
within a period of two/three years.
CLAUSE 12-15
(vii) The Lokpal should have strong wings for Investigation,
prosecution and Anti-Corruption wing etc.
CLAUSE 61
(viii) Central Govt./PM should not interfere in the working
of Lok Pal.
CLAUSE 33-34
(ix) Lokpal must be empowered to acquire/confiscate the
illegal movable/immovable property acquired by the corrupt
officials/politicians.
CLAUSE 38
(x) Lokpal must be empowered to constitute Special
Courts for hearing complaints under Prevention of
Corruption Act.
CLAUSE 17
(xi) NGOs, Social Welfare Organizations, Religious and
Cultural organizations raising voice against corruption
should not be covered under the Lokpal Purview.
(vi) The time limits for completion of inquiry
as given in Clause 23(2) and 23(8) are
adequate.
(vii) The Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing [Clause 12] and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15].
(viii) Clause 61 of the Lokpal Bill provides
that the Lokpal may make regulations to
carry out the provisions of this Act, namely
– conditions of services of the secretary
and other offices and staff of the Lokpal;
place of sittings of Benches of the Lokpal;
manner for displaying on the website of the
Lokpal the status of the complaints, etc.;
the manner and procedure of conducting an
inquiry or investigation.
(ix) The powers to attach property acquired
through corrupt means by the corrupt public
servants are provided in Clause 33 and 34.
(x) The Special Courts are to be set up by
the Central Government as recommended by
the Lokpal [Clause 38].
(xi) Such of the organisations which receive
public funds are covered. However, the
religious organisation receiving public funds
are kept outside the purview of the Bill. The
jurisdiction given under Clause 17 of the Bill
is adequate.

360
(xii) Clause 47 of the Bill provides for
declaration of assets by public servants.
(xiii) The Lokpal is meant to inquire into all
allegations of corruption against certain public
functionaries and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(i) As the false and frivolous complaints
may cause irreparable loss to the innocent
public servants, it is necessary that some
deterrent is there to discourage mala fide
complaints. Therefore, the provisions made
in Clause 49 and 50 to deal with false
complaints are adequate. But, DoPT is open
to suggestions in this regard.
(ii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments' set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 47
(xii) Central Govt. to make it mandatory to declare Assets
& Liabilities statements for all Political Parties, MPs/
MLAs, IAS/IPS/IRS/IFS Gazetted Officers at the time of
joining and thereafter every year.
PREAMBLE
(xiii) Lokpal should have powers to enquire against any
political party/organization established by politicians for
their funding, benefits obtained from Govt. and their
working. Also the powers to enquire against the statements
of Expenses & Funds raised from the public/industrialists
by the politicians for contesting elections.
CLAUSE 49-50
(i) In Clause No. (XIV) Govt. Lokpal Bill, there should be
a provision of imposing a reasonable fine instead of
prosecution for making frivolous or false or meaningless
complaints otherwise the fear of prosecution will never
allow a person to make even a truthful complaint.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) PM should be in the ambit of Lok Pal.
S.N. Agrawal, DS
(Retired),
‘Ashiana’, 7/409,
Near Disneyland,
High Sec. School,
Malviya
Nagar, Jaipur – 17
57.
12 3 4

361
(iii) The Chairman, Director, Manager, Secretary or any
other officer of any Body, Board, Corporation, Authority,
Company, Society, Trust, Local Self Body either receiving
financial aid from Govt. should also be in the domain of
Lok Pal.
(iv) Judiciary, whether higher or lower, should not be
kept under Lokpal instead of this there can be a separate
legislation for judiciary.
(v) Either the CBI be brought under Lokpal or given the
autonomy.
(i) Set up of Lokpal at Centre and Lokayukta in each
State completely independent of the Government.
CLAUSE 23 & 42
(ii) Investigations should be completed within one year
and trial should be completed in next year to send the
corrupt politicians, officer or judge to jail while recovering
loss from them.
(iii) The Bill provides that any person who
is or has been a director, manager, secretary
or other officer of every other society or
association of persons or trusts wholly or
partly financed or aided by the Government
and the annual income of which exceeds
such amount as the Central Government may
by notification are within the ambit of the
Lokpal.
(iv) The Judicial Standards and Accountability
Bill is before the Parliament.
(v) The Bill provides for setting up of
Investigation Wing [Clause 12] and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15] by the Lokpal.
(i) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(ii) The time limits for completion of inquiry
as given in Clause 23(2) and 23(8) The
preliminary inquiry is required to be
completed within 30 days which may be
extended for a further period of 3 months.
The inquiry is to be completed within a
period of six months which may be extended
for a further period of six months. Clause
42 of the Bill provides for recovery of loss
caused to the public exchequer.
58. Devendra Kumar

362
(iii) Lokpal to impose financial penalty on the guilty
officers for delay caused in doing any work of any
citizen. This penalty will be given as compensation to the
complainant.
CLAUSE 4
(iv) The members of Lokpal should be appointed by
judges, citizens and constitutional authorities through a
completely transparent and participatory process, and not
by politicians.
CLAUSE 41
(v) Any complaint against any officer of Lokpal shall be
investigated and the officer shall be dismissed within two
months.
CLAUSE 12-15
(vi) CVC, departmental vigilance and anti-corruption branch
of CBI to be merged into Lokpal and Lokpal shall have
the complete powers to independently investigate and
prosecute any officer, judge or politician including PM.
(vii) Lokpal to provide protection to those victims who
are raising voice against corruption.
CLAUSE 54
(viii) There should not be any timeline for complaining
corruption done at upper level like A/B class, PM, Judge
and Sansad.
(iii) For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(iv) The procedure for appointment of
Chairperson and Members as prescribed in
Clause 4 meets the demand.
(v) The provisions for complaint against
officials of Lokpal as given in Clause 41 are
adequate.
(vi) Since, the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing [Clause 12] and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15], there is no
need to put CVC and ACB of CBI under
Lokpal.
(vii) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(viii) The limitation period as prescribed in
Clause 54 is considered necessary to
safeguard the public servants against
unnecessary victimasation.
12 3 4

363
59.
60.
Sarvesh Kumar
Suyash,
A-1802, Avash
Vikash Colony,
Hanspuram, Naubasta,
Kanpur-21
J.N. Gahlaut, Vice
Patron, Indian Red
Cross Society
CLAUSE 17
(i) The societies conducting programs on different religions
and cultural societies to be kept out of Lokpal and there
should be provision of action under Societies Act against
their irregularities.
(ii) All the officials of Centre and State Govt. to be
brought under Lokpal.
(iii) The services like Police/Ration/Hospital/Education/Raod/
Transport/Industries/Panchayat /Municipality/ Forest/
Irrigation/Pension/Collectoriat etc to brought under Lokpal
and there should be a provision of atleast 10 years
imprisonment, if the complaint is found true.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM, Judiciary and the conduct of MPs during session
should be kept out of the perview of Lokpal.
(ii) Lokpal should have the control over the govt. appointing
authorities.
(i) The jurisdiction as defined in Clause 17
of the Bill is adequate. As far as provisions
of action under the Societies Act are
concerned, it is beyond the scope of the
present Bill.
(ii) The proposed Lokpal Bill covers the
public functionaries under the Central
Government. In so far as the officials under
the State Governments are concerned, it is
for the respective State Governments to set
up the institution of Lokayukta.
(iii) For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(i) In the proposed Bill, the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the Lokpal
once he/she demits the office [Clause 17].
With regard to the judiciary, a separate Bill,
Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is already
under consideration of the Parliament. The
conduct of the MPs on the floor of the
House is also not within the purview of
Lokpal.
(ii) This mean that the Lokpal would be all
encompassing authority thereby all the
powers will converge with the single
authority which may not be desirable as it
will have its implications.

364
CLAUSE 23-29, 33 & 34
(iii) There should be a provision for conducting inquiries
on receiving the information regarding deposits in bank
accounts and the other properties in shape of real estate,
created through undesirable sources. If the information is
correct, this property to be taken over by the govt. and
10% share to be given to informer. It will control the
corruption as the people the reality of such persons.
(iv) Persons caught red handed should be removed from
service and no extension after 60 years of age. All the
cases of corruption should be decided with in three
months by fast track courts.
CLAUSE 17 & 23
(i) Except Supreme court, all govt official including PM
should be kept under the ambit of Lokpal. Lokpal should
have the power to investigate all the agencies including
CBI and it should take on action on complaints made by
public.
CLAUSE 49-50
(ii) There should not be any provision of prosecution
against complainant as it is possible that corrupt official
may vanish the evidence and in this case, the complaint
will be trapped unnecessarily.
CLAUSE 12
(iii) Lokpal should have its own autonomous bodies with
the powers to investigate against CMs of States and the
Governors of the States should come under them.
(iii) The complaints mechanism and
procedure for inquiry/investigation as given
in Clause 23-29 appears to be adequate.
Clause 33 & 34 of the Bill provide for
attachment of property. The present Bill does
not provide for reward to the informer.
(iv) The removal of the public servants has
to be done after due process of law. Further,
on completion of investigations, if the
commission of offence has been established,
the Lokpal shall file a report in the Special
Court. Thereafter, the Special Court will
decide the quantum of sentence, etc. as per
the established procedure.
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
Clause 17 is adequate. Clause 12 of the Bill
provide for setting up of Investigation Wing
by the Lokpal and the procedure to deal
with the complaints is given in Clauses 23-
29, which appears to be adequate.
(ii) Action for false complaints has to be
taken as per the provisions of Clause 49-50.
(iii) The Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing [Clause 12]. However, as
regards investigations against the CMs of
12 3 4
61. V .K. Tyagi,
40/8B, Chavmandi,
Rurkee

365
the States and the Governors by the Lokpal
is concerned, the same come within the
jurisdiction of the Lokayuktas of the
respective States.
(iv) The eligibility conditions for appointment
as Chairperson and Members of Lokpal as
given Clause 3 are adequate. Regarding
provisions for removal and complaints against
the Lokpal and its members, and the
complaints against the officials of the Lokpal
the provisions of Clause 8, 40 and 41 are
adequate.
(i) There appears to be no reason to change
the name of the Bill.
(ii) The Bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act. As regards the jurisdiction of the
Lokpal, the provisions made in Clause 17
seem to be adequate.
(iii) The appointment procedure as prescribed
in Clause 4, 5 & 6 of the Bill is adequate.
(iv) The Chairperson and Members are to
be appointed by the President. The procedure
CLAUSE 3, 8, 40 & 41
(iv) The members and official of Lokpal should have a
clean image and unblemished record. Only the Supreme
Court should have the powers to prosecute the members
or officials of Lokpal.
(i) The name of the bill should be “Jan Lokpal Bill”.
DEFINITIONS AND CLAUSE 17
(ii) The term “Corruption” shall be defined in the bill. The
bill shall cover all the aspect of corruption at all levels,
i.e. from individuals to all organizations.
CLAUSE 4
(iii) A selection committee of three members consisting of
Speaker of Lok Sabha, Leader of Opposition in LS and
Chief Justice of Supreme Court will be constituted by
President to appoint Lokpal and its members. The Lokpal
and 10 members shall be selected through open
advertisement with transparency.
(iv) Lokpal to be accountable to President of India and its
members to Lokpal. Complaint against Lokpal may be
62. Unknown Citizen

366
filed in Supreme Court which shall take decision to remove
of punish them.
CLAUSE 23-29
(v) A complaint can be made against any individual or
organization by anyone regarding corruption to Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(vi) All public servants should be kept under the purview
of Lokpal. PM and the conduct of MPs shall be under
the purview of Lokpal but investigation will be decided by
10 member bench Lokpal bench.
(vii) Lokpal at Centre and Lokayukta at State will exercise
their powers against corruption.
(viii) Each department shall make citizen’s charter and its
violation will be dealt by Judiciary not by Lokpal.
(ix) Lokpal will provide protection to whistle blowers.
(x) There should not be any provision of phone tapping.
for complaints against the Chairperson and
Members as given in Clause 8 and 40 of the
Bill is adequate.
(v) The mechanism for handling complaints
is given in Clause 23-29.
(vi) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
in the Bill is adequate.
(vii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(viii) For matters relating public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be set
up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions is
working on the same.
(ix) This is covered under the protection ro
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(x) There is no such provision in the present
Bill.
12 3 4

367
(xi) Punishment for corrupt practices will depend on the
intensity of the case and may be from 6 months
imprisonment of 6 months to 10 years, termination of
service, imposition of fine or forfeiture of assets, as the
case may be.
CLAUSE 23-29 & 35
(xii) Lokpal shall conduct preliminary enquiry and if the
fact is established, Police will lodge FIR followed by
filing charge sheet in Special Court. Also the corrupt
officer/staff shall be put under suspension till the case is
disposed off by special fast track court.
CLAUSE 16
(xiii) Lokpal will get fund from consolidated fund of
India.
CLAUSE 49-50
(xiv) Lokpal will decide on the false or frivolous
complaints and accusation will attract fine up to a maximum
up to Rs. 1 lakh
(i) Lokpal must be a constitutional body like Election
Commission of India. All its members must be judicial
members.
CLAUSE 23-29
(ii) There should be a provision for appeal against Lokpal
in Supreme Court and in case of Lokayukta in High
Court.
(xi) The quantum of punishment on
conviction is to be decided by the Courts as
per the prevailing law. As regards the
termination of service, action has to be taken
by the competent authority after following
due process of law.
(xii) The procedure for conduct of inquiry
and action thereon is prescribed in Clause
23-29 of the Bill, which is adequate. Clause
35 provides that the Lokpal may recommend
transfer or suspension of public servant
connected with allegation of corruption.
(xiii) Clause 16 of the Bill provides for the
same.
(xiv) The provisions made in Clause 49 and
50 to deal with false complaints are adequate.
But, DOPT is open to suggestions in this
regard.
(i) The proposed institution of Lokpal is a
statutory body. However, for making Lokpal
a Constitutional body, Constitutional
Amendments will be required.
(ii) On completion of investigations, if the
commission of offence has been established,
the Lokpal shall file a report in the Special
Court. Thereafter, the Special Court will
decide the quantum of sentence, etc. as per
63. Yogendra Prasad
Singh, Convener,
Bihar Anusachiviya
Karmchari Sangh

368
(iii) Column IV of Clause 3 of Notification, i.e. Section
19 of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 to be retained
as it is. [Section 19 provides for previous sanction of the
competent authority for prosecution]
CLAUSE 33 & 34
(iv) Clause VI - Assets of public servant to be confiscated
and credited only after the final decision.
(v) Lokpal to be set up in five phases according to public
convenience.
(vi) Lokpal to be constituted under the provisions of
constitution and the States should have the right to
constitute Lokayukta.
(vii) Vigilance may be used to prevent the corruption
among Non Gazetted officials. Public servant should be
dealt without deviating from the Article 311 of the
Constitution.
the established procedure. In so far as
Lokayuktas are concerned, it is for the
respective State Governments to frame
legislations.
(iii) With a view to speed up the process of
investigation and prosecution, the Lokpal Bill
provides that previous sanction will not be
required for investigation and initiating
prosecution by Lokpal in certain cases.
[CLAUSE 27].
(iv) The provisions made in Clause 33 and
34 of the Bill for attachment of property are
adequate.
(v) The intentions of this suggestion are not
clear.
(vi) To make the Lokpal as a Constitutional
body, Constitutional Amendment would be
required. Further, setting up the institution
of Lokayukta falls within the domain of the
States. Keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for the
States to decide.
(vii) The proposed institution of Lokpal is to
inquire into allegations of corruption against
Group ‘A’ and above officers and certain
other public functionaries. On the basis of
the report of the Lokpal, the departmental
action has to be taken by the competent
authority as per law. [CLAUSE 23-29].
12 3 4

369
(i) Clause 46 provides that the Lokpal shall
furnish such reports, returns as prescribed
by the Central Government and the Central
Government shall lay a copy of the report
before each House of Parliament.
(ii) The meaning of the corruption will have
the same meaning as is contained in the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
(iii) The procedure for appointment of
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal as given
in Clause 4 is adequate.
(iv) The Lokpal Bill 2011 envisages
investigations of allegations of corruption
against certain public functionaries.
(v) There is no such provision in the Lokpal
Bill, 2011.
(vi) If the Government decides on salary of
Lokpal Chairman and Members, it may lose
its independence.
(vii) As per Clause 6 of the Bill, the
Chairperson or Member of the Lokpal shall
hold office for a term not exceeding five
years from the date on which he enters
CLAUSE 46
(i) Lokpal should submit its corruption report to President
through PM who has right to question, query and ask
any clarification before sending to the President. PM shall
have the right to see, verify and monitor the progress of
all the corruption cases except any case related to PM.
DEFINITION
(ii) Definition of corruption to include both sides, i.e.
Govt. and Private.
CLAUSE 4
(iii) Selection of Lokpal chairman and its members should
be done by Govt. approved selection committee and
maximum categories of people to be involved.
(iv) Jan Lokpal should cater for cases related to reported
corruption only.
(v) Secretary Vigilance should retain its post and there is
no need for separate Vigilance Secretary in the Lokpal to
look into the affairs in the Govt. deptts.
CLAUSE 7
(vi) Govt should decide the salary of Lokpal chairman
and its members rather than the provisions of Jan Lokpal
Bill. Also the salary & service conditions of Lokpal Staff
should be as per the prevailing rules of Govt.
CLAUSE 6
(vii) Lokpal Chairman and its members should be less
than 75 years of age where as there can be relaxation of
upper age limit for its staff.
64. Jagpal Singh,
Retd. Civilian
Gazetted Officer

370
upon his office or until he attains the age of
75 years whichever is earlier.
(viii) The Jan Lokpal Bill is before the
Committee for its examination.
(ix) The judgements are passed by the
appropriate Courts and provisions exist in
the law to approach appropriate higher Courts
against such orders.
(x) To tackle this, separate Bill, namely the
Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public
Officials and Officials of the Public
International Organisations Bill, 2011, is
already under examination of the Standing
Committee.
(xi) As per the provisions of the proposed
Bill on completion of investigations, if the
commission of offence has been established,
the Lokpal shall file a report in the Special
Court. Thereafter, the Special Court will
decide the quantum of sentence, etc. as per
the established procedure. Appeal for revision
of judgment etc. has to be done as per the
judicial procedure.
(xii) As per Clause 27 of the Bill, previous
sanction is not necessary for investigation
and initiating prosecution by Lokpal in certain
cases. Clause 28 of the Bill provides that in
the case of Ministers and Members of
Parliament, where on conclusion of the
(viii) Since, Jan Lokpal is drafted by civil society, its
members should not made Lokpal Chairman and members.
(ix) Citizens should have the right to protest against the
judgement of corruption report.
(x) Lokpal bill should also deal the bribe cases of private
sector. Briber giver and taker both should be punished
under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 23-29
(xi) MPs should have the right to review the judgement
of Lokpal through Parliamentary Procedure and submit
the suggestions to the President of India. Ultimately, it
will be at the discretion of President to review/pardon this
judgement.
CLAUSE 27 & 29
(xii) Approval of PMO and Parliament to be taken in case
of political corruption.
12 3 4

371
CLAUSE 47-48
(xiii) Computerisation of property of all govt. servants
may be maintained and should be available of govt. website.
Lokpal can call for any such information, if required.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM, Ministers, MPs or Judiciary members can be
brought under the ambit of Lokpal but they must be
shielded through adequate checks and balances by making
subordinate legislation under the proposed clause 60 of
Lokpal Bill. The insulation should be provided as mentioned
below:
PM & Minister
The complaint against PM/Ministers along with the evidence
shall be first examined by a committee of experts including
two sitting or retired Judges of Supreme Court/High
Court. This committee will submit its report to the Ethics
committee of the respective house and then after
considering this report Ethics committee may recommend
the complaint based on the facts for investigation and
prosecution to the Lokpal. In case of the Minister who
has yet to attain the membership of either of the house,
Vice President shall constitute a Committee comprising
the MPs of both the houses of Parliament in lieu of
Ethics Committee.
MPs
In case of complaint against MPs, the complaint can be
investigated and further prosecution only after the Ethics
inquiry or investigation, the findings of the
Lokpal disclose the commission of an offence
under the PC Act, 1988, the Lokpal may file
a case in the Special Court and shall send a
copy of the report together with its finding
to the Competent Authority.
(xiii) Clause 47 and 48 of the Bill deals with
the declaration of assets by the public
servants.
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as provided
in Clause 17 is adequate. In the proposed
Bill, the Prime Minister will come within the
purview of the Lokpal once he/she demits
the office [Clause 17]. Clause 23-29 of the
Bill provides procedure to process the
complaints
However, the judiciary has been kept outside
the purview of Lokpal and a separate Bill,
Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is already
under consideration of the Parliament.
65. RSV Mani,
139, DIN
Apartments, Sector 4,
Plot No. 7,
Dwarka, N. Delhi-78

372
Committee of the respective house, has examined the
alleged misconduct and evidence against MP, and
recommends the investigation by Lokpal. Ethics Committee
may seek the services of any sitting/retired Judge of High
Court or of any Law Officer of Govt. of India to assist
in the examination of evidences.
Members of Judiciary
In case of complaints against Judicial Members, Chief
Justice of India (CJI) shall constitute a group of Judicial
experts/collegium for each case and it will submit its
recommendations to CJI who may accord sanction for
prosecution to Lokpal.
Similarly insulation can be provided for other constitutional
authorities like CAG (PAC chairman may be made
authority) etc.
(ii) In regulation part, a schedule of items can be made
regarding exemption of investigation by Lokpal like National
Security, Intelligence matters, Defence matters and
decisions regarding financial consolidations. Also,
suspension of Lokpal during emergency may be included
Duties of Lokpal
(i) Lokpal’s jurisdiction, status, powers and accountability
can be worked out by Parliament as desired to be effective.
(ii) Lokpal should discharge his duties by choosing the
place of investigation/probe each day on random basis
keeping their programme of visits strictly secret and
(i) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 provides for the
jurisdiction, status, powers and accountability
of the Lokpal.
(ii) The Lokpal is expected to inquire into
allegations of corruption against certain public
functionaries and it is not to be an institution
12 3 4
66. M S Krishnamurthy,
A-4, Adinath Co-op
Hsg. Society, Antop
Hill, Wadala (E),
Mumbai–37

373
surprise. Lokpal should choose the place of visit preferably
on the day of visit.
(iii) Action against corrupts should be time bound.
(iv) HOD to be held accountable for any corruption
detected in his department.
(v) Cases of elected leaders with criminal antecedents
should be decided within 6 months after their election.
(vi) There should be fixed time for all projects failing
which a strict penalty for those involved including the
licensing process of oil blocks, iron ore blocks and
spectrum allocation.
(vii) Strong judicial accountability and Police reforms to
be brought.
(viii) The corrupt businessmen to be barred Govt. projects
and to be blacklisted.
(ix) Citizen’s Charters to be endorsed in Govt. Departments.
doing the inspection work. Further, Clause
61 provides that Lokpal may make
regulations in this regard.
(iii) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and Clause 28 of the Bill.
(iv) It may not be possible for HOD to
control the conduct of other persons. Hence,
he cannot be held responsible for every
instance of corruption detected in his
Department.
(v) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and 28 of the Bill.
(vi) This is beyond the scope of Lokpal.
(vii) The Judicial Standards Accountability
Bill is already under consideration of the
Parliament. As far as Police reforms are
concerned, it is beyond the scope of this
Bill.
(viii) This is beyond the scope of the present
Bill.
(ix) For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.

374
PREAMBLE & CLAUSE 17
(i) Corporate and private functionaries to be brought
under the ambit of Lokpal.
(ii) Media being fourth pillar of democracy to be brought
under the ambit of Lokpal.
(iii) In clause 17 (f ), the societies or associations or
trust constituted for religious purposes to be brought
under the ambit of Lokpal to prevent the ongoing corruption
in these trusts/societies.
(iv) Clasue 4 (1) -  The selection committee of Lokpal
should also include Chairperson of National Women
Commission, Chairperson of SC 1ST Commission and
Chairperson of National Commission for Minorities.
CLAUSE 3
(v) For the members of Lokpal, apart from 50%
representation from Judiciary, it should include 50%
representation for women, 25% for SC/ST and 25% for
minorities.
CLAUSE 49-50
(vi) When a false or frivolous complaint is made against
SC/ST functionaries, while punishing the complainants in
such a situation, clauses 3.1 (ix), 3.2(i), (ii), (vi) and 7
of SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities Act), 1989 also need
to be invoked and needs to be mentioned in Lokpal Bill.
(vii) Lower level of public and private functionaries to be
included in the Lokpal Bill.
(i) & (ii)  The present Bill is to provide for
establishment of the institution of Lokpal to
inquire into allegations of corruption against
certain public functionaries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(iii) The societies or associations or trusts
constituted for religious purposes have been
kept outside the purview of Lokpal.
(iv) The composition of the Selection
Committee as prescribed in Clause 4 of the
Bill is adequate.
(v) In the Bill, 50% of the Members of the
Lokpal are to be from judiciary because the
Lokpal will be a qusai-judicial body and it
will also be discharging certain judicial
functions. There is no proposal provide
reservations on any ground to any category.
(vi) The provisions to tackle false complaints
as contained in Clause 49 & 50 of the bill
are adequate. The aggrieved person may seek
appropriate remedies from appropriate fora.
(vii) This will over burden the Lokpal and
may put strain on the available resources.
Bharat Patil,
Nagarjun Colony,
Sanjay Gandhi Nagar,
Nagpur-17
67.
12 3 4

375
(viii) There should be a provision a website and common
telephone number to register complaints. And necessary
protection rights for whistler blowers to be provisioned.
(ix) Diversion of funds from SC/ST subplan should come
automatically under the purview of Lokpal and to be
treated as an offence under SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities
Act), 1989, if required, necessary amendments can be
made in this Act.
(x) Election expenses also to be brought under the ambit
of Lokpal
CLAUSE 17
(i) Lokpal to have powers to take action against corrupt
officials, MPs or Ministers.
CLAUSE 23-29
(ii) Lokpal to have powers to act on complaint from
general public and to initiate cases by registering FIR and
further take up the cases of corruption on its own.
Lokpal to have a maximum trial period of 1 year to put
the culprits behind the bars as the earliest.
CLAUSE 33 &34
(iii) Lokpal to have powers to confiscate the property of
culprits and hand over to the Government An open hearing
should take place to remove corrupt officials.
CLAUSE 12-15
(iv) The entire vigilance machinery like CVC, CBI and
regulatory bodies should come under Lokpal.
(viii) These are the matters for which Lokpal
has to make rules and regulations.
(ix) The Lokpal is intended to investigate
matters where allegations of corruption are
involved.
(x) This issue relates to Electoral Reforms.
(i) Lokpal has such powers.
(ii)The procedure for handling complaints
and investigations etc. is given in Clause 23-
29 which is adequate.
(iii) The provisions for attachment of
property are given Clause 33 and 34 of the
Bill.
(iv) The Bill provides the Lokpal shall set up
its own Investigation Wing  [Clause 12]  and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15].  Hence, there
is no need to place CVC and CBI under the
Lokpal.
68. Venkat Pogaru,
F-37/1, Vrindavan
Housing Society,
Sector 4, Sanapada,
Navi Mumbai-05

376
(v) A citizen charter to be prepared mentioning time
period for specific work by every department and if this
charter is ignored, the dealing employee will be punished
by Lokpal and a fine to be imposed on employee which
is to be paid to the citizen.
CLAUSE 17
(vi) President, PM and the judges of Supreme Court to
be included in the ambit of Lokpal. Also the Lokpal to
have the powers to prosecute judges, bureaucrats, MPs
& PM.
(vii) Set up of Lokpal at Centre and Lokayukta at state
level. The complaints can be made directly to Lokpal &
Lokayukta.
CLAUSE 4
(viii) Lokpal members to be selected by a committee
comprising 2 leaders, 4 judges and 2 persons from
constitutional position with full participation of public.
CLAUSE 8, 40 & 41
(ix) A complaint regarding removal of Lokpal member can
be filed in Supreme Court by any citizen. Also a complaint
commission to be set up in each state to investigate
breaching in Lokpal Staff. The complaint against Lokpal
staff to be investigated within one month and the guilty
staff member to be terminated from duty.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM and Judiciary to be brought under Lokpal with
certain conditions.
(v) For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(vi) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
Clause 17 is adequate.
(vii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(viii) The Selection procedure provided in
Clause 4 is adequate.
(xi) Clause 8 and 40 of the Bill provides for
mechanism for complaints against the
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal and
Clause 41 provides for complaints against
the staff of Lokpal, which are adequate.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
12 3 4
69. Jaikishan Agrawal,
Blind Social Activist, 393,
Kucha Bulaki Begum,
Dariba Kalan, Delhi-06

377
CLAUSE 4
(ii) A three member committee to be constituted to form
a Search Committee which will select suitable persons for
Lokpal and submit its recommendations for the approval
of President.
(iii) The matters of Govt. officials from Peon to Group
“A” officers, MLA, MPs and ministers to be brought
before Lokpal.
CLAUSE 16
(iv) Salaries of staff of Lokpal and its subordinate offices
can be paid by prescribing certain fee for complaints and
by imposing Lokpal Cess.
CLAUSE 1 & 3
(v) Whole India should be under the jurisdiction of Lokpal
and Vice Lokpals to be appointed under Lokpal.
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal. As regards
judiciary, a separate Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is before the Parliament.
(ii) Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the
Selection Committee may constitute a Search
Committee for the purpose of selecting the
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal and
for preparing a panel of persons to be
considered for appointment as such.
(iii) The Bill proposes to cover higher
bureaucracy, i.e. Group ‘A’ officers and other
public functionaries. If the lower bureaucracy
is also brought within the ambit of Lokpal,
it will over burden it and put strain on the
resources.
(iv) Clause 16 of the Bill provides that
expenses of the Lokpal shall be charged on
the Consolidated Fund of India.
(v) The territorial jurisdiction of the Lokpal
extends to whole of India and also applies
to public servants outside India [Clause 1].
The composition of the Lokpal as given in

378
(vi) There should be fixed time for disposing off the
cases by Lokpal.
CLAUSE 52
(i) Lokpal shall have protection from Liability and
Prosecution for acts performed under law.
(ii) Only Supreme Court shall have right to review
jurisdiction of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 6
(iii) Tenure of Lokpal and its member should be 3 years
and Lokpal may be dissolved at before tenure by majority
voting in Parliament if found incapable to hold the office
on moral and technical grounds.
(iv) CBI should come under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(v) Jurisdiction of the Lokpal shall exclude the High court
and Supreme court. It will have the powers to investigate
the officers/members of lower judiciary and shall submit
its report to High court or Supreme court.
(vi) Lokpal shall recognize and reward the public servants
who have act as a whistleblower against corruption in
their offices.
Clause 3  is adequate.
(vi) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and Clause 28 of the Bill.
(i) Clause 52 of the Bill provides for
protection of action taken in good faith by
Lokpal or any officer, employee, etc.
(ii) On completion of investigations, the
Lokpal has to file a report before the Special
Court. Normal judicial procedure has to be
followed for any appeal etc.
(iii) The tenure of the Lokpal and its Members
as given in Clause 6 is adequate.
(iv) The Bill provides for setting up of
Investigation Wing [Clause 12]  and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15] by Lokpal, so
there is no need to place CBI under Lokpal.
(v) The judiciary is not within the ambit of
Lokpal. Judicial Standards Accountability Bill
is already under consideration of the
Parliament.
(vi) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
12 3 4
70. Robin Ghosh,
49 Rajinder Road,
Opp. Tele Exchange,
Jalandhar Cantt-05

379
(vii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
in Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.
(viii) The judiciary is not within the ambit
of the Lokpal. In the proposed Bill, the
Prime Minister will come within the purview
of the Lokpal once he/she demits the office
[Clause 17].
(ix) The institution of Lokpal is meant to
curb corruption at higher places. Therefore,
the Group ‘A’ and above officers have to be
brought within the ambit of Lokpal. Further,
if the Group ‘A’ officers are within the
purview of CVC and Lokpal jointly, there
will be duplicity of work and there may
clash in approach.
(x) For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same
(xi) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and Clause 28 of the Bill.
(xii) The Lokpal has powers of Civil Court
in the matter of summoning and enforcing
the attendance of any person; requiring
discovery and production of any document;
receiving evidence on affidavits; requisitioning
any public record; issuing commission for
(vii) Lokpal to investigate against MLAs/MPs and local
political leaders including student unions registered under
national political parties.
(viii) Judges of Supreme court and High court should not
come under Lokpal. PMO should come under Lokpal
only for investigation.
(ix) Lokpal shall cover public servants other than Grade
A. Grade ‘A’ officers shall be covered by the CVC &
Lokpal jointly.
(x) A separate panel shall be setup for screening complaints
by the citizens against any Grade A officer and other
complaints directly by Lokpal or Lokayukta.
CLAUSE 23 & 28
(xi) Lokpal/Lokayukta shall have to reply to the complainant
within 45 days and matter to be disposed off with 15
months.
CLAUSE 31
(xii) The warrant of arrest shall be issued by local police
under the order of Lokpal/Lokayukta against corrupt. No
bail before first proceedings by Lokpal.

380
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART-II
(xiii) Provision of minimum 5 years imprisonment extended
upto life imprisonment, barring from contesting elections,
ceasing of personal property of guilty.
(xiv) Lokpal shall have the powers of a civil court.
CLAUSE 23
(xv) Progress report of Lokpal to be made public half
yearly and to be discussed in Lok Sabha along with
coverage under RTI Act
CLAUSE 3 & 17
(i) There should three tier Lokpal system, i.e. District,
State and National level. The jurisdiction of the three
should be as follows:
(a) Jurisdiction at District level shall include matters
where alleged amount is form 1 Lakh but less
than two lakh. Public officers taking salary of
Rs. 1 lakh to 5 lakh per annum may fall in this.
(b) The State Level shall include matters from Rs. 2
lakh to 1 crore. Public officers taking salary of
Rs. 5 lakh to 10 lakh per annum may fall in this
(c) National level shall cover matters of above 1 crore.
Public officers taking salary more than Rs. 10
lakh per annum may fall in this.
(d) But the corruption amount involved actually shall
determine the actual jurisdiction rather than salary
of public officer.
the examination of witnesses or documents,
etc. [Clause 31].
(xiii) The punishment has to be awarded as
per the prevailing law.
(xiv) Clause 31 provides for this.
(xv) Clause 23 of the Bill provides that the
Lokpal shall display to the public the status
of the complaints pending before it or
disposed of by it.
(i) The structure of the Lokpal as given in
Clause 3 is adequate. Further, setting up the
institution of Lokayukta falls within the
domain of the States. Keeping in view the
federal structure of our Constitution, it may
be left for the States to decide. The
jurisdiction of the Lokpal as prescribed in
Clause 17 is adequate.
12 3 4
71. Gurjit Singh,
18, Ghuman Nagar,
Sirhind Raod,
Patiala (Punjab)

381
(e) Territorial jurisdiction will be according to the
place where alleged offence has taken place and
if it matches the pecuniary limits of jurisdictions
mentioned above
Appeal
(ii) Provisions for appeals filing appeals to be made. Also
the appeal from lower level should be allowed only if the
matter involves question of law or a substantial question
of public importance.
Revision and Review
(iii) Provisions for revision and review of orders passed
to be made. Also provisions for filing reference in matter
that need clarification by National level and involve question
of law.
(iv) Provisions for filing online complaints as well as for
online availability of orders passed on website
CLAUSE 17
All religious organizations raising funds from Public should
come under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM, Judiciary, MPs and NGOs and functionaries of all
political parties (without any exception) should come under
the ambit of Lokpal, and the person or entities in which
Public and Govt. reposes faith such as CAs, Advocates,
Credit Agencies, BCCI should also be though of inclusion.
DEFINITIONS
(ii) The word “Corruption” to be defined. It may include
any kind of favor whether in lieu of money or equivalent
(ii) & (iii)  On completion of investigations,
if the commission of offence has been
established, the Lokpal shall file a report in
the Special Court. Thereafter, the Special
Court will decide the quantum of sentence,
etc. as per the established procedure. Appeal
for revision of judgment etc. has to be done
as per the judicial procedure.
(iv) The Lokpal may frame regulations in
this regard. [Clause 61]
The Lokpal Bill consciously excludes the
religious organisations from the purview of
Lokpal.
(i) The jurisdiction as given in Clause 17 of
the Bill is adequate.
(ii) The meaning of the corruption will have
the same meaning as is contained in the
72.
73.
Jana Vignana
Vedika (Andhra
Pradesh)
Pawan K. Sharma,
C-10/27, FF,
Sector-15, Rohini,
Delhi-89

382
or any other mode such as appointing someone of
corrupt's choice an employee or director or any other
office of profit which culminates into money of equivalent
to money or any other direct or indirect benefit such
extracting or enjoying some power or perks of order of
supply/contracts etc.
CLAUSE 4
(iii) The power of appointment of a member of the
Lokpal should be balanced in the hands of the Government
Vs. others in the ratio 4(4:1) instead of giving majority of
appointment powers to Government.
(iv) Section 4 of Lokpal Bill draft should give explicit
description of the method for selection of the chairperson
or the member instead of leaving it to the rules and
procedures to be made which says that the selection
committee shall adopt its own procedure in this regard.
CLAUSE 9
(v) A provision should be made setting a condition that a
chairperson and a member has not and shall hold any
position or place or post prior to one year and posterior
five years. This provision should replace section 9 of
Lokpal bill draft.
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
(iii) & (iv)  The Selection procedure as given
in Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
(v) Clause 9 of the Bill provides that on
ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson and
every Member shall not be eligible for
reappointment as the Chairperson or Member
of the Lokpal; any diplomatic assignment,
appointment as administrator of a Union
Territory; further employment to any other
office of profit under the Government of
India or the Government of a State and
contesting any election of President or Vice
President or Member of either House of
Parliament or Member of either House of a
State Legislature or Municipality or Panchayat
within a period of five years from the date
12 3 4

383
CLAUSE 10
(vi) Section 10 of Lokpal Bill draft should be clear as to
the seniority whether by wholesome age of the members
or by age of appointment as member.
(vii) S ection 15 (2) - Lokpal should be self reliant and
the proceedings of Lokpal should be time bound.
CLAUSE 17
(viii) Well defined matters pertaining to national security
must be kept out of the Lokpal ambit under section 17
of the Bill (page 8, line 1 onward).
(ix) Section 17 (1) (a) - the words “after, he has demitted
the office of PM” must be deleted as all the PMs whether
serving or retired must come under Lokpal.
(x) Atleast all UPSC ICS officers in whatever category
they may fall should be covered under section 17 of the
Bill.
(xi) In section 26 of the Lokpal Bill “and notwithstanding
the provisions of any other Act or statue” to be added
after “Subject to the provisions of this Act,”
CLAUSE 49-50
(xii) Provision for providing restoration of property and
benefits during the attachment, if the accused is finally
absolved.
CLAUSE 40
(xiii) Chapter X – the powers to opine to the President
on complaint against Lokpal members should be vested in
3 Judges of Supreme Court/High Court including CJI
of cessation of holding the office of the
Chairperson or Member.
(vi) The provisions of Clause 10 are
adequate.
(vii) It is not understood that as to what is
meant by that the Lokpal should be self
reliant.
(viii), (ix) and (x)  The provisions made in
Clause 17 are adequate.
(xi) The suggestion is not relatable to Clause
26 of the Bill.
(xii) The provisions for attachment of
property as provided in the Bill are adequate.
(xiii) The provisions regarding complaints
against Chairperson and Members of Lokpal
as contained in Clause 40 are adequate.

384
instead giving to CJI alone.
(xiv) Section 47 – A schedule prescribing the Performa
for disclosure of assets and liabilities by public servants
containing full details as to the cost, source, market
value, annual income for five years immediately prior
acquisition/owning should be there.
(xv) Section 57 and 58 needs to be revisited as seems
contradicting.
CLAUSE 23, 28 and 54
(xvi) Limitations of time wherever not prescribed must be
prescribed to make it time bound exercise and provisions
to be inserted for adherence of time limit as a must by
imposing disqualifications or severe penalties. Bill's main
time limit 7 years from cause of action may be extended
to atleast 11 years.
(xvii) Disciplinary or any other penal actions, whether
pecuniary or otherwise, to be taken at the hands of
Lokpal must be defined/quantified in a band
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM and Judiciary (for non judiciary activity) must be
brought under Lokpal.
(xiv) The details such as proforma etc. may
be provided in the rules and regulations.
(xv) There does not appear to be any
contradiction. However, this will have to be
examined by the Legislative Department while
finalising the final Bill.
(xvi) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and Clause 28 of the Bill. Further, the
limitation to inquiry by Lokpal as prescribed
in Clause 54 of the Bill is adequate.
(xvii) The disciplinary action has to be taken
by the appointing authority. The functions
of the appointing authority cannot be
delegated to the Lokpal.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
12 3 4
74. Om Prakash, IFS
(Retd.)
National Working
President, Bharat
Raksha Manch.

385
CLAUSE 4
(ii) Chairman UPSC should be included in Selection
Committee and the Search Committee should include a
former Cabinet Secy., a former Director of Intelligence
Bureau and a former Chief of Army Staff.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) Lokpal should have jurisdiction over all NGOs and
Civil Societies whether funded by Government or not.
Also religious organizations must be under Lokpal and the
provision of their exception to be deleted from section
l7(1)(g) of the Lokpal Bill.
(iv) The time schedule mentioned in Jan Lokpal should be
retained in final draft.
CLAUSE 35
(v) Any civil servant, if found caught red handed while
accepting bribe, he/she must be suspended and should
remain suspended till acquitted by a court of Law. Also
Government should must give up powers to reinstate a
public servant caught red handed with bribe money.
CLAUSE 4
(vi) The members of Search Committee and the names
suggested by this committee for Selection Committee
must be verified by the security agencies. If the security
agencies object to any name, that name may be dropped
only with the consultation/concurrence of the Leader of
Opposition in Lok Sabha. There will  be a televised public
hearing by a Parliament Subcommittee on the names
recommended for Selection Committee to ensure the
the purview of the Lokpal. As regards
judiciary, a separate Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is before the Parliament.
(ii) The composition of the Section
Committee as provide in Clause 4 is adequate.
(iii) Such of the organisations which receive
public funds/donations are covered. However,
the religious organisation receiving public
donations are kept outside the purview of
the Bill. The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as
given in Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.
(iv) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and Clause 28 of the Bill
(v) For suspension etc. the relevant rules
are to be followed. However, Clause 35 of
the Bill empowers to recommend transfer or
suspension of the public servant connected
with allegations of corruption.
(vi) Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the
Selection Committee may constitute a Search
Committee for the purpose of selecting the
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal and
for preparing a panel of persons to be
considered for appointment as such. It
further provides that the Selection Committee
shall regulate its own procedure for selection

386
transparency of selection procedure, thereafter, a panel of
names approved by Parliamentary Subcommittee should
go to the Selection committee headed by PM for final
selection of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
(i) Apart from inclusion of public representatives,
administrators, police, bureaucracy, etc., Coporates, MNCs
and listed companies as they are often seen pumping
huge amount of money in order to influence, frame,
change or manipulate the Government Policies to seek
desirable favours, NGOs seeking Government/foreign
funding and both Print and Electronic media as back
room of investment in it are politicians and corporate
houses and sometimes they manipulate news for their
vested interest, all these should come under the ambit of
Lokpal.
(ii) As the Judiciary is appointed through legislative and
administrative process, it should come under Lokpal ambit.
CLAUSE 23-29
(iii) There should be mandatory punishment in the trials
under Lokpal whether the guilty party is complaint or
accused. There should be no provision of judicial appeal
for either of the party and with provision of immediate
implementation of the verdict.
CLAUSE 17
(iv) PM should be given liberty to declare if she/he to be
included in the ambit of Lokpal.
the Chairperson or Members of the Lokpal.
(i) As regards the corruption by Corporate/
MNCs is concerned, it is required to be
tackled separately. For corruption by private
parties, necessary amendments to IPC are
underway. Further, Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of
Public International Organisations, Bill, 2011
has already been introduced. For corruption
in Media, it is felt that separate steps are
required to be taken in this regard. Therefore,
the jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given in
Clause 17 is adequate.
(ii) For judiciary, Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is already before the
Parliament.
(iii) The procedure for inquiry and
investigations as provided in Clause 23-29 is
adequate.
(iv) Discretion may not be provided in such
cases.
12 3 4
75. Krishna Mohan
Ivaturi and Kshitij
Adyalkar

387
(v) The Lokpal Committee should be made accountable to
both the houses of Parliament and the final verdict should
rest with the Parliament within the stipulated time frame
as may be decided without any judicial intervention.
(v) The suggestion is not workable. The
suggestion would imply that in each and
every case, the Parliament will have to take
a decision, which is not feasible under any
circumstances.

388
COMMENTS OF DoPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of the Comments/Suggestions Comments of DoPT
No. Organisation/
Individual
12 3 4
S. Krishnan,
IA&AS (Retd.),
Advisor, and Bejon
Misra, Founder,
Consumer Online
Foundation
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
(i) Citizens’ Charter to be brought within the ambit of
Lokpal to ensure Transparency, Accountability, Availability
of Information and Efficient & Effective Grievance
Redressal Mechanism by declaring that:-
(a) Every Citizen’s letter should be acknowledged
within a week.
(b) Every Citizen’s letter must be replied within a
month.
(c) Every officer who has public contact must wear
a name badge.
The charter can be made mandatory. Also, The Lokpal
Bill should provide for the mandatory Information
Facilitation Counters (IFCs) by all organizations covered
by the Bill.
(ii) Protection offered under article 310 & 311 need to be
reviewed to strengthen Lokpal.
(iii) There is a need for National Competition Policy to
ensure level playing fields for all concerned and to avoid
CWG & 2G scams etc.
PROTECTION TO WHISTLEBLOWERS
(iv) An adequate mechanism to be built into the Lokpal to
protect Whistleblowers.
(i) For matters relating public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be set
up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions is
working on the same.
(ii) This requires Constitutional amendments.
(iii) This is beyond the scope of Lokpal.
(iv) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
76.

389
DEFINITIONS
(v) As the term “Corruption” is not defined in Lokpal Bill
but certain terms of Lokpal Bill are defined in the PC Act,
there should be some methodology to bring the definition
of “Corruption” and its various facets defined in the
Prevention of Corruption Act directly into this Bill.
CLAUSE 58 & 2
(i) The Lokpal Act, 2011 should completely override,
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 while incorporating all
the necessary provisions with the required modifications
in the Lokpal Act. The word" Corruption" to be defined
in the Bill.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) Since, the MPs subject to clause 17 (2) of lPC have
been included within the powers of Lokpal, those provisions
with required modifications should be incorporated in the
Lokpal Bill, 2011.
PREAMBLE
(iii) In first paragraph of Lokpal Bill, for the word “inquire”
the words to “inquire & investigate” should be inserted.
Similarly in the third & fourth paragraphs, for the words
“independently inquire into” & for the words “contain
corruption”, the words “independently inquire and
investigate into” & “eradicate corruption” to be inserted
respectively.
the Bill are under consideration.
(v) The Bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shal1 have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
(i) The Lokpal Bil1 2011 is meant to deal
with the corruption at higher places, whereas
the PC Act, 1988 deals with corruption by
public servants. Clause 58 of the Bill clearly
states that the provisions of this Act shall be
in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force. Further,
the Bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.[Clause 2(2)].
(ii) The suggestion is not clear as the
exception clause 17 (2) referred to by the
author is of Lokpal Bill, 2011 and not of
IPC.
(iii) The suggestion is to make changes in
the Preamble of the Lokpal Bill.
77. Lalit Kumar
Kejriwal,
Executive President,
Centre for Legal
Research & Studies,
Muzaffarpur

390
12 3 4
(iv) Clause 3(2) (b)  – There should be “Ten” members
instead of “eight” members in the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 4
(v) Selection Committee should be constituted without
dominance of Govt. and as per the Jan Lokpal Bill version
2.2.
(vi) For Search Committee, clause 6(8) of Jan Lokpal Bill
version 2.2 with a modification in clause 6(8) (a), i.e.,
instead of ‘Five Members’, ‘Six members’ in place of
former CAGs & CECs of India, should be 'Ex-RBI
Governors, Ex-CAGs/Ex-CECs of India, (b) instead of
‘five members’ , ‘three members’ from civil society and
(c) one member from Ex-Presidents of FICCI/CII.
(vii) Clause 17(1) (a) – Incumbent PM should also be
covered in addition to Ex-PMs under the Lokpal. Also the
definition of Public Servant in Sec 2(c) of Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 should be incorporated.
(viii) Judges of Supreme Court/High Court should not be
in the jurisdiction of Lokpal as mentioned in Jan Lokpal
Bill Version 2.2.
(iv) The Composition of the Lokpal as given
in Clause 3(2)(b) of the Bill is adequate.
(v) The composition of the Selection
Committee as given in Clause 4 of the Bill
is adequate.
(vi) Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the
Selection Committee may, if necessary,
constitute a Search Committee consisting of
such persons of standing and having special
knowledge and expertise in the matters
relating to anti-corruption policy, public
administration, vigilance, policy making,
finance including insurance and banking, law
and management.
(vii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(viii) The judiciary is not within the ambit
of the Lokpal Bill, 2011.

391
Deepak Khokar,
Correspondent 889/
28, Bharat Colony
Rohtak, Haryana
78.
(ix) All other provisions of Jan Lokpal Bill version 2.2
except that punishment for offences in clause 19 A of Jan
Lokpal Bill that should not be to the extent to life
imprisonment but should be maximum upto 10 years
CLAUSE 17
(i) Private Sector as well as the Health & Education
sectors to be included in the jurisdiction of Lokpal.
(ii) Media and its commercial activity, not only paid news
but also Media Institutes & the conduct of reporters/
correspondents should be brought in the ambit of Lokpal
to ensure the reliability of the news aired by media. It is
to be made mandatory for all the Media Institutes to
submit an affidavit that if they found indulged in any
corrupt activity, their licenses/registration are liable to be
cancelled. There should be a concrete Code of Conduct
for Media. The owners, Editors and correspondents of all
newspapers, magazines, news channels and other TV
channels along with correspondents' organization/clubs must
come under the ambit of Lokpal. There should be license
system for correspondents.
(iii) Cricket and Cricket Associations along with other Sports
Organizations to be brought under the ambit of Lokpal.
(iv) Religious Institutions, NGOs, Trusts & Private Sector
Tele companies.
(v) For effective implementation of Lokpal, a Public
Information Centre to formed at National level with the
provision of a toll free number to provide information
about Lokpal, complaints procedure and its disposal etc.
The same system should be followed for Lokayuktas in
the States.
(ix) The punishment is to be awarded by
the Competent Court of Law as per the
prevailing laws.
(i) to (iv) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 is meant to
deal with the corruption at higher places;
hence the jurisdiction as provided in Clause
17 of the Bill is adequate.
(v) These are the matters to be taken care
of by Lokpal and the Lokpal may frame
regulations in this regard.

392
12 3 4
CLAUSE 33 & 34
(vi) Private property along with all the official papers, i.e.
Ration Card, V ote ID and distinct ID cards etc. should be
confiscated.
CLAUSE 4
(i) Lokpal Selection Committee should be independent and
free from Govt. influence without any political member.
It should include highly reputed judges, National awardees,
highly reputed social workers, PM & President only.
CLAUSE 12-15 & 32
(ii) Lokpal should its own investigation and prosecution
wings at Centre level and in every State. Lokpal should
have powers to use the Police and Army if required.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) Every Govt. servant should come under Lokpal rather
all citizens to be held accountable for corruption.
CLAUSE 33 & 34
(iv) Corrupt money to be recovered from the corrupt
person by seizing bank accounts, selling property acquired
through corrupt means and any other possible way of
recovery.
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(v) Persons making false complaints should be fined by
Lokpal according to the seriousness of the case rather
than imprisonment.
(vi) The provisions made in Lokpal Bill, 2011
for attachment of property are adequate
[Clause 33 & 34].
(i) The Selection procedure as prescribed in
Clause 4 of the Bill is sufficient.
(ii) The Lokpal will have its own Investigation
Wing [Clause 12]  and Prosecution Wing
[Clause 15] . Further, the Lokpal has the
powers to utilise services of officers of
Central or State Government. However, the
Lokpal to have powers to use the Police and
Army may not be desirable.
(iii) The public functionaries as given in
Clause 17 of the Bill are within the ambit of
the Lokpal and the provisions made are
adequate.
(iv) Provisions for attachment of property
of corrupt public servants are provided in
Clause 33 & 34.
(v) For false complaints, provisions of Clause
49 and 50 would be applicable. But, DoPT
is open to suggestions in this regard.
79. Dr. Narinder Singh,
Assistant Professor,
Govt. Home Science
College, Sector-10,
Chandigrah.

393
(vi) People should be encouraged to expose the act of
corruption by giving them reward and national awards for
unveiling the corruption. Reward may be 10% of money
recovered from the corrupt.
Constitutional Framework, Appointment & Removal
(i) Lokpal must be within our Constitutional framework
without superseding Parliament, which is supreme,
sovereign institution of “We the People”. It should also
not encroach upon Judiciaries independence as stated in
Jan Lokpal Bill. Our representatives (MLAs/MPs) should
not be made bondsmen of any agency/institution.
CLAUSE 4
Selection Committee
(ii) Lokpal office must be appointed by “Selection
Committee” consisting of PM, Leader of Opposition of
both houses, Union Law Minister, Union Home Minister,
CJI & senior most Judge of Supreme Court, Speaker of
Lok Sabha and Chairmen of SC/ST/OBC Commission,
headed by PM.
Screening/Recommending Committee
(iii) It may contain Chairman Human Rights Commission
& Minorities Commission, 3 Legal Experts with legal
knowledge and expertise of ‘multiple dimensions’ of
corruption, Ex-Lokpal, Chairman of Equality &
Opportunities Commission (which must be created), and
4 peoples representatives from different fields (elected or
non elected). It will finalise a list of candidates 5 times
of the vacancies for the recommend of PM within a
stipulated time. The selection committee shall have the
discretion to finalise the names and forward it to the
President of India.
(vi) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 does not contain
any provisions for rewards to the
complainants.
(i) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 is within the
framework of the Constitution.
(ii) & (iii) The Selection procedure as
prescribed in Clause 4 of the Bill is sufficient.
80. People for
Constitution,
Democracy & Human
Rights (PCDHR)

394
CLAUSE 8
Removal
(iv) The removal of Lokpal must be made by President
upon the ‘inquiry’ made by committee consisting of the
CJI & 2 other Judges of SC of India. The Lokpal must
hold the office only for four years (preferable 3 years)
without holding other Public Office.
CLAUSE 17
Jurisdiction
(v) Grade B to D public servants must be under CVC
which can be strengthened with investigative powers & a
wing with prosecution powers.
(vi) PM, Ministers, MLAs/MPs, Judges of Supreme court
& High court, President, Vice President, Speaker & Deputy
Speaker of Lok Sabha, Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha,
C& AG, Attorney General of India and Chairman of SC,
ST, OBC Commissions, UPSC, CEC & any other authority
appointed under the constitution of India must be kept
out of the purview of Lokpal. The Judiciary must be
accountable to a ‘National Judicial Commission’. While
preserving the privileges of MLAs/MPs, they must be
regulated by the rules of House.
(vii) The definition of corruption needs to be broadened
to encompass corruption in Govt. & Private Sector,
Corporate sector, Business, Media, Charitable & Religious
Institutions and NGOs. All such NGOs, religious
institutions and companies being funded, allotted land &
other facilities, subsidized, loaned, getting tax concessions
by Central Govt. or State Govt. must be brought under
12 3 4
(iv) Provision for removal of Lokpal and its
Members are given in Clause 8, which are
adequate.
(v) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 is meant to deal
with the corruption at higher places.
(vi) & (vii) The jurisdiction as provided in
Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.

395
the ambit of Corruption.
(ix) A “Separate Authority” must be created for dealing
corruption in Private & Corporate sector and religious &
charitable denominations with the same punitive measures
under Lokpal/Lokayukta to uphold Equality principle
(Art. 14).
CLAUSE 23-29, 30-37
Powers & Functions
(x) Lokpal must not be vested with enormous & draconian
powers of investigation, police authority; powers of
confiscation, recovery & auction, suo motto  injuries, to
raid any place or person without courts permission, powers
of open court, quasi judicial  authority and also powers
of contempt simultaneously. Instead, Lokpal must be given
only ‘quasi judicial powers’ and powers of 'investigation'.
The powers to prosecute & adjudicate must remain separate
as they are today.
CLAUSE 49-50
(xi) Like protection for the Whistleblowers & Complainants,
there shall be protection to the public officials & public
servants. In case of false & malafide/complaints, the
complainants shall be liable for imprisonment upto 5 years.
(xiii) If the public servants or any other person is acquitted,
they must be compensated with service benefits (if
applicable), monetary terms & dignity.
CLAUSE 41
(xiv) Lokpal officials must be punished for false inquires
& prosecution in service matters upto imprisonment upto
(ix) This issue requires to be examined
separately. However, it may be stated that
the Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public
Officials and Officials of the Public
International Organisations Bill, 2011, is
already under examination of the Standing
Committee.
(x) The procedure for inquiry and
investigation by Lokpal as provided in Clause
23-29 are adequate. On completion of
investigations, if the commission of offence
has been established, the Lokpal shall file a
report in the Special Court. Thereafter, the
Special Court will decide the quantum of
sentence, etc. as per the established
procedure. Further, Clause 30-37 provides
for the powers of Lokpal.
(xi) For false complaints, provisions of
Clause 49 and 50 would be applicable. But,
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(xiii) Decision in such cases is to be taken
depending upon the facts and circumstances
of each case.
(xiv) The complaints mechanism against the
officials of the Lokpal as provided in Clause

396
5 years with punitive measures or both.
CLAUSE 23 & 28
(xv) There should be a time limit for the conduct of
investigation, filling of chargesheet and completion of trial
including Supreme Court must not be more than 7 years,
i.e., decision in session court in 2 years, High court
3 years and supreme court another 3 years.
RESERVATION
(xvi) There must be reservation in all the posts & vacancies
of Lokpal & Lokayuktas for SC/ST/OBCs in accordance
with Art 15 (4), (5), 16(4), (5) & 335 of the constitution.
LOKAYUKTAS
(xvii) The Lokayukta must be formed in each State &
UTs but the states must be allowed to legislate upon this
as per state list.
CLAUSE 16
(xviii) The expenses of the Lokpal/Lokayukta shall be
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India/States
respectively instead of allowing self funded scheme.
(xix) There must not be any reward schemes/financial
awards for encouraging complaints.
(xx) Grievance Redressal Mechanism must be separated
from Lokpal/Lokayukta.
DEFINITIONS
(i) The term ‘Corruption’, Maladministration, misconduct
and other features of corruption should be defined in
41 is adequate.
(xv) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and Clause 28 of the Bill.
(xvi) The reservation has to be provided as
per the Government policy on the subject.
(xvii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(xviii) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 provides that
the expenses of the Lokpal shall be charged
upon the Consolidated Fund of India.
(xix) No such scheme is provided in the
Lokpal Bill, 2011.
(xx) The Lokpal Bill does not provide to
deal grievance redressal mechanism.
(i) & (ii)  The Bill provides that the words
and expressions used but not defined in this
12 3 4
81. P.S. Krishnan, IAS
(Retd.), Aptt. No.
1513-B, Beverly Park

397
clause 2, brought within the purview of the Lokpal.
Corruption shall include:—
(a) Diverting, misutilising of outlays earmarked for
SCs/STs under Plan for Schedule Castes (SCP)
& Tribal sub Plans (TsP).
(b) Failure to formulate the SCP/TsP with
specifications required to verify actual benefits
and bridging of the gap between the SCs/STs
and advance classes/castes including failure of
implementation of the SCP/TsP. and showing
utilization funds for purposes other than the actual.
(c) Diverting, misutilising of outlays earmarked for
SCs/STs under Plan for Schedule Castes (SCP)
& Tribal sub Plans (TsP) to benefit other
categories, individuals, families etc.
(d) Failure to formulate the SCP/TsP with
specifications required to verify actual benefits
and whether they have reached to the SC/ST
individuals, families. Also failure to formulate the
SCP/TsP in a manner which will remove the gap
between the SCs/STs and advance classes/castes
including failure of implementation of the SCP/
TsP and showing or reporting utilization funds
for purposes other than for benefits directly and
exclusively benefiting individuals, or families, or
groups of SCs. Etc.
(e) Failure on the part of superior Govt., servant &
public servants to promptly take effective remedial
as well as punitive when any of the (a) & (b) are
brought to the notice.
(f) Failure to utilized funds provided & earmarked
for BCs including BCs of religious minorities
including failure to formulate Plan & Strategy for
them for eliminating the backwardness.
(g) Failure to utilize funds earmarked for women/
children including failure to formulate plans for
Act but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have
the same meaning as assigned to them in
that Act.
II, DLF City,
Phase-II, Gurgaon

398
women/children to remove the disparities in all parameters
between women/children and men/ children
including SC/ST/BC women/children of religious
minorities and men/children of advanced classes/
castes.
(h) Failure to properly implement legislations enacted
for the protection, welfare and advancement of
SCs, STs, BCs including Religious Minorities of
these and women & children.
(ii) The definition of corruption should be further widened
to include:—
(a) All kind of discrimination and exclusion practices
in public, private sector and media.
(b) Corporate frauds that include misappropriation of
natural resources depriving SCs, STs, BCs, issue
of black money, tax evasion and corporate social
accountability.
(c) Pay to or receiving by any professional any
amount exceeding Rs. 50,000/- other than cheque/
draft/bank transfer.
(d) Possession pecuniary resources or property or
wealth by any person in the public or private
sector in any profession disproportionate to that
person's known legal sources of income and these
should be brought within the ambit of proposed
Lokpal Bill.
(iii) As there is no definition of term “whistleblower” or
provision of protection in the Lokpal Bill, either the
definition of whistleblower given in Clause 14, Section 2
of Jan Lokpal Bill may be imported in the present bill
making provisions for their protection, or a separate
(iii) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
12 3 4

399
Whistle Blower Protection Bill may be enacted.
CLAUSE 3
Composition of Lokpal
(iv) The Lokpal Bill should consist of a Chairperson and
12 members. Lokpal shall have not less than 15% from
SC, not less than 7.5% from STs, and not less than 27%
from BCs including religious minorities in such a manner
that total number of these social classes does not exceed
50% of the total strength of Lokpal including chairperson
and members.
(v) There should not be less than one-third women of the
total strength of Lokpal including chairperson and
members.
Qualification of Lokpal members
(vi) Clause 3(3) (b) – The phrase ‘free from
unconstitutional caste-bias’ should be inserted after the
word “impeccable integrity”.
(vii) The following should be added at the end of the
Clause 3(3) (b) of the Bill:–
“or in matters relating to SCs, STs, BCs including
BCs of Religious Minorities, Women and Children, and
preferably those who in their professional work have
earned/shown sensitivity to the special vulnerabilities and
the constitutional and statutory and human rights of these
classes.”
(viii) For eligibility of chairperson and members the
following should be added:–
“Particularly against corruption, maladministration,
(iv) & (v)  The composition of the Lokpal
as given Clause 3 of the Bill is adequate.
(vi) & (vii) The provisions made in Clause
3(3)(b) are adequate.
(viii) to (xiii)  The eligibility conditions for
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal as given
Clause 3 of the Bill are adequate.

400
misconduct, improper discrimination etc. in specific relation
to SCs, STs, BCs, other Poor, Women, Children and
Labourers”, after “efforts to fight against corruption in
the past”.
Disqualification for  Appointment
(ix) Any person who has been convicted by a Court or
who has been charged by a Court for any offence under
Acts for the protection, welfare and advancement of SCs,
STs, BCs including BC Minorities, Women, Children, Other
Poor and Labourers.
(x) Any person who has been found guilty of unfair
practices by a consumer court or by the Competition
Commission.
(xi) Any person who has not implemented stipulations in
favour of the above classes while receiving allotment of
land or other facilities free of cost or at concessional
rates.
(xii) Any person who has been established to have
encroached upon or illegally acquired lands or SCs or
STs which otherwise should not be.
(xiii) Any person who has wealth of more than Rs...........
(may be filled up suitably by the Standing Committee &
Parliament).
Age
(xiv) The minimum age limit should be as indirectly fixed
in the Bill or 60 years to be fixed.
(xiv) There is no need to put minimum age
limit in the Bill.
12 3 4

401
CLAUSE 4
(xv) The Selection Committee should have at least one
member from SC, ST, BC, BC Minorities and Women.
Salaries and Allowances
CLAUSE 7
(xvi) No salary or honorarium shall be paid to Chairperson
and other members but shall be provided all functional
facilities including travelling facilities. They shall have the
status of CJI and that of the Judges of Supreme Court
respectively.
(xvii) Adequate legal and other safeguards against the
witch-hunting of Dalit employees should be provided in
the Bill. It may include first referring complaints against
SCs, STs, BCs, Minorities and Women to the respective
National Commissions to screen and verify whether they
are free from caste-bias and other prejudices and there
should be enhanced punishment for false complaints against
any of these social and gender categories, especially SCs
and STs.
CLAUSE 61
(xviii) The Bill should provide a procedure of screening
by the Lokpal to screen and verify whether complaints
against public servants not belonging to the classes
mentioned above are free from manipulation by powerful
vested interests for reasons mentioned above and ensure
that there is full protection for honest officers.
(xix) Apart from the Charter mentioned in the Bill/Jan
Lokpal Bill, there should be additional Dalit Citizens' Charter,
one each for the categories mentioned above in para
(xvii).
(xv) The composition of the Selection
Committee as given in Clause 4 is adequate.
(xvi) The salary, allowances and other
conditions of service of Chairperson and
Members shall be governed by provisions of
Clause 7.
(xvii) The Lokpal is to inquire into the
allegations of corruption.
(xviii) The Lokpal has to frame its regulations
for the manner and procedure of conducting
an inquiry or investigation.
(xix) There is no such concept of Dalit
Citizens’ Charter.

402
PREAMBLE
(i) The Bill should aim to tackle corruption at the topmost
level in the Legislature and Executive and should be
confined to tackling corruption in high places to make the
Lokpal manageable and to keep the focus intact.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) The Lokpal Should cover the following only:–
(a) All MPs including PM and Ministers.
(b) All other constitutional and top statutory office
holders excluding President, Vice President and
Judiciary.
(c) Officers of the rank of JS and above in the
Government of India and its Public Sector
undertakings and other organizations.
(d) Judges to be covered under the proposed “Judges
Standards and Accountability Bill.”
CLAUSE 3
(iii) The Lokpal Should have only a chairperson five
members with the following work allocation and
Specification:–
(a) Chairperson – Former/serving CJI or Judge of
Supreme Court or Attorney General. For deciding
on the culpability of the accused taking into
consideration all the aspects of the matter.
(b) Member (General) – Former/serving Cabinet
Secretary/C&AG/CEC/CVC or a person having
(i) The Lokpal Bill 2011 is meant to deal
with the corruption at higher places.
(ii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
in Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate. Further,
in the context of the Indian polity, the Prime
Minister occupies a pivotal position in the
Governments' set up. To ensure that Prime
Minister is able to discharge his functions
without any interference from any quarter, it
is felt that the Prime Minister may be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal. However,
after the Prime Minister has demitted the
office, he will come within the purview of
the Lokpal.
(iii) The composition and eligibility conditions
of the Chairperson and Members of the
Lokpal as given in the Bill are adequate.
12 3 4
Satya Narayan
Shukla, IAS (Retd.),
Advocate General
Secretary, Lok
Prahari
82.

403
held equivalent rank in Government of India. For
specialized knowledge of Rules and Regulations
especially related to contracts/procurement.
(c) Member (Finance) – Former/Serving Governor of
RBI/Finance Secretary/Chairman SBI or a person
of similar large reputed banking/financial
organization. To see if the financial rules and
procedures have been followed.
(d) Member (Audit) – Head of an eminent Chartered
Accountant firm in the panel of CAG with
experience of auditing accounts of PSUs with
largest spending/earnings/turnover. To examining
the accounts.
(e) Member (Engineering) – A former/serving Director
of IIT of Head of a similar institution. For
examining engineering/technological aspect, if any,
of the case.
(f) Member (Investigation and Prosecution) – A
former/serving Director of CBI/RAW/IB. For
examining the culpability of the accused under
relevant criminal laws and supervising investigation
and prosecution.
CLAUSE 6
(iv) T enure of Chairperson and members shall be five
years and persons in the age group of 55-70/65 years
should be considered for appointment and should be
debarred from reappointment or holding any other
constitutional/statutory office under GoI/State Gov ernment
after demitting the Lokpal.
(iv) As per Clause 6 of the Bill, the
Chairperson or Member of the Lokpal shall
hold office for a term not exceeding five
years from the date on which he enters
upon his office or until he attains the age of
75 years whichever is earlier.

404
CLAUSE 4
(v) The selection committee should have the following as
members:–
(a) Chairperson Rajya Sabha
(b) Speaker of Lok Sabha
(c) Prime Minister
(d) Leader of Opposition
(e) Chief Justice of India
(f) Chairman, Bar Council of India
(g) Chairman, Broadcasting Editors’ Association
(h) Chairman, Editors’ Guild of India
(i) Oldest Noble Prize/Bharat Ratna/Padma Vibhusan
(in that order) awardees in the field of Public
Service/Affairs
(j) Oldest Noble Prize/Bharat Ratna/Padma Vibhusan
(in that order) awardees in the field of Social
Work/Social service.
Functions and Powers
(vi) Lokpal should deal with not only complaints about
acts of omission or commission punishable under IPC
and Prevention of Corruption Act but also those relating
to Money Laundering and Foreign Exchange violations.
CLAUSE 12-15
(vii) Lokpal should have its own investigation and
prosecution wing taking senior officers of CBI on
deputation basis.
CLAUSE 27
(viii) There is no need of taking permission for investigation
and prosecution by Lokpal.
12 3 4
(v) The composition of the Selection
Committee as given in Clause 4 of the Bill
is adequate.
(vi) The Lokpal will deal with allegations of
corruptions.
(vii) The Lokpal will have its own Investigation
Wing [Clause 12] and Prosecution Wing
[Clause 15].
(viii) The Lokpal Bill, 2011 provides that
previous sanction is not necessary for
investigation and initiating prosecution by

405
CLAUSE 3
(i) Lokpal shall have one chairperson and eight members.
The chairperson should be sitting Judge of Supreme
court or retired CJI and the 8 members should include:
(a) Retired Army/Navy/Air force Chief
(b) Retired Cabinet Secretary
(c) Retired Accountant
(d) Retired Chief Secretary of any State on rotation
basis giving chance to all States.
(e) Retired Chief Justice of High Court.
(f) Senior Counsel of Supreme Court/High Court.
(g) Retired District Judge.
Muslims, Hindus, Dalits and Christians should have
representation from (a) to (h) for the purpose of social
justice.
CLAUSE 12-15
(ii) Investigation and Prosecution wing of Lokpal should
have officers of high integrity representing major
communities of Muslims, Hindu, Dalits and Christians.
Such offices should be without facing any departmental
enquiry or charged of any offence and they should declare
their assets on joining and thereafter every year till
relinquishment of office.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) Apart from the persons mentioned, IAS, IPS, IFS, IPoS
officals, CMs and Ministers of State Government, MLAs
and Defense Officials to be brought under Lokpal ambit.
CLAUSE 30-31
(iv) Powers of search, seizure and proposed powers of
police upon Lokpal should be within the domain of Civil
Procedure Code, Criminal Procedure Code read with
Evidence Act.
Lokpal [Clause 27].
(i) The composition of the Lokpal as given
Clause 3 of the Bill is adequate.
(ii) The Lokpal will have its own Investigation
Wing [Clause 12] and Prosecution Wing
[Clause 15]. The appointment of the officers
to man the Investigation Wing and
Prosecution Wing has to done as per the
rules and guidelines on the subject.
(iii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
in the Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.
(iv) These provisions have been made in
Clause 30 and 31 of the Bill.
83. Rayeece M.A. Khadir,
H.No. 274/3RT, Vijay
Nagar, Hyderabad-57

406
CLAUSE 35
(v) Whenever, Lokpal recommends transfer or suspension,
must be implemented by the concerned authorized officer
and on failing which that office to be punished.
CLAUSE 38-39
(vii) Instead of constituting special courts, the strength of
regular courts may be increased and out of such courts,
one of the court may be designated as special court.
(i) The Legislation to be called “Lok Pal Act”.
CLAUSE 1
(ii) The Act should cover all the States including J&K and
to be implemented within 180 days from the date of
enactment.
DEFINITIONS
(iii) Definition of Corruption should include the following:
In respect of Employees of Centr e/State Government
and PSUs/Corporations/Autonomous bodies.
(a) If a Government servant gives or tries to give
undue advantage to an individual/organisation against
the prescribed rules or asks for money/other things
in lieu of doing an official administrative work.
(b) Act/attempt of irregularities in allotting license/
Government contract or lease, discrimination in
providing benefits of government schemes.
(c) Attempt of selling government property or attempt
of causing loss to government income including
by way of tax evasion and theft of fuel purchased
for official work.
(v) The provisions made in Clause 35 are
adequate.
(vii) To expedite the disposal of corruption
related cases, it is necessary to set up Special
Courts to exclusively deal with such cases.
(i) After the Bill is passed, it becomes an
Act.
(ii) The territorial jurisdiction of the Bill
extends to the whole of India and also to
public servants outside India.
(iii) The Bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
12 3 4
84. Prinsu,
E-17, Gunjan Bihar,
Single Story Colony,
Karrahi, Kanpur-27
(UP)

407
(d) Involvement in accumulation of black money/
money laundering or favouring to other in doing
so.
(e) Attempt of concealing his/her property or estates
by not declaring it.
Public servants (Representatives)/Constitutional
heads
(a) Misuse of Public Money, act/attempt of
irregularities in allotting licenses/Government
contract/lease or allotment on lower prices than
current market price to an individual/organization.
(b) Use of Public Money for personal benefits and
attempt of selling Government property or attempt
of causing loss to Government income including
by way of tax evasion and theft of fuel purchased
for official work.
(c) Involvement in accumulation of black money/
money laundering or favoring to others in doing
so.
(d) Attempt of concealing his/her property or estates
by not declaring it.
(e) Embezzlement in Government aides/grants to
NGOs and irregularities by Government contractor/
license holder.
(f) Attempt regarding appointment of a particular
person or group of people Government to a
Government Post by illegal means.

408
CLAUSE 3 and 17
Lokpal
(iv) Lokpal will be head of a 9 member committee which
shall have the powers to investigate and prosecute against
corruption cases in Legislature, Executive, Lower Judiciary
and PSUs without any interference/influence by anyone.
CLAUSE 6 and 9
Tenure
(v) Lokpal will have a 5 years tenure. A person should
not be appointed Lokpal more than two terms. Also the
committee of Lokpal members will be dissolved
automatically on the completion of the tenure of Lokpal
and the tenure of its members should not be extended
more than two times.
CLAUSE 3
Qualification
(vi) Should be a citizen of India and residing in undivided
India since birth. Age for Lokpal should be not less than
25 and more than 70 years. Should not be insane or
insolvent. Should have clean image and there should not
have been instances of corruption charges against that
person or his/her family including involvement in corruption
case.
CLAUSE 4
Selection
(vii) Lokal will be appointed by the President on the
(iv) The composition of the Lokpal [Clause
3] and the jurisdiction [Clause 17] provided
in the Bill are adequate.
(v) As per Clause 6 of the Bill, the
Chairperson or Member of the Lokpal shall
hold office for a term not exceeding five
years from the date on which he enters
upon his office or until he attains the age of
75 years whichever is earlier. Clause 9 of
the Bill provides for restriction on
employment by Chairperson and Members
after ceasing to hold office.
(vi) The eligibility conditions as provided in
Clause 3 of the Bill are adequate.
(vii) The Selection procedure as prescribed
12 3 4

409
recommendations of a joint committee comprising Judges
of Supreme Court and High Courts. This committee itself
shall be appointed by President and must include CJI and
Chief Justices of any two High Courts. The Lokpal shall
compulsorily declare his/her assets including the assets of
family members and will have to leave his private business,
if any.
(viii) The Lokpal contestants should not be an Industrialist/
Capitalist in any circumstance.
(ix) A Government servant if appointed Lokpal, shall
resign from his service.
(x) It is necessary for the contestants that he/she should
have struggled against corruption earlier or would have
contribute in eradication of corruption in any matter.
CLAUSE 8
Removal
(xi) President shall have the power to remove Lokpal on
the grounds of inefficiency or misconduct or become
incapable mentally/physically in discharging his duties or
becomes the member of any political party including
relation with political parties or pressurize any Government
official to encourage corruption.
Powers
(xii) Powers of constituting 9 members Lokpal committee
comprising at least 1 retired Chief Justice of Supreme
Court or High Court, 2 persons of legal background and
others from former Election Commissioners and Nobel
laureate/Magsaysay awardees.
in Clause 4 of the Bill is sufficient.
(viii) to (x) The eligibility conditions as
provided in Clause 3 of the Bill are adequate.
(xi) The procedure for removal of
Chairperson or Member is provided in Clause
8 of the Bill.
(xii) The intention of the suggestion is not
clear.

410
CLAUSE 54
(xiii) Lokpal should have powers to investigate any
corruption cases but the cases older than 7 years to be
investigated after approval of President by giving one
month advance notice for this purpose.
(xiv) Powers of Phone Tapping and to have record of
internet conversation of any suspected person under RTI
Act. CVC, CBI and CAG to be under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 49-50
(xv) Lokpal should have the powers of imposing fine
from Rs. 50,000 to 50,00,000/- and punishment with
minimum 5 years and maximum life imprisonment or
both as the case may be.
CLAUSE 42
(xvi) Should have powers to impose recovery of damage
to Government property on accused and provision of
economic recovery caused to a person from accused due
to corruption.
Procedure of Complaint
CLAUSE 60
(xvii) Any complaint regarding corruption can be made
with Lokpal by submitting a complaint application along
with an affidavit.
(xviii) Lokpal should provide adequate protection to the
Whistleblowers.
(xiii) The provisions for limitations have been
provided in Clause 54.
(xiv) This is beyond the scope of the Lokpal.
(xv) The Lokpal will have power to impose
fine for false complaints as per provisions
of Clause 49 and 50. However, for imposition
of penalty for acts of corruption, the matter
has to be decided by the appropriate Courts.
(xvi) Clause 42 provides for assessment of
loss and recovery thereof by the Special
Courts.
(xvii) Clause 60 provides that the Central
Government shall make rules in this regard.
(xviii) This is covered under the protection
to Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
12 3 4

411
CLAUSE 23-29 and 17
(i) The complaint of the disproportionate assets made
against any of the person mentioned in Clause 17 and 17(1)
of Lokpal Bill should be within the Jurisdiction of Lokpal
to investigate and prosecute. Also in clause 17(1), after
word any allegation of corruption, “Or allegation of criminal
misconduct as defined in section 13 of Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 which includes possession of the
property disproportionate to his known source of income”
to be added.
CLAUSE 33
(ii) Clause 33 (1) – Not only proceeds of corruption but
also if the property found disproportionately held or earned
by committing misconduct as defined in section 13 of
Prevention of Corruption Act should be made subject of
attachment and confiscation.
(iii) Some law be enacted to make it mandatory for
all purchaser of any immovable property to have
PAN and to disclose in the so purchased document, the
complete details of other immovable property owned by
him/her and by his/her spouse with their PAN and also
owned by his/her minor children with complete details.
Failure of it should be made a punishable offence either
by enacting a separate law of making some amendments
in existing IPC or PA Act, 1988 and if any such offence
is committed by the persons referred in Clause 17 (1)
of Lokpal Bill, it should be investigated and prosecuted
under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 17
Jurisdiction of Lokpal
(i) PM must be brought under the provisions of Lokpal
only for the acts of corruption only and not for any other
(i) The procedure in respect of inquiry and
investigation is provided in Clause 23-29 of
the Bil1.
(ii) The provisions for attachment of property
are given in Clause 33 and 34.
(iii) This is beyond the scope of the Lokpal.
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given in
Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate. Further, in
85.
86.
S.N. Gupta,
President, The
Society for Humanity
and Honesty
Gurudev Singh,
Guru Nanak Nagar,
Nalas Road, Rajpura,
Distt. Patiala (Punjab)

412
act. For corruption charges against PM including charges
of protecting his/her ministers involved in corruption
charges, the Papers of preliminary investigation must be
graded as “Secret” and no paper to be published or
disclosed in any manner by Print/Electronic media until
and unless the charges are cleared by the Full Bench of
Supreme Court.
(ii) MPs must be brought under the ambit of Lokpal for
the acts of corruptions by MPs inside or outside the
Parliament and not for any other act he/she does in
Parliament or outside as an MP.
CLAUSE 3
Composition of Lokpal
(iii) Lokpal should have one chairperson and 9-10 members.
Chairperson must be retired Judge of Supreme Court or
Chief Justice of High Court in case of non availability of
retired judges of Supreme Court and other members
should be retired judges of Supreme Court or High Court.
No politician or Bureaucrat should be its member.
CLAUSE 4
Selection of Lokpal
(iv) Selection Committee must consists of PM, Home
Minister, Leader of Opposition of both the houses, CJI or
the Judge of Supreme Court nominated by CJI and one
senior most Chief Justice of High Court.
the context of the Indian polity, the Prime
Minister occupies a pivotal position in the
Governments’ set up. To ensure that Prime
Minister is able to discharge his functions
without any interference from any quarter, it
is felt that the Prime Minister may be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal. However,
after the Prime Minister has demitted the
office, he will come within the purview of
the Lokpal.
(ii) MPs are included within the ambit of
Lokpal. However, their actions on the floor
of the House are outside the purview of the
Lokpal.
(iii) The composition of the Lokpal as given
Clause 3 of the Bill is adequate.
(iv) The selection procedure as given in
Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
12 3 4

413
CLAUSE 8
Removal of Chairperson/Members of Lokpal
(v) In case of Chairperson or any member of Lokpal is
suspected to be involved in acts of corruption/
misconduct, the matter should be referred to the Supreme
Court through the details containing charges duly signed
by the Home Minister and Law Minister. And the full
bench of Supreme Court will decided this matter and if
it finds its fit to remove, CJI will should sign orders of
the removal.
Anonymous Complaints
(vi) Such complaints should not be rejected but should be
investigated indiscreetly and if found substantial, should
be processed further.
Provisions for State Lokavukta
(vii) Lokpal Bill must contain the provisions for the
appointment of Lokayukta and the same selection
committee should appoint the retired judges of High Courts
as Lokayukta in all states. There should be one Deputy
Lokayukta who shall assume the charge of Lokayukta in
case of sudden demise of Lokayukta and another
incumbent should be appointed as Deputy Lokayukta not
later than 3 months.
(ix) Other provisions of Jan Lokpal Bill should be retained
in toto.
CLAUSE 17
(i) The Corporate and private functionaries, lower level of
public & private functionaries, Media, being fourth pillar
of democracy, including such societies or associations or
(v) The procedure for removal of
Chairperson or Member is provided in Clause
8 of the Bill .
(vi) There is no specific provision in the
Bill. However, it will be for the Lokpal to
decide [Clause 61].
(vii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(ix) The Jan Lokpal Bill is also before the
Standing Committee.
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as provided
in the Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.
87. R.H. Khobragade

414
trust that are constituted for religious purposes must be
brought within the ambit of Lokpal Bill.
(ii) Clause 4 (1) – The selection committee should include
(a) Chairperson of National Commission for Women
(b) Chairperson of SC/ST Commission and (c) Chairperson
of National Commission of Minorities.
(iii) Clause 3 (b) – Apart from 50% judicial representation,
Lokpal should include 50% representation for women,
25% for SC/ST and 25% for Minorities.
(iv) Clause 49 (1) – If a false and frivolous or vexatious
complaint is made against any SC/ST functionary, the
relevant clauses, i.e. 3.1(ix), 3.2 (i), (ii) & (vi) & 7 under
the SC & ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, also
need to be invoked and needs to be mentioned in Lokpal
Bill.
(v) Lokpal Bill should have provisions for a website and
a toll free number for registering a complaint. for the
common man to indicate possible corruption. Also there
should be provisions for the protection of the rights of
whistle blower.
(vi) Diversion of funds from SC/ST sub-plan should
come automatically under the purview of Lokpal and be
treated as offence under SC & ST Act, 1989.
(vii) Election expenses to be brought under the purview
of Lokpal.
(ii) The composition of the Selection
Committee is adequate.
(iii) The provisions of Clause 3 (b) are
adequate.
(iv) For false complaints, provisions of
Clause 49 and 50 would be applicable. But,
DoPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(v) These are the issues which can be taken
care while framing rules and regulations for
the Lokpal.
(vi) The Lokpal is to inquire into allegations
of corruption.
(vii) The issue relates to Electoral Reforms.
12 3 4

415
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM, Leader of Opposition, CJI, Lok Sabha Speaker,
Judiciary, CBI, Foreign Ministers, Legislative Wing,
Standing Committee should not be investigated by Lokpal
but only after demitting the office.
CLAUSE 3
(ii) Lokpal to have 5 Chairpersons and 10 members
which should be selected from the officers such as
retired Supreme Court & High Court Judge one each,
Retired Advocate General, expert from ACB, two persons
from civil. They will be appointed by a bench of 7
Supreme Court judges and 7 members of Bar Association.
The Lokpal will be directly accountable to President of
India. Chairperson and members shall submit affidavit on
oath they will not do any such thing, which is against the
democratic procedure and National Interest.
CLAUSE 23-29. 30 & 31
(iii) Lokpal should have powers to investigate any
corruption, power to search and seizure and certain powers
of civil court.
(iv) The selection of Judges for specific judiciary courts
should be done by an independent Bench of 7 judges
comprising Chief Judges of Supreme Court & High Court
& 7 members from Bar Council of India.
(v) Selection of officers for Lokpals' for investigation and
prosecution wing should be approved by majority of five
chairpersons and finally to be authorized by Supreme
Court.
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as provided
in Clause 17 is adequate.
(ii) The composition of the Lokpal as
provided in Clause 3 the Bill is adequate.
(iii) The procedure in respect of inquiry and
investigation as provided in Clause 23-29 is
adequate. Further, the Lokpal has powers to
search and seizure [Clause 30] and powers
of civil court [Clause 31].
(iv) This issues relates to the appointment
of Judges.
(v) The appointment to any of the post is to
be done as per the relevant recruitment rules
to be framed in due course after
establishment of the Lokpal.
88. Narendra G . Dawa

416
(vi) Supreme Court independently should be given the
task of bringing back the Black money from Swiss Bank
& other foreign bank and the task of 2G Spectrum
Corruption. SC can take help of CBI, CVC, Lokpal etc.
(vii) Citizens accumulated Black Money in Swiss/Foreign
bank should be given chance to bring Black Money back
to India by asking them to pay 40% and to invest the
balance amount for their business. If they do not agree,
freeze all their money by offering 5-10% commission to
Swiss/foreign banks if they seize such money and declare
it to the Supreme Court or Govt. with the A/C No., name
of holder and their address in India and abroad with the
transaction details of last one year.
CLAUSE 47 & 48
(viii) All the Public servants and Chairperson and Members
of Lokpal must declare its assets and liabilities, loans
from Banks/Corporates on their selection/appointment and
thereafter every year.
CLAUSE 23-29
(ix) Lokpal can probe MPs suo moto or complaints received
from general public after permission from majority of
chairperson and also permission from minimum 7 members
of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 13
(x) Lokpal should not have police powers.
CLAUSE 8 & 40
(xi) Any aggrieved party can complaint for removal of
Lokpal and its members to the President who further will
(vi) & (vii)  This is a separate issue which
requires to be handled by the appropriate
authority.
(viii) Clause 47 and 48 provide for declaration
of assets by the public servants.
(ix) The procedure in respect of inquiry and
investigation as provided in Clause 23-29 is
adequate.
(x) In order to carry out the investigations,
the Investigation Officers of the Lokpal will
have powers of police.
(xi) The complaint against the Lokpal and
Members can be made as per provisions of
12 3 4

417
refer it to CJI. And the complaints of Lokpal Staff shall
be looked after by chairpersons & members.
(xii) Centralised Lokpal will take over the responsibilities
of all anti-corruption agencies of States. Protection to
Whistle Blower to be granted by Supreme Court.
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART-II and Clause 49 & 50
(xiii) Punishment for corruption will be minimum 6 months
and maximum 7 years. If all assets made from corruption
are acquired, punishment should be reduced accordingly.
CLAUSE 17
(xiv) Lokpal can probe NGOs, Corporate, Bank Officers,
trusts, religious institutes etc.
This society has presented its own Bill called “The Indian
Lokpal Bill” and the gist of the Bill is given below.
Definition of Corruption
(i) Act of corruption would mean and include:–
(a) Any thing made punishable under Chapter IX of IPC
or Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; which would also
include any offence committed by an elected member of
a house of legislature even in respect of his speech or
vote inside the house.
(b) Willfully giving any undue benefit to any person or
obtaining any benefit from any public servant in violation
of any laws or rules.
Clause 8 & 40.
(xii) The proposed institution of Lokpal is at
the Centre level. Setting up the institution of
Lokayukta falls within the domain of the
States. Keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for the
States to decide.
(xiii) The provisions made for minimum and
maximum penalty are adequate. The
provisions for attachment of property as
provided in the Bill are adequate.
(xiv) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as
provided in Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.
(i) The Bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
89. We The People (A
Social Action
Society), A-44, LGF,
Lajpat Nagar, New
Delhi–24

418
Establishment of Lokpal
CLAUSE 3
(ii) Lokpal shall have retired CJI as chairperson and 10
members and shall be appointed by the President on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee. Atleast 4
members of Legal background, two shall be women, one
shall be from minority and atleast one member would be
from SC/ST/OBC.
(iii) A person who is not Indian citizen or less than 45
years of age, or a person again whom charges ever have
been framed by any court of Law for any offence
including moral turpitude or who has remitted any Govt.
service with the last two years, either by resignation or
retirement, shall not be eligible to become Chairperson or
member of Lokpal.
Selection Committee
CLAUSE 4
(iv) PM will be the Chairman of this committee and the
following will be the member of this committee:–
(a) Leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha
(b) Speaker of both the houses
(c) Two MPs of Rajya Sabha nominated by President
(d) Two Judges of Supreme Court and two permanent
Chief Justices of the High Courts selected by
Collegium of 5 senior most Judges of Supreme
Court.
(e) CEC & CAG
(f) All previous Chairpersons of Lokpal.
(v) The Selection Committee shall elect the Chairperson
and members from short list prepared by a 7 member
12 3 4
(ii) & (iii)  The composition of the Lokpal
and the eligibility as provided in Clause 3 of
the Bill is adequate.
(iv) & (v) The composition of the Selection
Committee and the selection procedure as
given in Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.

419
Search Committee comprising retired CJI, retired CEC,
retired IB chief, retired CBI/DRI Director, retired C&AG
and two member from Public domain. These persons
shall be on non-political background with impeccable
integrity and without holding any office of profit.
CLAUSE 6
(vi) Chairperson or members shall hold the office for 5
years of upto the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier
The Govt. shall fill up the vacancies of Chairperson and
members 3 months before the member or chairperson is
due to retire.
Powers and Function
CLAUSE 17, 23-29
(vii) The Lokpal Shall have the following functions &
Powers:–
(a) To directions & exercise superintendence over
the investigation of offences any act of corruption
either by Govt. servant or a public servant or
any officer of any society or association or trust
wholly or partly funded by the Govt. or in receipt
of any sum under the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976 or any donation from
Public.
(b) To impose punishment of dismissal, removal or
reduction in rank against Govt. servants or public
servants if they found guilty after investigation,
after giving them reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
(c) To initiate & ensure proper prosecution before a
Special Court established under the PA Act.
(d) To appoint judicial officers, prosecutors and senior
counsels.
(vi) As per Clause 6 of the Bill, the
Chairperson or Member of the Lokpal shall
hold office for a term not exceeding five
years from the date on which he enters
upon his office or until he attains the age of
75 years whichever is earlier.
(vii), (viii) & (ix)  The jurisdiction of the
Lokpal as provided in Clause 17 and the
procedure in respect of inquiry an investigation
provided in Clause 23-29 are adequate.

420
(e) To recommend cancellation or modification of a
lease, license, permission, contract or agreement,
if obtained by corrupt means including blacklisting
of corrupt firms/companies.
(f) To prepare a sentencing policy for the offences
under PC, Act. Also to prepare an appropriate
reward scheme to encourage complaints from or
within and outside the Govt. to report corruption
cases.
(g) To inquire into the assets declaration statements
filed by all the successful candidates after any
election to any seat in either of the house of
Parliament.
(h) To attach property and assets acquired by corrupt
means and to confiscate them certain cases as
provided under this Act.
(i) To determine the terms and conditions of service
of Lokpal officers & staff, recruitment of IOs
and their training arrangements including
procurement of modern equipment for investigation.
(j) The members of Lokpal or any officer under
Lokpal shall have the powers of a civil court
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.
(k) Lokpal bench may punish a public servant or any
other officer upto 6 months or with fine or both,
if he fails to comply with its order for ensuring
their compliance.
(l) The Lokpal may, at any stage of investigation
under this Act, direct by an interim order,
appropriate authority to tack such action as is
necessary, to prevent the public servant from
secreting the assets allegedly gained by corrupt
means.
12 3 4

421
(m) Lokpal shall be competent to investigate any
offence under any other law in the same case
while investigating any offence under PC,
Act 1988. It shall have the powers to issue
search warrant.
(n) No investigation or prosecution against PM,
Council of Ministers and MPs without permission
of a 7-member bench of the Lokpal.
(viii) Any person may file a complaint in the form of a
FIR as provided under the CrPC along with an undertaking
of true facts without any fee.
(ix) Any order passed by Lokpal shall be subject to writ
jurisdiction of High Court. Ordinarily, High court shall not
stay the order, but if it does, it will have to decide the
case within two months otherwise the stay will become
null and void and further no stay could be granted in that
case.
Removal of Chairperson or members of Lokpal
CLAUSE 8
(x) Chairperson or any member shall only be removed
from his office by President on the recommendation of
the Supreme Court after carrying out an inquiry for
alleged misbehavior, inefficient, insolvent or holds any
paid post etc. If the complaint is found false, Supreme
Court may impose a fine or an imprisonment upto one
year or both on the complaints.
Audit of Lokpal
CLAUSE 43, 44, 45 & 46
(xi) CAG shall conduct an annual financial & performance
audit while a Parliamentary Committee will do annual
appraisal of the functioning of Lokpal.
(x) The procedure for removal of
Chairperson or Member is provided in Clause
8 of the Bill.
(xi) & (xii)  The provisions made in the Bill
are adequate. [Clause 43, 44, 45 & 46].

422
(xii) The chairperson Lokpal shall present annually a
consolidated report in the prescribed format on its
performance to the President, which shall be place before
the Parliament.
(xiii) Lokpal shall publish every month on its website the
summary of the cases and action taken.
Independent Complaints Authority
CLAUSE 41
(xiv) In each state, one or more complaints authority
would be established to entertain any complaints against
any officer or staff of Lokpal. The authority shall have
one chairperson (retired High Court Judge), two retired
civil servants and two persons of Public Domain. This
Complaint Authority shall be selected by a committee of
3 persons comprising Chief Justice of the State High
Court, Chairman of State Lok Ayukta and Chairman of
State Human Rights Commission. This authority will decide
the complaints within two months and shall be subject to
writ jurisdiction of High Court.
Time completion of Investigation and trials
(xv) Every Investigating officer (IO) shall endeavor to
complete the investigation of an offence within a period
of 6 months but when necessary, he may obtain extension
of time from Lokpal bench. In any case the period of
investigation shall not extend beyond 18 months.
(xiii) Clause 23(13) of the Bill provide that
the website of the Lokpal shall display to
the public, the status of number of
complaints pending before it or disposed of
by it.
(xiv) The complaints mechanism against the
officials of the Lokpal as provided in Clause
41 is adequate.
(xv) & (xvi) The time lines are prescribed
in Clause 23 and Clause 28 of the Bill.
12 3 4

423
(xvi) Special courts will put effort trying an offence
under the PC Act, 1988 to complete the trial within a
maximum period of 12 months.
Whistle Blowers
(xvii) Lokpal shall provide full protection to whistle blowers
from any physical harm or administrative harassment.
Identity of such whistle blowers shall also be protected if
the whistle blowers so desires.
Punishments
SECOND SCHEDULE. PART-II
(xviii) For any act of corruption, the punishment shall not
be less than 6 months of rigorous imprisonment and may
be extended upto life imprisonment. The Special Court
may take into consideration the higher rank of an accused
to inflict a more severe punishment.
CLAUSE 42
(xix) If the offender is a business entity, in addition to the
other punishments under this Act & PC Act, a fine upto
five times the loss caused to the public shall be recovered
all the accused and recovery would also be made from
assets of business entity and personal assets of its MD.
(xx) If a public servant is convicted, such public servant
shall stand removed from his office.
CLAUSE 33 & 34
(xxi) If a public servant is found guilty by the Special
Court, all the properties and assets acquired by the corrupt
means by convicted person as well as accruals of these,
assets shall be confiscated on the orders of Special Court.
(xvii) This is covered under the protection
to Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(xviii) The punishment as prescribed in the
Bill appears to be adequate.
(xix) Provision for recovery of loss are
provided in Clause 42.
(xx) The existing disciplinary rules provides
for this and the action has to be taken by
the competent authority.
(xxi) Provisions for attachment of assets are
given Clause 33 & 34. Further, the
punishment has to be decided by the
appropriate Courts.

424
Property Statements
CLAUSE 47 & 48
(xxii) Every public servant shall within 3 months after
implementation of this Act and thereafter every 30
th June
of every submit to his/her head of department.
Miscellaneous Provisions
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(xxiii) If the complaints made with Lokpal are found false
or frivolous and meant only to harass certain authorities,
Lokpal may impose such fines on those complainants as it
deems fit and also may direct such complainant to pay
damages to such public authority, as it may deem fit. If
the complainant fails to do so, Lokpal may direct confiscate
his/her properties for the purpose of recovering such fine.
(xxiv) No govt official shall be eligible to take up jobs,
assignments etc with any person, company or organization
that he had dealt with in his official capacity.
(xxv) All contracts, public private partnerships, transfer
by way of sale, lease and any form of largesse by any
public authority shall be done with complete transparency
and by calling for public tender/auction/bids unless it is
an emergency measure.
(xxvi) The part of the Delhi Special Police Establishment
dealing with investigation and prosecution of offences
under Prevention of Corruption (PC) Act, shall stand
transferred, along with its employees, assets and liabilities
to the Lokpal.
(xxvii) Any bribe giver may be granted immunity from
prosecution by the special court if he voluntarily gives
(xxii) Provisions for declaration of assets by
the public servants are provided in Clause
47 & 48.
(xxiii) The Lokpal will have power to impose
fine for false complaints as per provisions
of Clause 49 & 50. But, DOPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
(xxiv) This is subject matter of service
conditions and is to be dealt with accordingly.
(xxv) This relates to system of procurement
etc.
(xxvi) Since, the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing [Clause 12]  and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15] , there is no
need to put anti corruption wing of CBI
under Lokpal.
(xxvii) No such provisions are made in the
present Bill.
12 3 4

425
timely information to the Lokpal about bribe giving with
evidence to get the briber taker caught.
The same suggestions by this person already received
(Memorandum No. 73)  and gist prepared accordingly. Pl
see the gist against memorandum no. 73.
(i) Since the Lokpal covers Group ‘A’ officers of Central
Govt., for covering other public servants effectively,
amendment in P.C. Act, 1988 to be done.
CLAUSE 15
(ii) Director of prosecution should have permanent Legal
Advisor and Public prosecutors.
(iii) Clause 56 – Group ‘A’  officers can afford legal
help, they should not be provision for legal assistance to
them. (iv) Lokpal should have every information available
under RTI Act including the enquiry documents after
completion or decision taken. Information exempted only
of investigation till the filling of charge sheet.
(iv) 
Clause 54  – There should not be limitation of 7
years.
(v) Statement before Investigation officers and evidence-
collected complainant like recorded conversation, sting
operation should be admissible subject to authenticity by
an expert.
(i) Non-Group ‘A’ officials are already
covered by PC Act, 1988.
(ii) Clause 15 of the Bill provides that the
Lokpal may constitute Prosecution Wing and
appoint Director of Prosecution and such
other officers and employees to assist the
Director of Prosecution for the purpose of
prosecution of public servants in relation to
any complaint by the Lokpal under this Act.
(iii) The provisions proposed in Clause 56
are adequate. However, DOPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
(iv) There has to be some limitation for
filing a complaint.
(v) Statement before Investigation Officers
and evidence collected etc. have to be as
per the relevant in force.
90.
91.
CA Pawan K. Sharma
Adv. Arvind A.
Aghav, 204, Om Sai
Shradha CHS
Ramchandra Nagar,
Thane – 04.

426
(vi) Government to provide protection to complainant and
witness. Identity should be kept secret like in MCOCA
Act.
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART-II
(vii) There should be a provision of enhanced punishment
in Lokpal Bill & P.C. Act, 1988, i.e. 10 years imprisonment
for fabricated/false evidence, forgery by accused in
corruption cases.
(viii) Any Public servant proved guilty second time should
be punished with life imprisonment.
(ix) There should be no provision of Parole in corruption
cases.
(x) There should be provision in Lokpal Bill that Discharge
application not to be allowed by accused in corruption
crimes.
(xi) Judiciary should be covered under Lokpal. Investigation
officers don't require any permission from anyone to
inquire or record statement of judicial person.
CLAUSE 23-29
(xii) There must be provision in Lokpal Bill that there
should be no delay in registering FIR.
(vi) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(vii), (viii), (ix) & (x) The punishments
provided in the Bill are adequate and are to
be decided by the appropriate Courts.
(xi) Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is
already before the Parliament.
(xii) The procedure in respect of inquiry
and investigation is given in Clause 23-29.
Accordingly, on completion of investigations,
if the commission of offence has been
established, the Lokpal shall file a report in
the Special Court. Thereafter, the Special
Court will decide the quantum of sentence,
etc. as per the established procedure.
12 3 4

427
(xiii) The Bill provides that the Lokpal to
recommend transfer or suspension of public
servants connected with allegation of
corruption.
(xiv) The Courts have to take decisions as
per the prevailing legal system.
(xv) Powers for search and seizure are given
in Clause 30 of the Bill. For attachment of
property, provisions are made in Clause 33
& 34.
(xvi) The Prime Minister is not within the
ambit of the Lokpal. The CBI is also
independent of Lokpal.
(xvii) The Lokpal will have power to impose
fine for false complaints as per provisions
of Clause 49 & 50. But, DOPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
(i) & (ii)  The composition of the Selection
Committee and the selection procedure is
given in Clause 4 of the Bill.
CLAUSE 35
(xiii) There should be a provision, in Lokpal Bill, of
immediate suspension of public servant on registration of
corruption case against him/her, should be suspended till
acquittal. Even if a contractor is found guilty under
corruption act, he and his direct or indirect firms should
be black listed for whole time.
(xiv) No court to be allowed to show any kind of
leniency or mercy to accused and no power of reduction
of sentence of accused. If more than 5 cases are acquitted,
senior judges committee including Lokpal and members
will suo moto  check such judgments.
CLAUSE 30, 33 & 34
(xv) Lokpal should have powers to allow investigating
agency to search and seize of bribery amounts by
conducting surprise raids on receiving any information of
bribery collection by any office.
(xvi) PM and CBI to be kept out the jurisdiction of
Lokpal.
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(xvii) Penalty for false complaints must be reduced
reasonably otherwise people will not come directly and
send anonymous complaints.
CLAUSE 4
Selection of Lokpal
(i) The 10 member Selection committee to have: (a) Not
more than 2 politicians including only 1 person from
ruling coalition party (b) 5 Judges (c) 3 persons from
social activists and constitutional experts.
92. Unknown Citizen

428
(ii) Search committee to be independent and selection
process should be aired live.
PM & CBI
CLAUSE 17
(iii) Lokpal should refer any allegation against PM to CBI
under Prevention of Corruption Act.
CLAUSE 12-15
(iv) Anti corruption wing of CBI should come directly
under the supervision of the Lokpal. Any allegation against
CBI to be probed by Anti corruption wing and be verified
and checked by the Lokpal.
Judiciary
CLAUSE 17
(v) Judiciary to be in the purview of Lokpal. There
should be special immunity against frivolous allegations.
(vi) All allegations against any MP, Cash for vote, laundering
and bribery should come under the ambit of Lokpal
Grievance Redressal
(vii) Sloth progress of any citizen's work to be deemed
as corruption after investigating the circumstances.
(iii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as provided
in Clause 17 and the Prime Minister while
holding his office is not within the ambit of
Lokpal.
(iv) The Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing [Clause 12] and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15], hence, there
is no need to place anti corruption wing of
CBI under the Lokpal.
(v) Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is
already before the Parliament.
(vi) The Members of Parliament are covered
under the jurisdiction of the Lokpal and their
conduct on the floor of the House is outside
the purview of the Lokpal.
(vii) For matters relating public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be set
up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions is
working on the same.
12 3 4

429
CLAUSE 8 & 40
Accountability and Integrity of Lokpal
(viii) Lokpal to be accountable to the people via Supreme
Court and any person or the Government has to approach
Supreme Court in order to remove a Lokpal member.
(ix) Lokpal along with two CBI Officers shall investigate
the charges made against any of its member and the
accused shall not be part of this investigation.
CLAUSE 41
(x) All rank of officers to fall under the ambit of Lokpal.
Lokayukta
(xi) Lokayukta to be established in all the States including
J&K.
CLAUSE 23-29
Dismissal and Punishment of Corrupt Government
(xii) Lokpal to decide the dismissal of corrupt Government
servants and this order can be challenged in High Court.
Maximum punishment in corruption charges shall be 10
years and 12 years in case extremely high ranked officials
including CBI, civil servants and judiciary.
(viii) & (ix)  The procedure for removal of
Chairperson or Member and the complaints
handling mechanism is provided in Clause 8
and 40 of the Bill.
(x) The procedure for complaints against
the officials of Lokpal is given in Clause 41.
(xi) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(xii) The procedure in respect of inquiry and
investigation is given in Clause 23-29.
Accordingly, on completion of investigations,
if the commission of offence has been
established, the Lokpal shall file a report in
the Special Court. Thereafter, the Special Court
will decide the quantum of sentence, etc. as
per the established procedure. The Lokpal
may also recommend to the competent
authority for initiation of disciplinary
proceedings under the rules of disciplinary
proceedings applicable to such public servants.

430
CLAUSE 43
Financial Independence
(xiii) Finance Ministry to decide the quantum of budget
with consultation with Lokpal.
Other points
CLAUSE 17
(xiv) All NGOs to be covered under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 49-50
(xv) There should a maximum punishment of 2 years for
false and frivolous complaints.
DEFINITIONS
(i) Definition of corruption should include both bribe
giving and taking.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) Allegations of corruption against even current PM
must be within the ambit of Lokpal with excepts where
covering him this way would affect national security/
interest.
JUDICIARY
(iii) Allegations against judiciary may not be within the
ambit of Lokpal but a strong Judicial Accountability Bill
must be introduced.
(iv) Alleged corrupt actions of MPs inside or outside
Parliament should be within the ambit of Lokpal.
(xiii) The provisions for preparation of
Budget are provided in Clause 43.
(xiv) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal is given
in Clause 17.
(xv) The Lokpal will have power to impose
fine for false complaints as per provisions
of Clause 49 & 50. But, DOPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
(i) The Bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
(ii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as provided
in Clause 17 and the Prime Minister while
holding his office is not within the ambit of
Lokpal.
(iii) Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is
already before the Parliament.
(iv) The Members of Parliament are covered
under the jurisdiction of the Lokpal and their
conduct on the floor of the House is outside
12 3 4
93. S. Ganeshan,
Flats 1 & 2, 3 rd Floor,
Srijees Apartments,
177/103, Lloyds
Road, Royapettah,
Chennai - 14

431
(v) Corruption by lower bureaucracy to be under Lokpal.
(vi) All PSUs and Govt. supported NGOs should come
under the ambit of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 8
(vii) Only Supreme Court should have the powers to look
into the complaints against Lokpal members.
(viii) CBI and CVC to report to Lokpal.
CLAUSE 4
(ix) Lokpal members to be selected by a panel of 9
members consisting of 2 Judges of Supreme Court, 2
Chief Justices of High Courts, 1 representative from
Central Government and 1 from main opposition party, 1
retired member of Lokpal; 1 bureaucrat from Central
Government and 1 from State Government.
CLAUSE 60
(x) Lokpal should receive complaints directly from Public
and no permission is required for registering case and
proceed. Even Lokpal shall have the powers to give
instructions for phone tapping.
CLAUSE 23-29
(xi) Lokpal members will hear the cases against high
officials or where the corruption is of a high magnitude
and other cases would be heard by the officers with
the purview of the Lokpal.
(v) The public functionaries as given in
Clause 17 of the Bill are within the ambit of
the Lokpal and the provisions made are
adequate.
(vi) These are covered under Clause 17.
(vii) The procedure for removal of
Chairperson or Member is provided in Clause
8 of the Bill.
(viii) CBI and CVC are separate independent
an autonomous authorities.
(ix) The composition of the Selection
Committee and the selection procedure is
given in Clause 4 of the Bill.
(x) Clause 60 provides that the Central
Government shall make rules in this regard.
(xi) The procedure in respect of inquiry and
investigations is given in Clause 23-29.

432
delegated powers by Lokpal.
(xii) Lokpal should give protection to whistleblowers,
witnesses and victims of corruption and their complaints
should be looked into and redressed on priority within set
time frame.
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART-II
(xiii) Punishment to be maximum life imprisonment and
dismissal of government servants to be on the binding
recommendation of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 49-50
(xiv) In case of false, frivolous or vexatious complaints
are established, the complaints should be punished with
same punishment, as alleged person would have.
CLAUSE 23-49 AND 38
(xv) High Courts to set up special branches to hear
appeals against Lokpal decisions in a time bound manner.
And the complaints against Lokpal staff to be heard by
concerned High Court where staff works. Cr.PC to be
amended wherever necessary to speed up cases.
Citizens’ Charter
(xvi) Each Government Department whether Centre or
States should have a citizens’ charter for redressal of
public grievances.
(xii) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(xiii) Maximum punishment of ten years
imprisonment has been proposed.
(xiv) The Lokpal will have power to impose
fine for false complaints as per provisions
of Clause 49 and 50. But, DOPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
(xv) The procedure in respect of inquiry
and investigation is given in Clause 23-29.
Accordingly, on completion of investigations,
if the commission of offence has been
established, the Lokpal shall file a report in
the Special Court. Thereafter, the Special
Court will decide the quantum of sentence,
etc. as per the established procedure. As
regards the setting up of Special Courts are
concerned, these are to be set up by the
Central Government on the recommendations
of the Lokpal to conduct speedy trial.
(xvi) For matters relating public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be set
up for which the Department of
12 3 4

433
Administrative Reforms and Pensions is
working on the same.
(xvii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our Constitution,
it may be left for the States to decide.
(i) No reservation has been proposed in the
Bill in the selection of Lokpal and its
Members.
(ii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal. For judiciary,
Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is already
before the Parliament.
(iii) The powers for search and seizure have
been provided in Clause 30.
(iv) The Lokpal will have powers to utilise
the services of officers of the Central or
LOKAYUKATAS
(xvii) There should be a provision for uniform Lokayukta
in all states on lines of Lokpal in Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 4
(i) There should not be any kind of reservation or
representation based on caste, religion, gender, region,
language etc. in the selection of Lokpal and its members.
The only criteria that should be uniformly and consistently
applied is that none of the members of Lokpal is associated
by any way with any political party or organization.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) The PM, Judiciary to be included in the ambit of
Lokpal but the allegations of corruptions against PM, CJI
or Judges of Supreme Court should be recorded and kept
in abeyance till the time they are in the office and would
be initiated immediately after they demit their offices.
CLAUSE 30
(iii) The actions of Lokpal on search and seizure should
not be challengeable in a civil or criminal court. Any appeal
against such actions to be minimum in the High court.
CLAUSE 32
(iv) When the services of Central or State Government
officers will be utilised by Lokpal, they will report only to the
94. Ashutosh Mishra,
D 904, Pearl Drop,
GE Garden, LBS
Marg, Kanjurmarg
(West), Mumbai – 78

434
Lokpal and will maintain absolute confidentiality of the
assignment entrusted to them and on failure they should
be charged under appropriate confidentiality provisions.
CLAUSE 8
(v) President of India will the authority for the removal
of Lokpal and its members. On the involvement of
chairman or any member of Lokpal in corrupt practices,
they will be removed immediately and investigated upon.
If found not guilty, they will be reinstated with the same
seniority and position.
CLAUSE 6
(vi) Chairperson and members of Lokpal to be administered
oath by President or CJI. And violation of this oath to
considered a criminal offence and liable to appropriate
punishment.
(vii) All state Lokayukta should be under the supervision
of Lokpal but no process of appeal from Lokayukta to
Lokpal.
(viii) CBI, Enforcement Directorate etc., should have a
transparent reporting process into the Lokpal.
(ix) The duration of investigation and prosecution should
be time bound.
State Government. For the officers working
on deputation, the normal deputation rules
shall apply.
(v) The provisions for removal of the Lokpal
and its Members are given in Clause 8.
(vi) Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the
President by warrant under his hand and
seal shall appoint the Chairperson and
Members of the Lokpal.
(vii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(viii) CBI is separate independent authorities
under supervision of CVC. For placing the
Enforcement Directorate under the Lokpal,
the Ministry of Finance have to give their
views.
(ix) The time lines are prescribed in Clause
23 and Clause 28 of the Bill.
12 3 4

435
(x) CVC, anti corruption unit of CBI and department
vigilance should be merged into a single body under the
leadership of CVC. CVC should have provision to refer
matters to Lok Pal; as deemed necessary.
(xi) Non performance of duty by various public agencies
within prescribed time, should not be deemed as
corruption.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM should be included in the ambit of Lok Pal but he/
she to be investigated for corruption complaints only when
50 or more (number may be decided by Parliament) MPs
sign the complaints and submit to Lok Pal, with reasonable
– even circumstantial – evidence and this shall form the
basis for Lok Pal’s investigation. And the same on the
submission of the complaint/petition by 25 MPs, a member
of council of minister would be investigated by Lok Pal.
(ii) For the Judiciary, a Judicial Lok Pal Bill exactly on
the lines of Lok Pal bill to be made and introduced with
the Lokpal Bill right now. The Judicial Lok Pal will
oversee all judiciary and comes from within the judiciary.
(iii) The Lok Pal Bill must have the provisions for uniform
Lok Ayukta in all the States with a uniform system and
beyond the purview of the state CMs.
CLAUSE 12-15 & 23-29
(iv) CVC and Anti-Corruption Wing of CBI must come
under Lok Pal. Lok Pal will be the only institution to look
into the corruption charges. If Government wants that a
particular corruption charge coming into its notice be
(x) There is no need to place the CVC and
CBI and the Departmental Vigilance under
the Lokpal.
(xi) For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments' set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(ii) Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is
already before the Parliament.
(iii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(iv) The Lokpal will have its own Investigation
Wing [Clause 12] and Prosecution Wing
[Clause 15], hence, there is no need to place
95. Vijay Mohan
JR Nagar, Behind
Pandian Rice Mill,
Tiruninravur,
Chennai  – 24

436
investigated, it must transfer to the Lok Pal with a
classification like urgent.
(v) All Groups (A, B, C and D) must technically come
under Lok Pal. But, Lok Pal must investigate directly only
groups A & B which are key functionaries under
government C & D groups must be handled by the
respective Departmental Anti-Corruption/Vigilance wings
at present. For this purpose, Departmental Anti Corruption/
Vigilance Wings must be selected on inter-departmental
basis by Lok Pal and must function under Lok Pal only.
They will report details on monthly basis and Lok Pal will
have full authority to re-investigate any serious case.
Departments themselves can handle non-Corruption cases.
The same system to be followed for Lok Ayuktas at state
level.
CLAUSE 4-6
(vi) Both Lok Pal and Lok Ayukta must be accountable
only Supreme Court of India. Even the Supreme Court
must have final approval of their appointments though
committees may be formed as stated in Jan Lok Pal Bill
Draft. However, Supreme court may nominate Judicial
Lok Pal to look at the Lok Pal/Lok Ayukta's monthly/
quarterly reports and submit its report to a 3 member
bench of Supreme Court. Also, Lok Pal may submit
advisory and statistical reports to Parliament for its views
and consideration. Parliament also may send the review
report to Lokpal for its consideration. Apart from this,
Supreme Court may issue advices to Lok Pal/Lok Ayukta
for handling of cases.
anti-corruption wing of CBI under the Lokpal.
The procedure for inquiry and investigation is
provided in Clause 23-29.
(v) All Group ‘A’ and above officers are
covered under the ambit of the Lokpal.
Bringing the lower bureaucracy under the
ambit of Lokpal will put undue strain on the
resources of the Lokpal.
(vi) The accountability of the Lokpal has to
be to the Parliament. The procedure for
appointment of Lokpal and its Members is
given in Clause 4-6 of the Bill.
12 3 4

437
CLAUSE 23-29, SECOND SECHEDULE, P ART-II
(vii) Every inquiry to be completed within 6 months and
there should be no jail sentence for first offence, unless
too serious and need not go to court of Law in case of
Grade C & D servants. Punishment should be imposed
by Lok Pal/Lok Ayukta , through controlling departmental
officers, who shall have no option in that matter.
Corruption cases of Grade A & B will be decided by Lok
Pal. Even for Ministers Lok Pal will decide punishment
based on the gravity of offence and recommend to the
courts of Law.
PROTECTION TO WHISTLEBLOWERS
(viii) There should be adequate protection to complainants
and Whistleblowers. There shall be no punishment for
complainants/whistleblowers in case, the complaint is not
proved. But if the complaint is totally proved false,
complaint motivated to implicate an honest officer, Lok
Pal must have powers to impose fine in first offence and
jail term for subsequent offences, which must not exceed
6 months in any case.
CLAUSE 30
(ix) There should Special Benches to fast track the cases
and complete them within 6 months maximum.
CLAUSE 43
(x) Lok Pal will decide its Budget and it will a charge on
Consolidated Fund of India and process will the same as
in case of Supreme Court. Similarly, Budgets for Lok
Ayukta will be a charge on the Consolidated Fund of
States.
(xi) Lokpal shall be entitled to take adequate steps or
prescribe procedures to prevent corruption on pro-active
basis. Lok Pal shall have the authority to supplement
(vii) The procedure for inquiry and
investigations as given in Clause 23-29 has
to be followed. The quantum of sentence is
to be decided by the appropriate Courts as
per the provisions of the law.
(viii) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(ix) The Special Courts are to be set up by
the Central Government on the
recommendations of the Lokpal.
(x) The provisions for preparation of Budget
are provided in Clause 43.

438
12 3 4
existing rules and procedure to strengthen them to prevent
corruption.
PHONE TAPPING
(xii) Both Government and Lok Pal shall have powers to
tap phones for pro-active prevention of corruption but
adequate reasons of for tapping shall be recorded in
writing and decision shall be taken at high level.
CLAUSE 37
(xiii) Lok Pal shall have to delegate duties to officers
working under him along with powers of interrogation
but only upto a certain higher level as per the seriousness
of the case and rank of accused.
CLAUSE 17
(xiv) PSUs should come under Lok Pal. NGOs funded by
Central and State Government may come under the Lokpal
and Lokayukta respectively.
CLAUSE 12-15, 23 & 28
(xv) Lok Pal/Lok Ayukta must be independent with adequate
powers to investigate and prosecute and recommend
punishments. About 95% cases to be completed within 6
months by them and remain 5% within another 6 months.
(i) If the regulatory body do not take any action against
an erring institution, an individual can file a complaint
with the Lokayukta who will first ask the regulatory body
why no action has been taken.
(ii) Regulatory bodies of institutions like educational
institutions shall be free from political influence and
(xii) Such powers are not envisaged for the
Lokpal.
(xiii) Clause 37 of the Bill provide for
delegation of administrative or financial
powers.
(xiv) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal is
provided in Clause 17.
(xv) The Lokpal will have its own Investigation
Wing [Clause 12] and Prosecution Wing
[Clause 15]. The time lines are prescribed in
Clause 23 and Clause 28 of the Bill.
(i) & (ii) The Lokpal shall inquire into
allegations of corruption against certain public
functionaries. The employees of the regulating
bodies shall also be covered for their acts
of corruption under the Lokpal.
96. Shrimati Lovina
Singhla, Advocate,
Chamber No. 262,
District Court,
Rohtak (Haryana)-01

439
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal is provided
in Clause 17.
(ii) The procedure for inquiry and
investigations is provided in Clause 23-29.
Provisions have been made of legal assistance
in Clause 56. As regards the procedure before
the Special Courts, this has to be as per the
rules on the subject.
(iii) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(iv) The Lokpal will have power to impose
fine for false complaints as per provisions
of Clause 49 & 50. But, DOPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
(v) No distinction is made in this regard.
should be independently answerable only to the head of
the state like Governor/President of India/Courts/Lokayukta.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM, Judiciary, NGOs, Trusts and Autonomous bodies
should be kept out of the jurisdiction of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 23-29 & 56
(ii) Complainants and Public servants must be given the
right to present their cases themselves in Special Courts.
Even if need arises, weak complainant or public servant
to be provided legal assistance. Petitions in the special
court to be allowed in both Hindi as well as English
languages and there should be a provision for allowing
complaints and petitions in regional languages with their
Hindi and English translation.
(iii) Lokpal Bill must have provision to provide security to
the complainants and time bound disposal of the complaints.
CLAUSE 49-50
(iv) For false or frivolous complaints, the complainant to
be punished as per the gravity of the case and not to be
punished with severe punishment in comparison to
punishment as the alleged public servant would have
punished on establishment of charges. It would be better
if the false complaints are disposed off by imposing fine
on the complainants.
(v) All corrupt public servants to be prosecuted in a
uniform manner irrespective of their status or position.
97. All India Community
Health Worker
Association, B 89/21,
Main Road,
Swatantra Nagar,
Narela, Delhi-40.

440
The individual has pointed out the plight of Dalits, women
and discrimination between Upper Caste/Class and Lower
caste/class people in implementation of various laws like
SC&ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, CrPC etc. Also he
has mentioned that Police is reluctant in registering the
cases under SC/ST Act against the Upper Caste/Class
people and also misuses the powers of Section 46 of
CrPC to carry out fake encounters of hundreds of hapless
detainees. But as such he has not given any suggestion
regarding provisions of Lokpal.
No comments. However, it is stated that the
Lokpal shall inquire into allegations of
corruption against certain public functionaries.
12 3 4
98. Lenin Raghuvansi,
Secretary General,
PVHCR, SA 4/2,
Daulatpur, Varanasi–02
(UP)

441
COMMENTS OF DoPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of Suggestions/Comments Comments of DoPT
No. Organisation/
Individual
12 3 4
Shri Nilay Dutta,
President, All Assam
Lawyer’s Association
(AALA), Guwahati-01
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM, CBI at least Anti Corruption Wing must be under
the purview of Lokpal. Central Government officers upto
Group “A” or equivalent should be under Lokpal and for
the officers below Group ‘A’ a separate bench of Lokpal
should be established in every state capital of zone-wise
so that all the Central Government servants could be
covered. The Higher Judiciary should be excluded from
the purview of Lokpal but should be within the control of
National Judicial Commission.
(ii) Large Corporate houses and activities of corporate
lobbyists, complaints pertaining to “Paid News” of
both Print and Electronic Media should be brought
under the purview of Lokpal. Accordingly, definition
of “corruption” in PC, Act 1988 or “Complaint” in the
Lokpal Bill needs to be amended. Even, the conduct
of MPs amounting to Corruption even within the
Parliament should come under the ambit of Lokpal.
MLAs to be under Lokayukta. But, the jurisdiction/
regarding MPs/MLAs by the Lokpal/Lokasyukta would
(i) In the proposed Bill, the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the Lokpal
once he/she demits the office [Clause 17].
Group ‘A’ and above officers are also within
the purview of Lokpal. Further, Clause 19
of the Bill provides for setting up of Benches
by the Lokpal.
Since, Lokpal will have its own Investigation
Wing and Prosecution Wing; there Anti
Corruption Wing of CBI may not be placed
under Lokpal.
Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill is
already before the Parliament.
(ii) As regards the corruption by Corporate/
MNCs and paid news of both print and
electronic media are concerned, it is stated
that the scope of the Lokpal is to enquire
into the complaints of alleged corruption
against certain public functionaries. If MNCs
and Media are also to be covered under the
Lokpal, in that case, the definition of the
public servant would be required to be
modified to include such entities. In order
99

442
12 3 4
to tackle corruption by private parties, which
include MNC and media, Ministry of Home
Affairs, in consultation with the States, is
already examining amendment to the IPC.
However, Clause 17(3) of the Bill provides
that the Lokpal may inquire into any act or
conduct of any person other than those
referred to in sub-section (1) of Clause 17,
if such person is associated with the
allegation of corruption under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988. The Government
has also introduced Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of
Public International Organisations, Bill, 2011
in the Lok Sabha. As far as the conduct of
MPs on the floor of the House is concerned,
they are already subject to Ethics Committee
of the respective House, and it would be
desirable if the matter is left to the respective
House for appropriate action in this regard.
(iii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(iv) Constitutional requirement of reservation
for filling the various posts in Lokpal would
have to be followed.
(v) For matters relating public grievances, a
be dependent on a referral by the Speaker of the
respective House.
LOKAYUKTA
(iii) Lokpal Bill itself should annex a draft Model Bill to
be enacted by the respective State Governments for
establishing of Lokayukta leaving sufficient scope
for the States to customize the different provisions of the
Model Bill according to their peculiar needs.
(iv) The constitutional requirement of reservation should
be complied with while constituting the Lokpal, so
accordingly, Section 8 of the Lokpal Bill needs to be
amended.
CITIZENS’ CHARTER
(v) There should be separate citizens’ charter for the

443
100.
101.
Central Gov ernment i nstitutions and the State
Government i nstitutions.
ELECTORAL REFORMS
(vi) First of all, R.P. Act to bring Electoral Reforms in the
light of V ohra Committee Report to be amended in order
to break the crime syndicate/mafia linkages with
Government machinery.
POLICE REFORMS
(vii) Immediate steps to be taken regarding Police Reforms.
All the State Government should separate the Law &
Order wing of Police from Investigation and Prosecution
Wing. The Prosecution to be placed under High courts or
atleast should be answerable to them for any act of
negligence on their part.
PUBLIC FEEDBACK
(viii) It is extremely important to first gather the Public
Feed Back on various important aspects of the Bill, by
employing the machinery of Panchayati Raj Institutions
and properly reflect such views of the public in the
proposed Bill. There should also be a nationwide debate
on the various versions of the Lokpal Bill.
The individual has submitted a copy of draft of Jan
Lokap Bill version 1.8 submitted by Civil Society led by
Anna Hazare with JDC earlier.
Preamble
(i) In the first line words ‘Sovereign’ and ‘Socialist’ to be
added before word ‘Democratic’. And the second line
read as “AND WHEREAS the Government is satisfied
that in order to ensure clean and responsive……….In the
third line after the word expedient, the words “to bring in
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(vi) The issue of Electoral Reforms requires
to be examined separately by the concerned
Ministry/Department.
(vii) The issue of Police Reforms requires
to be examined separately by the concerned
Ministry/Department.
(viii) Public consultations are done as per
the standard procedure.
(i) This may be examined by the Ministry of
Law. However, DOP&T may not have any
objection to it.
Vithal Rai Thakore,
1-5-642, Kothapet,
Hyderabad–60
Sanjay Saxena, 20
Mandir Marg, Vasant
Vihar Enclave,
Dehradun-06

444
before the Parliament an Act for establishing a strong….”
to be added.
Clause 17
(ii) If the complaint is against PM, Lokpal shall refer the
matter with full details to President who will form an
Enquiry Committee consisting of Speakers of both houses,
Leader of Opposition in LS & CJI. The Committee shall
submit its report within 180 days to President who shall
forward to Parliament for a decision. If the PM resigns
after this report, Lokpal may further take up the case.
(iii) Clause 27 – to be deleted.
These suggestions have already been submitted by this
Samiti vide memorandum No. 40.
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION
(i) Whistle Blower protection should include the protection
of Public/Government servants against character
assassination and deliberate defaming/tarnishing of image
by media or interests groups, jeopardy to academic career
of self or dependents by educational institutes, harassment
by medical professionals and damage of interests by the
corrupts. Even protection to all coming in the ambit of
Lokpal should be given against frivolous or false complaints
especially government/public servants.
12 3 4
(ii) In the proposed Bill, the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the Lokpal
once he/she demits the office [Clause 17].
However, the judiciary may be kept outside
the purview of Lokpal and a separate Bill,
Judicial Standards Accountability Bill is already
under consideration of the Parliament.
(iii) Clause 27 of the Bill provides that
previous sanction is not necessary for
investigation and initiating prosecution by the
Lokpal in certain cases. This provision has
been incorporated with a view to speed up
the process of investigations and prosecution.
(i) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
102.
103.
C.K. Pandey, Vice
Chairman, Bharastachar
Niwaran Samiti, B-5/
121, Yamuna Vihar,
Delhi - 53
Dr. Nitin B Jawale,
Ghatkopar (W),
Mumbai - 86

445
CLAUSE 3 & 9
(ii) Chairman of Lokpal can be an MP, MLA or Minister
not involved in any party work anymore and should not
be associated with media, NGOs, business body and will
not be associated even relinquishment of post. Lokpal not
be posted as President or Governor after demitting of
office. Whereas members can be retired civil servants/
officers including defense officers preferably of legal
background, meeting the above mentioned criteria.
Representation of SC/ST/Minority and women as members
of Lokpal should be mandatory.
CLAUSE 8
(iii) Lokpal and its members to be removed by
impeachment like judges or can be removed by Rajya
Sabha chairman, Governor & CJI.
(ii) The Bill provides [Clause 3] that the
Chairperson or a Member shall not be a
Member of Parliament or a Member of the
Legislature of any State or Union Territory
and shall not hold any office of trust or
profit or be connected with any political
party or carry on any business or practice
any profession. However, an MP, MLA or
Minister would not be involved in any party
work is not understood.
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that on ceasing
to hold office, the Chairperson and every
Member shall be ineligible for reappointment
as the Chairperson or a Member of the
Lokpal; any diplomatic assignment,
appointment as administrator of a Union
Territory; further employment to any other
office of profit under the Government of
India or the Government of a State; and
contesting any election of President or Vice
President or Member of either House of
State Legislature or Municipality or Panchayat
within a period of five years from the date
of cessation of holding the office of the
Chairperson or Member.
In the present Bill, there is no provision for
representation of SC/ST/Minority and Women
as Member of the Lokpal.
(iii) Clause 8 of the Bill provides for removal
and suspension of Chairperson and Members
of Lokpal. The Chairman and Members can
be removed by order of the President on the

446
grounds of misbehaviour after inquiry by
the Supreme Court. The process of
impeachment is lengthy and cumbersome
which may defeat the purpose.
(iv) Clause 42 provides for recovery of loss
caused to the public exchequer on account
of the action or decisions of such public
servant not taken in good faith. If the loss
caused was pursuant to a conspiracy with
the beneficiary or beneficiaries of actions or
decisions of the public servant, then such
loss may also be recovered from such
beneficiaries proportionately.
(v) The Bill provides that after investigations,
the Lokpal will file a report in the Special
Court and also send a copy of the report to
the competent for appropriate action/
proceedings against the public servant.
(vi) The intent of the suggestion is not
clear. However, every complaint has to be
substantiated by facts.
(vii) Declaration of assets by the
functionaries of NGOs/Trusts etc. may be
made mandatory by the authorities registering
such organisations by suitably amending the
conditions for registrations of such
organisations.
(i) & (ii) The procedure for appointment of
Chairperson and Members as prescribed in
12 3 4
CLAUSE 42
(iv) Recovery not to be made from near relatives, if they
acquire the property through their own individual earnings.
CLAUSE 28 & 29
(v) Appeal against the order of Lokpal can be made with
High Court or Supreme Court.
(vi) Onus of proof laying should be on the complainant.
CLAUSE 47
(vii) Like Government servant others who are under
Lokpal ambit have to furnish declaration about their assets
and liabilities to the Government through Commissioner/
Dy. Commissioner Income Tax or District Magistrate as
per their convenience.
CLAUSE 4
(i) The selection of Chairperson and 8 members should
be done from a panel of 27 persons recommended by the
104. D. Satyananda Rao,
Flat 201, Plot 7, SVS
homes, LIC Colony,

447
Committee of all the Judges of Supreme Court by seeking
the names through general public through advertisement
(online or any other means).
(ii) The persons recommended should have a track record
of exceptional honesty, sincerity, social service and
missionary activity or persons of exceptional judicial
background as eminent judge or persons with very good
practicable administrative experience.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) PM, All the Ministers (both Central and State), MPs/
MLAs all the Government servants, public sector officials,
corporate sector officials should come under the
investigating powers of Lokpal. Also all State Intelligence,
Public Sector Vigilance, PSUs vigilance, ACB, CBI, IB,
Lok Ayuktas etc should be directly under Lokpal.
Procurement of Defense forces shall also be under Lokpal
but these will not be under public domain for verification.
All the actions, if needed, to be done by defense forces
after mutual discussion between PM, Defense Minister,
Armed Forces and Lokpal.
SUPERVISION BY LOKPAL
(iv) The Lokpal shall have a right to order any government
deptt., PSUs or corporates to computerize systems and
procedures for approval, sanction, tendering, sale of assets,
purchase etc. and make them available to Lokpal whenever
asked for. All the related files of all the departments shall
be made available to Lokpal for online access. Any tender
above 5 crore or sale of assets of such value by any
government deptt./PSU/Trusts/Corporates need to be notified
to Lokpal.
Clause 4 is adequate.
(iii) The Bill envisages for setting up of the
institution of Lokpal at Centre level. In the
proposed Bill, the Prime Minister will come
within the purview of the Lokpal once he/
she demits the office [Clause 17]. Central
Ministers and MPs are within the ambit of
Lokpal. As regards lower bureaucracy, if the
same is also included within the purview of
Lokpal, it will overburden the system.
Bringing all State Intelligence, Public Sector
Vigilance PSUs vigilance, ACB, CBI, IB, Lok-
ayuktas, procurement by Defence forces,
would lead to concentration of powers in
one institution which may ultimately be
counterproductive.
(iv) This would mean that the Lokpal would
be supervising day to day working of all
Government departments, PSUs, corporate
etc., which is beyond the scope of the
Lokpal Bill. Further, this will overburden the
resources of the Lokpal with crippling
affects.
west maredpalli,
Secunderabad – 26.

448
POWERS EQUALENT TO JUDGE OF SUPREME
COURT
(v) Chairperson of Lokpal shall have all the powers
equivalent to a judge of Supreme Court. Lokpal should be
at par with executive, judiciary and Parliamentary
establishment and shall be independent without any control.
CLAUSE 8
(vi) Lokpal members can be removed through impeachment
procedures by Parliament and by  majority decision among
Supreme Court Judges.
CLAUSE 17
(vi) Any corruption case among judiciary should be allowed
for investigation by Lokpal, but all the high court and
above judges can be removed through impeachment by
Parliament after getting recommendation from Lokpal as
well as majority of Supreme Court Judges.
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(vii) No punishment against any public citizen lodging
complaints it is the responsibility of the Lokpal to verify
the complaints prior to launching any prosecution.
12 3 4
(v) The powers and functions of the
Chairperson of Lokpal are well defined in
the Bill. It has powers for search and seizure,
powers of civil courts, powers to utilize
services of officers of the Central
Government and State Government,
attachment of assets, powers to recommend
transfer suspension of public servants, give
directions to prevent destruction of records,
etc. The powers of Chairperson of Lokpal
cannot be equated with the powers of Judge
of Supreme Court. [CLAUSE 30-37] .
(vi) Clause 8 of the Bill provides for removal
and suspension of Chairperson and Members
of Lokpal. The Chairman and Members can
be removed by order of the President on the
grounds of misbehaviour after inquiry by
the Supreme Court. The process of
impeachment is lengthy and cumbersome
which may defeat the purpose.
(vi) The judiciary may be kept outside the
purview of Lokpal as a separate Bill, Judicial
Standards Accountability Bill is already under
consideration of the Parliament.
(vii) Clause 49 and 50 of the bill provide for
prosecution and penalties for false
complaints. But, DOPT is open to suggestion

449
(viii) Lokpal shall have powers to order modification of
systems and procedures for improving the efficiency of
the system over a period of time.
LOKAYUKTA
(ix) All the states should have a uniform regional Lok
Ayuktas with similar establishments under direct control
of Central Lokpal. The state intelligence agencies & ACBs
will be directly under Lok Ayuktas.
CLAUSE 4 & 8
(i) Lokpal will be appointed by the President on the
advice of CJI for a period of five years unless he/she is
removed by the President on the advice of CJI. If the
monitoring is not entrusted to Supreme Court, ten members
Lokpal Committee by President on the advice of Lokpal.
CITIZENS’ CHARTER
(ii) Government must make a Citizens Charter by
prescribing a time limit for disposal of every work, i.e.
30 days, which can be extended on request by Lokpal.
(iii) If anyone doesn’t know where to send application/
complain or in case of refusal of application from
Government servant, it will be submitted to Lokpal who
shall send it concerned government official.
LOKAYUKTA
(iv) There will be a Lokayukta in every state, having
similar powers and functions, appointed by Governor for
five years on the advice of Chief Justice of High Court
concerned.
in this regard and can be modified suitably.
(viii) The Lokpal may make suggestions for
modifications of systems and procedures,
however, the final decision should rest with
the concerned competent authority.
(ix) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it maybe left for the States to
decide.
(i) The Bill provides that the Chairperson
and Members shall be appointed by the
President after obtaining the recommendations
of the Selection Committee. The procedure
for selection and removal as prescribed in
Clause 4 and 8 of the Bill is sufficient.
(ii) For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(iii) The Lokpal is meant to inquire into
allegations of corruption against certain public
servants and not work as coordination wing.
(iv) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
105. V irendra Kumar, C-5/
9-1, Vrindavan Appts,
Sector 5, CBD
Belapur, Navi
Mumbai -14

450
CLAUSE 23-29
(v) All investigations of corruption against PM, Ministers,
MPs, CMs and State Ministers, MLAs will be monitored
by the Supreme Court. Therefore, strength of Supreme
Court Judges may be increased by more Judges instead
of members of Lokpal Committee. Anti Corruption Wing
of CBI will be directly under “Supreme Court”.
CLAUSE 28, 29 & 42
(vi) Trials of corruption against Government members,
Parliament and State Legislature will be conducted in the
High Court within a period three months. No bail in such
cases and the punishment will be life imprisonment where
as punishment in other corruption cases may ten years.
Also losses due to corruption will be recovered out of the
properties of the guilty.
DEFINITIONS
(vii) A corrupt act will include all acts of commissions
and omissions done, attempted to have done, aided or
(v) The Lokpal Bill provides for inquiry/
investigations by the Lokpal on receipt of a
complaint. The punishment has to be
awarded to the public servants by the
appropriate courts/ authorities once the
commission of offence is established.
Monitoring of investigations by the Supreme
Court in all such cases, appears to be not
practicable. Further, the Prime Minister will
come within the purview of the Lokpal once
he/she demits the office [Clause 17]. The
intent of the suggestion to increase the
strength of the Supreme Court instead of
having 11 members of Lokpal Committee is
not clear. Further, bringing Anti Corruption
Wing of CBI under the Supreme Court is
not feasible as the Apex Court is not expected
to engage in day to day working of
investigating agencies.
(vi) The Bill provides that the Lokpal shall
submit a report to the Special Court. [Clause
28 & 29] . The Special Courts are to decide
the cases and award the punishment as per
the established law. Clause 42 of the Bill
provide for assessment and recovery of loss
caused to the public exchequer on account
of the actions or decisions of such public
servants not taken in good faith and for
which he stands convicted.
(vii) The Bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
12 3 4

451
abetted with intent to wrongful gain to oneself or wrongful
loss to others.
(i) Clause 2.1 (c) – “Competent Authority” to be replaced
by word “Lokpal”.
(ii) Clause 2.1 (i) – PM to be included in the definition
of Ministers.
(iii) Clause 4(1)  – Selection Committee should have 7
members comprising PM, Speaker of Lok Sabha, both
Leaders of Opposition in Lok Sabha & Rajya Sabha,
Sitting Judge/Chief Justice of Supreme Court, Sitting Judge/
Chief Justice of High Court and C&AG of India.
(iv) The Selection Committee should be permanent
(v) 
Clause 12  – Investigation Wing: The clause to be
replaced by bringing CBI as Lokpal Investigation Wing
and CBI courts as special courts under Lokpal Bill.
(vi) 
Clause 30 & 32 – Lokpal to have all the powers
under Criminal Procedure Code.
(vii) Clause 42  – Assessment and quantification of loss
should be with Lokpal.
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
(i) This would render the Clause 2(1)(c)
meaningless.
(ii) Since, the Prime Minister while holding
the office of PM is outside the purview of
the Lokpal, the definition of Minister as
prescribed in Clause 2(1 )(i) does not include
the Prime Minister.
(iii) & (iv)  The composition and tenure of
the Selection Committee as prescribed in
Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
(v) The Bill provides for setting up an
Investigation Wing by Lokpal. CBI to continue
a separate investigating agency. Special
Courts are to be constituted by the Central
Government on the recommendations of the
Lokpal [Clause 38].
(vi) Lokpal would be a qusai-judicial body,
and will have powers for search and seizure
[Clause 30]  and powers of Civil Courts in
certain cases [Clause 32].
(vii) The punishments and fines and also
assessment of loss to the exchequer is to be
decided by the Courts.
106. D. Krishna Rao,
Flat 202, Suryamitra,
Yellareddyguda,
Hyderabad - 73

452
(viii) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are adequate. But,
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(i) The provisions made in Clause 49 and 50
to deal with false complaints are adequate.
But, DOPT is open to suggestions in this
regard.
(ii) Clause 41 of the Bill provides on
completion of the inquiry, if there is prima
facie evidence of the commission of an
offence under the PC Act, 1988 or of any
wrongdoing, the Lokpal shall order to
prosecute such officer or employee of the
Lokpal or such officer or employee of
agency engaged or associated with the Lokpal
and initiate disciplinary proceedings against
the official concerned. Same procedure is
applicable in respect of other Government
servants.
(iii) In the present scenario, there is need to
have institution of Lokpal to deal with the
allegations of corruption.
(viii) 
Clause 49  – Why there is no imprisonment of
guilty public servant and only loss of recovery where as
there is provision of fine ranging from Rs. 25,000 to
2,00,000 and imprisonment from 2- 5 years for false or
frivolous complaints. This most subversive clause.
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(i) There is no provision of punishment for the
complainants for complaining against the State/Central
Govt. servants, if he/she fails to gather evidence whereas
there is a provision of punishment if this happens in case
of complaints against Chairperson or member of Lokpal.
Why is it so?
COMPLAINT AGAINST EMPLOYEES OF LOKPAL
(ii) If any Lokpal Officer or staff is found indulged in
Corruption, they will be investigated under IPC, why not
Govt. servants can be investigated under IPC. Then what
is the need of Lokpal separately?
Suggestions to curb corruption
(iii) Instead of Lokpal, implementation of the provisions
of Constitution of India in true spirit is sufficient to
eradicate corruption. So, the constitution to be implemented
correctly. Also the persons working against the constitution
must be punished.
12 3 4
107. Bechar Bhai Rathore,
National President
BAMSEF

453
REMOVAL OF CORRUPT PERSONS
(iv) Corrupt persons to be removed from their posts and
all the property & business of the country to be
nationalized.
CLAUSE 17
(v) All trusts, Ashrams, Math etc. must be under the
control of the Govt. and their money utilized for the
education in the country. Also the Media must be
controlled.
FREE & COMPULSORY EDUCATION
(vi) There should be free compulsory education till the
age of 18 years and free higher education without any
age restriction and in accordance with the reservation of
SC, ST, OBC & religious minority.
SOCIAL CORRUPTION
(vii) Social corruption to be curbed by taking strict steps.
APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES
(viii) Judges at all the levels to be appointed through
Judicial service.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM & MPs and Govt officials above Director Level,
NGOs/Schools etc. receiving funds from Govt. and
Advocate/Lawyers to come under the purview of Lokpal.
(ii) Lokpal Bill needs to consider the necessity of quicker
justice at all levels. Also the court fees be revised upwards
considerably in criminal cases to reduce frivolous litigation
and extra earned money be partially used for BPL cases.
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
(iii) Corrupt practices of all kinds like graft to file FIR,
(iv) Action against the corrupt persons has
to be taken after following due process of
law.
(v) The employees of the trusts wholly or
partly financed or aided by the Government
and also the trusts in receipt of donations
from the public are covered. However, the
societies, associations or trusts constituted
for religious purposes are excluded.
(vi) & (vii)  This is outside the scope of the
Lokpal.
(viii) Appointment of Judges is not covered
by the Lokpal.
(i) The Bill provides that the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the Lokpal
once he/she demits the office. The NGO/
Trust etc. are also within the purview of the
Lokpal.
(ii) The Lokpal is being established to enquire
into allegations of corruption against certain
public functionaries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(iii) These issues relate to public gnevances
108. Grahak Sahayak
Gurgaon, B 6/6, DLF
City, Phase – I,
Gurgaon – 02

454
getting dates in courts, graft to obtain driving licenses;
registration of property or change of land use, all such
should be covered in one form or other.
CORRUPTION IN APPOINTMENTS
(iv) The Bill needs to study the cases of corruption in
appointments to Govt. Jobs and also elections needs
maximum vigilance including the revision of procedure or
legitimatising money sourcing to parties.
(i) The Bill must expressly provide (other than implied by
other provision of the Bill) provide that the Lokpal shall
not entertain any complaint filed by an unknown person
or filed under a false name and address. There must be
a provision of providing an Affidavit along with ID proofs
of address by the complainant. The complaint must be
self-contained and with detailed statement of facts.
CLAUSE 23-29
(ii) If the complaint is valid, accused must be prosecuted
and to be suspended till the final decision. If found guilty,
must be awarded punishment and should automatically
dismissed from service. But if not held guilty, compensation
to be provided to the accused and penalties to be imposed
on complainant. If the complaints are found false or
frivolous, the complainant would compensate not only to
Lokpal for its expenses but also to the accused of its
monetary, reputation loss and mental harassment.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) Everyone who receives grant, salary, aids out of
taxpayer’s money must come under the ambit of Lokpal.
Highly value corruption charges to be given priority for
investigation.
redressal mechanism. Department of
Administrative Reforms is working on the
same separately.
(iv) The Lok Pal Bill into the allegations of
corruption against certain public functionaries.
As per collection and findings is concern it
is part of electoral reforms which is being
examined by the Government separately.
(i) This is a matter for which rules are to
be framed separately. [Clause 60]
(ii) Action against the accused public servants
has to be taken as per the provisions
contained in Clause 23-29 of the Bill. Further
the procedure to handle the complaint is
given in Clause 23 to 29.
(iii) The Bill provides that the organizations
which are wholly/partly funded or added by
the Government and also the trust etc. in
receipt donations from the public are under
the Lokpal.
12 3 4
109. Sughosh Bansal,
704, Avalon Heights,
Anna CGHS Ltd.,
Plot No. GH-6,
Sector 47,
Gurgaon - 01

455
The same suggestions have already been submitted by
Bharat Patil vide memorandum no. 67.
NATIONAL LOKPAL & ZONAL  LOKPALS
(i) The institution of Lokpal to be established with one
National Lokpal, 5 Zonal Lokpals (i.e. East, West, Central,
South and North) and One Nodal Officer for each state
in Zones. Each zone will have separate administrative
support staff. Lokpal shall have its own investigating
agency supported by CBI, State level police, CBCID etc.
at all levels in all zones.
CLAUSE 4
(ii) The Lokpal Selection Committee shall have 11 members,
with PM as its head. The members would be 4 Central
cabinet ministers or retired PM, President or equivalent, 3
retired Judges of Supreme court or High Court or
equivalent and 3 eminent social personalities.
(iii) National Lokpal committee shall have total 10 members
including Chairman and shall include 3 retired central
cabinet ministers, 3 judges of Supreme court or High
Court and 3 eminent social personalities. The Zonal Lokpal
committee too shall have 10 members comprising 3 retired
MPs or union ministers, 3 retired Judges of Supreme
Court or High Court and 3 eminent social personalities.
The nodal committee will be the same as Zonal Lokpal
Committee.
110.
111.
Dr. Pravin H
Khobragade, F-147,
Nar Vihar 2, Sector
34, Noida – 06
V ajrakavach
Strategic Solutions
Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai
(i) The Bill provides for setting up of the
institution of Lokpal at Central level. Clause
19 of the Bill provides that the Lokpal may
exercise its jurisdiction by through Benches.
In so far States are concerned, it is for
respective State Government to set-up the
institution of Lokaykut. Clause 12 of the bill
provides that the Lokpal will have an
Investigation Wing. Clause 32  of the Bill
empowers the Lokpal to utilize services of
officers of the Central/State Government.
(ii) The Selection Committee as proposed in
Clause 4  of the bill is sufficient.
(iii) The Bill provides for setting-up of
institution of Lokpal at Central level. As far
as State Governments are concerned it is
for the respective State Government to set-
up the Lokayukta as the subject matter falls
within the domain of the State Governments.
The composition of Lokpal as given in
Clause 3  of the bill is adequate.

456
12 3 4
(iv) The eligibility criteria for selection committee, National
Lokpal Committee & Zonal Lokpal Committee will be
same and reads like this:-
(a) No criminal track record of pending cases
(b) Age not less than 45 years
(c) Preferably should have legal background
(d) Must be a citizen of India & NRI not permitted.
(e) Should not hold any position in any office of
profit or corruption.
Functioning of Lokpal
(v) Lokpal will function as an autonomous institution like
judiciary and election commission.
Investigation & Prosecution
CLAUSE 12
(vi) Lokpal shall have separate investigation wing supported
by existing investigation agencies within India. There will
be special courts and the prosecution will be as the
constitutional powers of judiciary.
Flow of Complaints & Disposal
CLAUSE 60 & 61
(vii) Complaints received through letters, phone calls,
website or personal visit shall be made with Nodal Officers
of concerned state and would be investigated by Zonal
Lokpal Investigating agencies and prosecuted as per the
(iv) The composition of the Selection
Committee as provided in clause 4(1) appears
to be sufficient.
(v) The Lokpal as proposed in the Bill will
be a statutory body.
(vi) Clause 12 of the Bill provides setting-up
of Investigation Wing by the Lokpal. Till such
time the investigation wing within the Lokpal,
Central Government shall make available
investigating officers and other staff as may
be required by the Lokpal for carrying out
investigation. Clause 38 of the Bill provides
that the Central Government shall constitute
such number of special courts has
recommended by the Lokpal to hear and
decide the cases investigated by the Lokpal.
(vii) These are the matters for which rules
are to be framed separately in Clause 60 or
61.

457
constitutional laws. There will be a provision for appeal
against the judgment of the Zonal Lokpal only to National
Lokpal.
CLAUSE 23
(viii) National Lokpal has to dispose off all kind of
complaints within 3 years whereas one & half year by
Zonal Lokpal.
Jurisdiction
CLAUSE 17
(ix) President & Governors after demitting office, PM,
Union Ministers, CMs , Ministers, MPs, MLAs Governor
of RBI, all Central/State Govt. servants, all autonomous
bodies of Central/State, all levels Judiciary, PSUs, NGOs
and organizations fully or partially funded by govt.
CLAUSE 4
(i) The search, selection, appointment and removal of
Lokpal not be controlled by Govt. and Lokpal to be
structured according to the UN Convention Against
Corruption 2003 while looking at the provisions of
(viii) The time limit for completion of the
inquiry are given in Clause 23. The
preliminary inquiry is required to be
completed within 30 days which may be
extended for a period of 3 months. The
inquiry is to be completed within a period of
six months which may be extended for a
further period of six months.
(ix) Clause 17 of the bill provides that Prime
Minister after he demits the office of the
Prime Minister; person who is/was of the
member either of the Parliament; any Group
“A” officer equivalent or above; certain
officers of Corporation Company,
Autonomous body set-up by an Act of
Parliament; certain functionaries of Societies,
Associations or Trust which are partly/wholly
funded by the Government; and certain
functionaries of trust etc. which are in
receipt of donation but are not set-up for
religious purposes are within the purview of
the Lokpal. The President or Governors of
States after they demit office are not within
the purview of Lokpal.
(i) The selection procedure as prescribed in
Bill is sufficient.
112. Prem Singh Dahiya,
President,
Senior Citizens Council,
255, Sector 2,
Rohtak (Haryana) – 01

458
Independent Commission Against Corruption of Hong
Kong.
CLAUSE 1
(ii) Lokpal Act to be implemented within 120 days on its
enactment.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) All the public servants, lower & higher bureaucracy,
MPs, Ex-MPs, Ministers including PM & only regd.
NGOs with turnover of Rs. 1 crore or those getting
foreign aid/donations etc. should be under the ambit of
Lokpal whereas certain functions of PM like foreign
relations, law & order, security matters may be outside
Lokpal ambit.
(iv) CVC & Anti Corruption branch of CBI to be merged
with Lokpal and Lokpal to have its own investigation,
prosecution & research wings.
LOKAYUKTAS
(v) Each state/UT should have a Lokayukta on the pattern
of Lokpal.
CITIZENS’ CHARTER
(vi) All Central/State Govt. offices/deptts./PSUs etc should
have Citizens’ Charter and to enforced through Grievance
Redressal Mechanism at District level under the supervision
of Lokpal/Lokayukta.
(ii) Clause 1(3) of the Bill provides that it
shall come into force at such date as Central
Government made notification to appoint the
different provisions of the Act.
(iii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as provided
in Clause 17 is adequate. In the proposed
Bill, the Prime Minister will come within the
purview of the Lokpal once he/she demits
the office [Clause 17]. The organisations
funded by the Government are also within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(iv) The Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing and Prosecution Wing.
Therefore, CBI and CVC may not merge
with Lokpal.
(v) Setting up of Lokayukta falls within the
domain of States. Keeping in view the federal
structure of our Constitution, it may be left
for the States to decide.
(vi) Various Ministries/Departments may
frame Citizens Charter. However, for issues
relating to public grievance redressal
mechanism, separate machinery is required
for which Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances is examining
the issues.
12 3 4

459
DEFINITION
(vii) The definition of Corruption should be comprehensive
enough as given in PC Act, 1988, Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 while covering misuse of office,
substandard construction of buildings, roads, commissions,
kickbacks ect.
CLAUSE 3, 33 & 34
(viii) The provisions regarding eligibility conditions/criteria
qualifications & confiscation of property of corrupt public
servants as mentioned in Jan Lokpal Bill to be adopted.
CLAUSE 31
(ix) Lokpal should have powers of a civil court and
powers to take disciplinary action against the accused
including removal/dismissal and it shall powers to take
suo motto  action in all matters, except the conviction &
confiscation of property. Lokpal should special anti-
corruption courts in each district, where cases by Loka-
yukta would also be heard.
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(x) Lokpal to look into anonymous complaints but shall
have the powers to impose fine upto Rs. 1 lakh for
frivolous or false complaints instead of the provisions
given in Lokpal Bill draft.
SECOND SCHEDULE, P ART -II
(xi) There should be a provision of minimum 2 years
imprisonment extended upto life imprisonment for guilty
corrupt public servant, whereas in case of politician-
(vii) The meaning of the corruption will
have the same meaning as is contained in
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
(viii) The eligibility conditions for appointment
as Chairperson and Member of Lokpal as
provided in Clause 3 of the Bill seems to be
adequate. The provisions for attachment of
property of corrupt public servants are
provided in Clause 49-50 of the Bill.
(ix) Lokpal would be a qusai-judicial body
and will have powers of Civil Courts in
certain cases [Clause 32]. On completion of
investigation, if commission of offences has
been established the Lokpal shall file a report
in the Special Court and also send copy of
the report to the competent authority. The
Special Court will decide the sentence and
competent authority may initiate appropriate
disciplinary proceedings under the relevant
rules for appropriate penalty.
(x) Clause 49 & 50 of the Bill provides for
prosecution and penalties for false complaints
but DOPT is open in this regard.
(xi) The punishment will be awarded as per
prevailing law. The Bill proposes to amend
Section 13 and 14 of the PC Act, 1988 to

460
bureaucrat – criminal nexus minimum sentence would be
5 years.
CLAUSE 47 & 48
(xii) Each public servant covered by Lokpal shall have to
declare his/her property including of dependent children
along with an affidavit that he/she is not holding any
Benami property, on public domain.
WHISTLEBLOWERS PROTECTION
(xiii) The provisions regarding “Whistleblowers” to be
modified in conformity with Jan Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 8
(xiv) President shall have the powers to remove erring
members of Lokpal/Lokayukta, on the recommendations
made by Supreme Court after an appropriate enquiry on
the complaints of anyone.
CLAUSE 61
(xv) Lokpal should frame the Rules for itself which shall
be duly approved by Parliament/Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
Clause 4(1)
(i) Selection must include only the PM, Leaders of
opposition in LS & RS, Home Minister, CJI & senior,
most Chief Justice of High Court.
provide for maximum imprisonment of 10
years instead of 7 years.
(xii) Clause 47 & 48 of the Bill provides for
declaration of assets by the public servant.
(xiii) This relates to Whistleblowers Bill. The
recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on the Bill are under
consideration.
(xiv) Clause 8 provides for removal and
suspension of Chairperson and Members of
the Lokpal.
(xv) Clause 61 of the Lokpal Bill provides
that the Lokpal may make regulations to
carry out the provisions of this Act, namely
– conditions of services of the secretary
and other offices and staff of the Lokpal;
place of sittings of Benches of the Lokpal;
manner for displaying on the website of the
Lokpal the status of the complaints, etc.;
the manner and procedure of conducting an
inquiry or investigation.
(i) The Selection procedure as prescribed in
Clause 4 of the Bill is sufficient.
12 3 4
113. V .K. Agrawal, 118,
Nayagaon Housing
Society, Jabalpur

461
Clause 8(1)
(ii) President shall take action against the Lokpal or any
member on the report of the CJI only when the complaint
is found true. Also it is to be mentioned that what action
would be taken if the complaint is false or baseless.
Clause 17(1) (a) & (d)
(iii) Serving PM also to be included and Group ‘B’
officers also to be covered.
Clause 17(2)
(iv) Exception to be allowed and MPs to be investigated
for cash for vote in a particular manner for consideration
of financial gains.
Clause 17 (3)
(v) Proviso to be there that if consent of State Govt. is
not conveyed within 3 months, Lokpal will be free to
initiate investigation against such officer of the State
Govt.
Clause 23(1)
(vi) Lokpal to be authorized to take action ‘suo motto’ .
(ii) The provisions of Clause on removal
and suspension of Chairperson and Members
of Lokpal have adequate safeguards.
(iii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments' set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal. If the lower
bureaucracy is also included within the
purview of the Lokpal, it will overburden
the resources of the Lokpal.
(iv) MPs are included within the ambit of
Lokpal. However, their actions on the floor
of the House are outside the purview of the
Lokpal.
(v) This would render the proviso redundant.
(vi) The Lokpal has to take action on receipt
of complaint.

462
Clause 28 (2)
(vii) There should be some provision for punishment/
disciplinary action if the competent authority fails to take
action against delinquent officer or fails to take or complete
the action within the specified period.
Clause 29(3)
(viii) When the Lokpal shall file the case with a Special
Court with a copy to competent authority, there is no
need for Govt. to take further action as proposed, in
Lokpal Bill.
Clause 49(1)
(ix) Punishment, in case of false or frivolous complaint
(with intention to defame a person is established, should
be reduced to 3 months or fine of Rs. 25,000/- or both.
CLAUSE 28 & 29
(x) It is not clear in the Draft Lokpal Bill whether the
Lokpal shall have the powers to lodge FIR & prosecute
or not. If not, Lokpal should have the authority to lodge
FIR & prosecute. Also the staff of Lokpal looking after
the anti corruption cases should be placed under the
control of the Lokpal.
LOKAYUKTAS
(xi) State Govt. to appoint Lokayukta to look into the
cases of State Govt. employees.
(vii) The Bill provides for the competent
authority to send a report to the Lokpal
within six months of initiation of disciplinary
proceedings against the delinquent public
servants. It does not mandates that the
disciplinary proceedings must be completed
within six months.
(viii) The Courts have to decide the cases
as per PC Act and other relevant clauses of
Criminal Laws, whereas the competent
authority has to examine the issue from
administrative angle.
(ix) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are adequate. But,
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(x) On completion of investigation, if
commission of offences has been established
the Lokpal shall file a report in the Special
Court. Thereafter, the Special Court will
decide the quantum of sentence, etc. as per
the established procedure.
(xi) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
12 3 4

463
CLAUSE 29
(i) If Lokpal makes any recommendation to take action
against PM, Ministers or MPs, then the report to be
placed before both the houses of Parliament who would
consider it within six months. Parliament shall have the
power to send the report for reconsideration with reasons
but only once. If it happens, Lokpal would again consider
the report and take the action in terms of report as per
this Act.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) Judges of Supreme Court of High Court should not
be brought under within the ambit of the Lokpal.
CLAUSE 6
(iii) Term for Lokpal members should not more than 3
years and one-third of the total members should retire
after every one year. The person who has given his
views on the subject should not be made member of the
Lokpal.
CLAUSE 38
(iv) Time frame for completion of trials to be fixed and
Special Court to be set up by appointing retired High
Court Judges to conduct trial on day-to-day basis. Against
the decision of such court, appeal to be made only before
the Supreme Court.
(i) In the proposed Bill, the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the Lokpal
once he/she demits the office [Clause 17].
Clause 29 of the Bill provides that on
completion of inquiry, if the commission of
offence under the PC Act is established,
may file a case in the Special Court and
shall send a copy of the report together
with its findings to the competent authority,
which shall be laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha/Rajya Sabha.
(ii) The judiciary is not within the purview
of Lokpal.
(iii) The Bill provides for a maximum term
of Lokpal and its Members to be five years
or until he attains the age of seventy years
whichever is earlier.
(iv) The Bill provides that the Special Courts
shall ensure completion of each trial within a
period of one year from the date of filing the
case in the court. However, in case the trail
cannot be completed within a period of one
year, the Special Court shall record reasons
therefor and complete the trial within a further
period of three months or such further periods
not exceeding three months each, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, before the end of
each such three months period, but not
exceeding a total period of two years. The
appointment of Judges to the Special Courts
has to be done as per the extant rules.
Justice Tejinder
Singh Doabia (Retd.),
C-4/45, Safdarjung
Development Area,
New Delhi
114.

464
CLAUSE 17
(i) The Media, Press, all NGOs and Lower bureaucracy
should also be included under the jurisdiction of Lokpal
Bill.
CLAUSE 3
(ii) There should be one single Lokpal in the whole
country while merging the Local Lokayukta to root out
corruption.
(iii) India should have a strong Lokpal as the custodian of
hopes and aspirations like our constitution.
(iv) There must be clear-cut instructions for discharging
functions by Lokpal and there should be very limited
scope for discretion in any public office.
CLAUSE 17
(i) Lokpal should have powers to investigate allegations of
corruption against PM, Judiciary, and MPs (for taking
bribe to vote or speak in Parliament). But special safeguard
to be provided to PM & Judiciary against frivolous
& mischievous complaints and to preserve judicial
independence.
(i) For Media and Press, it is felt that a
separate mechanism, perhaps under the Press
Council of India, may be required. The
NGOs receiving Government funds or
donations are covered. As far as lower
bureaucracy is concerned, if it is also brought
under the ambit of Lokpal, it would put
strain on the resources of the Lokpal.
(ii) One single institution covering all the
States as well may not be workable
proposition.
(iii) & (iv) The Bill proposes to set up the
institution of Lokpal to enquire in the
allegations of corruption against certain public
functionaries.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
12 3 4
115.
116.
117.
Memoranda No. 115
not received from the
Rajya Sabha
Secretariat
Dr. S.K. Sharma,
Associate Professor,
Govt. Girls’ PG
College, Ghazipur
(UP) – 233001
K.K. Swami,
Vice President,
Akhil Bhartiya
Grahak Panchayat,
51 Samrat Eclave,
Pitampura,
New Delhi - 34

465
(ii) NGOs funded by Govt. only and Lower Bureaucracy
& Anti corruption branch of CBI to be included in the
jurisdiction of Lokpal. If an officer does not do a citizen’s
work in prescribed time, he should be penalized and the
delay to treated as corruption.
CLAUSE 4
(iii) Selection committee should be independent of Govt.
influence. There should be provision of Lokayuktas in all
the states in the Lokpal Bill.
PROTECTION TO WHISTLEBLOWERS
(iv) There should be provisions in Lokpal Bill to ensure
protection of whistleblowers, witnesses & victims of
corruption. Also there should be only fines for false
complaints.
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal. The conduct of
MPs on the floor of the House is also not
within the purview of Lokpal. For judiciary,
a separate Bill, Judicial Standards
Accountability Bill is already under
consideration of the Parliament.
(ii) The NGOs funded by the Government
are covered by the Lokpal. If the lower
bureaucracy is also included within the
purview of the Lokpal, it will overburden
the resources of the Lokpal. Since the Lokpal
will have its own Investigation Wing [Clause
12], merger of Anti Corruption Branch of
CBI is not required. For matters relating
public grievances, a separate mechanism is
required to be set up for which the
Department of Administrative Reforms and
Pensions is working on the same.
(iii) The Selection procedure as prescribed
in Clause 4 of the Bill is sufficient. Setting
up the institution of Lokayukta falls within
the domain of the States. Keeping in view
the federal structure of our Constitution, it
may be left for the States to decide.
(iv) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.

466
SECOND SCHEDULE, PART-II
(v) Maximum punishment for corruption should be 10
years, higher punishment for accused higher official and
higher punishment for accused business entity and such
entities to be black listed for future contracts after
conviction.
CLAUSE 23-29
(vi) Lokpal members will only hear cases against senior
official and politicians or cases of huge amount. Officers
working under Lokpal will do rest of the work.
CLAUSE 8
(vii) A citizen should have power to seek removal of
Lokpal from Supreme court. Complaint against Lokpal
staff should be heard by an independent authority.
CLAUSE 23-29
(viii) Method of enquiry should be as per CrPC. After
preliminary inquiry, an FIR to be lodged and case to be
registered and presented before the court after due
investigation. High courts will set up special branches to
hear corruption cases.
(ix) In addition to filling a case in court after investigation,
Lokpal will hold open hearing to decide the removal of
Govt. servant. It will also be the duty of Lokpal to
prevent corruption in an ongoing activity, if brought to
notice.
CLAUSE 16
(x) Lokpal should financially independent and to decided
its budget.
(v) The punishment will be awarded as per
prevailing law. The Bill proposes to amend
Section 13 and 14 of the PC Act, 1988 to
provide for maximum imprisonment of 10
years instead of 7 years.
(vi) The procedure in respect of inquiry and
investigation as provided Clause 23-29 is
adequate.
(vii) Clause 8 of the Bill provides for removal
and suspension of Chairperson and Members
of the Lokpal.
(viii) The procedure in respect of inquiry
and investigation as provided Clause 23-29
is adequate.
(ix) On completion of inquiry by the Lokpal,
the competent authority has to take action
as per the relevant disciplinary rules.
(x) The expenses of the Lokpal shall be
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India
[Clause 16] .
12 3 4

467
CLAUSE 17
(i) From a Group ‘D’ servant to all those who come in
the definition Public servant should be investigated and
punished severely for corruption by Lokpal at center and
by Lokayukta at state level. Lokpal to investigate and
dispose off the complaints against PM, Ministers, MPs,
defence/Central Govt. officials. The Central Govt. official
working with State Govt. to be heard & punished by
Lokayukta of that State.
MERGER OF CBI AND CVC WITH LOKPAL
(ii) CBI & CVC to be merged with Lokpal and Lokpal &
Lokayukta should be independent with a unit at District
level.
POWERS OF PUNISHMENT TO LOKPAL
(iii) Lokpal & Lokayukta should have powers to prosecute
and to punish. Guilty corrupt person to be punished with
minimum 5 years imprisonment, and in serious bribery
cases to be punished with death sentence or life
imprisonment along with the recovery of embezzled money
from assets/property.
LOKPAL TO BE EFFECTIVE FROM 1950
(iv) Lokpal Bill to be made effective since 1950 and the
illegal property/assets gained by the Govt officials to be
seized and taken over by the State/Center as the case
may be.
(i) The Bill envisages for setting up of the
institution of Lokpal at Centre level. In the
proposed Bill, the Prime Minister will come
within the purview of the Lokpal once he/
she demits the office [Clause 17]. Central
Ministers and MPs are within the ambit of
Lokpal. As regards lower bureaucracy, if the
same is also included within the purview of
Lokpal, it will overburden the system. Setting
up the institution of Lokayukta falls within
the domain of the States. Keeping in view
the federal structure of our Constitution, it
may be left for the States to decide.
(ii) Since the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing [Clause 12]  and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15] , merger of
CBI and CVC with Lokpal is not required.
Further, these two organisations have served
the purpose and have expertise, they should
be strengthened.
(iii) The Lokpal would be a quasi judicial
authority. The punishment has to be awarded
by the appropriate courts as per the prevailing
laws.
(iv) Any Law can be introduced from the
prospective date and not from the
retrospective date. Clause 33 and 34 of the
Bill provides for attachment of property of
the accused public servant.
118. President, Jan Chetna
& Bharastachar
Unmoolan Manch,
Jodhpur, Rajasthan

468
CLAUSE 23
(v) All the complaints against Govt. officials to be disposed
off within 1 year and not more than 2 years in any case.
CLAUSE 28
(vi) Convicted Govt. servant should be removed from
service immediately and no appeal against the order. Also
the victim to be compensated by the convict.
CITIZENS’ CHARTER
(vii) There should be fixed time to do the work of any
citizen. If the Govt. offical fails to do the work even
after prescribed time limit without any proper reason, fine
of Rs. 500 per day to be imposed.
CLAUSE 47 & 48
(viii) The assets/property of Govt. servants to be verified
time to time. In case of disproportion, property/asset
should be confiscated.
SUPERVISION OF CIVIL WORKS ETC.
(ix) The Roads, Buildings and Dams are built on Govt.
expenses and gets deteriorated or damaged with 10 years,
concerned contractor or Govt. Observer should be held
responsible and the reconstruction of repairing work should
be done by recovery money from them or heavy fine and
punishment be imposed.
(v) The time limits for completion of inquiry
as given in Clause 23(2) and 23(8) The
preliminary inquiry is required to be
completed within 30 days which may be
extended for a further period of 3 months.
The inquiry is to be completed within a
period of six months which may be extended
for a further period of six months.
(vi) Action will have to be taken by the
competent authority as per relevant rules. As
far as awarding the compensation to the
victim is concerned, it is for the concerned
Court to decide as per law.
(vii) For matters relating public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be set
up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions is
working on the same.
(viii) Clause 47 and 48 of the Bill provides
for declaration of assets by the public
servants.
(ix) This has to be tackled through the
appropriate relevant rules. However, the
allegations of corruptions against the public
servants would be investigated by the Lokpal.
12 3 4

469
TRANSFER OF GOVT. EMPLOYEES
(x) No transfers of State Govt. servants before 3 years
excluding exception. If it happens, concerned HOD or
State Govt. to be held responsible for doing so by taking
bribe.
FILLING UP OF VACANCIES
(xi) There should be adequate staff in all the offices,
courts of the Central and State Governments and on
vacation of any post, the same should be filled up
immediately.
CLAUSE 17
(i) Amassing unlawful wealth, misuse of power and
authority to directly or indirectly benefit the favoured
individuals/groups should be included in the jurisdiction of
Lokpal.
PUBLIC CONSULTATION ON THE BILL
(ii) Final draft prepared by Parliamentary Standing
Committee to be placed before the general public for its
final observation, before placing before the Parliament for
approval.
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(iii) Provision of jail and punishment to the complainants
to be removed from the Bill as it deterrent to those who
want to bring out the truth of corruption.
Composition of Lokpal
CLAUSE 3
(iv) Out of 8 members, 4 should be from judicial/legal
category, 2 from NGOs, Public non-political organizations
and 2 representatives form Govt. If any seat falls vacant,
it should be filled from the respective category.
(x) This relates to the day to day
administration and is outside the purview of
the Lokpal.
(xi) This is beyond the scope of the Lokpal
as the subject matter is of administrative
nature.
(i) Clause 17(3) of the Bill provides that the
Lokpal may inquire into any act or conduct
of any person other than those referred to
in sub-section (1) of Clause 17, if such
person is associated with the allegation of
corruption under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
(ii) Public consultations are done as per the
standard procedure.
(iii) Clause 49 and 50 of the bill provide for
prosecution and penalties for false
complaints. But, DOPT is open to suggestion
in this regard and can be modified suitably.
(iv) The composition of the Lokpal and the
selection procedure as prescribed in Clause
3 and 4 of the Bill is sufficient.
119. Surat Citizens’
Council Trust,
A 205/206, Tirupati
Plaza, Nanpura,
Surat - 01

470
For this purpose, Lokpal Bill should have provision for
wait list of eligible persons for filling a vacant seat.
Investigation & Prosecution Wing
(v) CBI & CVC should be free from Govt. Control.
There should be specific time frame for disposing off
corruption complaints. Officers & staff for investigation
must be other than the Govt. employees. Lokpal provisions
should prevail over/ supersede existing laws wherever
applicable.
CLAUSE 17
(vi) MPs, PM with entire Executive, Judiciary and other
must be accountable to Lokapl investigation and
prosecution and that is to without any exemption. All
proceeding of Lokpal should be made available on its
website for public.
Powers to Search & Seizure
CLAUSE 30. 33, 34
(vii) There should not any limitation on Search, Seizure
and confiscation powers of Lokpal. The Lokpal Bill should
also include confiscation of properties of culprits including
overseas assets and their permanent disqualification to
hold any office, contest elections and Govt. service.
Present cases handled by CVC & CBI should be
(v) Since the Lokpa1 will have its own
Investigation Wing [Clause 12]  and
Prosecution Wing [Clause 15] , merger of
CBI and CVC with Lokpa1 is not required.
Further, these two organisations have served
the purpose and have expertise, they should
be strengthened.
(vi) The Bill envisages for setting up of the
institution of Lokpal at Centre level. In the
proposed Bill, the Prime Minister will come
within the purview of the Lokpal once he/
she demits the office [Clause 17]. Central
Ministers and MPs are within the ambit of
Lokpal. As regards lower bureaucracy, if the
same is also included within the purview of
Lokpal, it will overburden the system. On
completion of investigation, if commission
of offences has been established the Lokpal
shall file a report in the Special Court.
(vii) Clause 30 of the Bill provides powers
to search and seizure and Clause 33 and 34
provides powers to confiscate the assets of
corrupt public servants. Disqualification of
guilty persons to hold any office, contest
elections etc. has to be as per the Law. The
12 3 4

471
automatically accessible to Lokpal Office for their
monitoring.
Declaration of Property
CLAUSE 47 & 48
(viii) The mandatory provision of declaring the property
of Ministers, MPs & civil servants should also include
strict provision of dismissal form their posts, positions
and permanent disqualification to hold such posts or
positions in future, deprivation of service benefits etc., if
they fail to declare true facts in the time limit of one
month. Such persons shall not option to appeal in any
court.
Limitation
RECOVERY OF BLACK MONEY
(ix) The Lokpal should also include recovery of Black
Money in India and from foreign deposits by the corrupts.
As the corruption is not limited to limited categories,
areas of Govt. operations, Lokpal should also take
preventive steps to supervise/monitor large orders,
contracts in all Govt. dealings. All political parties shall
have to restrain from infusing vast amount of money in
elections.
Lokpal will have its own Investigation Wing
[Clause 12]  and Prosecution Wing [Clause
15], merger of CBI and CVC with Lokpal is
not required. Further, these two organisations
have served the purpose and have expertise,
they should be strengthened.
(viii) Clause 47 and 48 of the Bill provides
for declaration of assets by the public
servants. Non-declaration of assets by public
servants in certain cases will be presumed
as to acquisition of assets by corrupt means.
(ix) The issue of Black Money has to be
tackled effectively through separate
appropriate Laws. As regards the monitoring
large orders, contracts in all Government
dealings etc., this would amount to enlarging
the scope of Lokpal whereby it may become
unwieldy and may ultimately be
counterproductive thereby defeating the very
purpose of having the institution of Lokpal.

472
COMMENTS OF DoPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of the Suggestions/Comments Comments of DoPT
No. Organisation/
Individual
12 3 4
Wg Cdr (Retd.)
UK Munshi
Jurisdiction
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM (except some strategic decisions), all Ministers,
MPs (including their conduct in the parliament or outside),
all bureaucrats from top to bottom, Judiciary at levels, all
PSUs and Govt. funded NGOs including Investigating
agencies must come under the Lokpal Bill.
CITIZENS’ CHARTER
(ii) There should be a fixed time frame for every public
dealing of the Govt. servants as well as time frame for
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Government’s set-up. To ensure that the
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal. MPs are included
within purview of Lokpal; however, their
actions on the floor of the House are outside
the purview of the Lokpal since they are
subject to disciplinary mechanism of the
House. Further, ‘Group A’ and above officers
including employees of PSUs, NGOs funded
by the Government are covered under the
Lokpal Bill 2011. The lower bureaucracy
has not been included as the inclusion of the
same will over burden the system. The
judiciary is also kept outside the purview of
the Lokpal as a separate Bill, Judicial
Standards Accountability Bill, is already under
consideration of the Parliament.
(ii) For matters relating to public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be set-
119(I)

473
setting the cases by judiciary. Any delay should be treated
as culpable corrupt action. Regular performance audit to
be carried out by the Lokpal’s outfit.
LOKAYUKTAS
(iii) All Lokayuktas must become a part of the Lokpal.
Powers
CLAUSE 23-29
(iv) Lokpal must not have only recommending powers
but also the prosecution powers whereas the case to be
processed in the courts only. The investigation and the
court cases should be finalized within a pre-decided time
frame.
CLAUSE 3, 6
(v) Ideally, Lokpal may have 7 to 9 members of non-
political background for 6 years term while 1/3rd members
retiring every two years. The members can be eminent
persons like writers/retired SC Judges/social activists.
CLAUSE 8
(vi) A system to impeach corrupt members must be in
place.
Whistleblowers
(vii) Lokpal shall be responsible for the protection of
Whistleblowers. If the complainant is not able to present
convincing evidence, Lokpal shall have to make honest
effort to collect evidence.
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(viii) The punishment, in case of a frivolous complaint,
should not be deterrent to the future complainants.
up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions is
working on the same.
(iii) Setting up of the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view federal structure of our constitution,
it may be left for States to decide.
(iv) The Bill envisages that on completion of
investigation, if commission of offences has
been established the Lokpal shall file a report
in the Special Court. Thereafter, the Special
Court will decide the quantum of sentences
etc. as per established procedure.
(v) The eligibility conditions for appointment
as Chairperson and Member of Lokpal as
given in Clause 3 of the bill are adequate.
The tenure of 5 years of the Chairperson and
Member of Lokpal is adequate [Clause 6].
(vi) Clause 8 of the bill provides for removal
and suspension of Chairperson and Member
of Lokpal. The provision provided in the Bill
seems to be adequate.
(vii) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(viii) Clause 49 and 50 of the Bill provides for
prosecution and penalties for false complaints.

474
12 3 4
120. Luxmi Kant Shukla
General Point
CLAUSE 23 & 38
(ix) The investigation and prosecution process must be
time bound & quick and the punishment should be
exemplary to serve as a deterrent.
(i) The suggestion is for brining a composite Bill for
setting up the institution of Lokpal at the Centre level and
the Lokayuktas at State level.
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM
(ii) Preparation and Display of Citizen’s Charter by Public
Authority and complaints related thereto.
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard
and the provisions can be modified suitably.
(ix) The time line for completion of inquiry
and completion of trial has given in Clause
23 and 38. The preliminary inquiry is
required to be completed within 30 days
which may be extended for a further period
of 3 months. The inquiry is to be completed
within a period of 6 months which may be
extended for a further period of 6 months.
The Bill provides that the Special Court shall
ensure the completion of each trial within a
period of one year from the date of filing
the case in the Court. However, in case the
trial cannot be completed within a period of
one year, the Special Court shall record
reasons thereon and complete the trial within
a further period of not more than 3 months
or such further period not exceeding
3months each, but not exceeding a total
period of 2 years.
(i) The present Bill envisage the setting-up
of the institution of Lokpal at the Centre.
Setting-up of the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States.
Keeping in view the federal structure of
our constitution, it may be left for the
States to decide.
(ii) For matters relating to public grievances
including Citizen’s Charter etc., a separate
mechanism is required to be set-up for which

475
Department of Administrative Reforms and
Pensions is working on the same.
(iii) As far as protection to Whistleblowers
Bill is concerned, it is covered under the
protection of Whistleblowers Bill. The
recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on the bill are under
consideration. The Lokpal Bill 2011 does not
contain any provisions for rewards to the
complainants. The system of rewards may
lead to a flurry of false/incomplete
complaints. Exposing corruption should be
adequate reward in itself.
(iv) Since, rules and regulations for handling
the complaints are to be confirmed under
Clause 60 & 61 of the Bill, there appears to
be no need to define the term 'Lok
Complaints Officer'.
(v) The Bill envisages that the Lokpal shall
enquire into the allegations of corruption
against certain public functionaries. There is
no need to define the term of ‘public
authority’ in the Bill.
PROTECTION AND REW ARD TO WHISTLE
BLOWERS AND COMPLAINANTS
(iii) Protection and Reward to whistleblowers and
complainants by Lokpal & LokayuktaDEFINITIONS
(iv) “Lok Complaints Officer”  – means an independent
officer appointed by Lokpal or the Lokayukta for
registration of complaints in the manner prescribed by the
Lokpal or Lokayukta.
(v) “Public Authority”  means any authority of body or
institution of self Government established or constituted.
(a) by or under the Constitution
(b) by any other law made by Parliament or the
State legislature
(c) by notification issued or order made by the Central
Govt. or the State Govt.
(d) by any NGOs, Industry, Company, Corporation,
Society, Association, Trust, Contactor, Educational
Institution, Hospitals, Business House, Firm/Shop/
Press Media (Print or Electronic) rendering any
type of service to the people of Union of India
or the State therein.

476
(vi) ‘Public servant’ – means a person engaged in any
type of service rendered to the people of Union of India
or States therein, whether in Public Sector or in Private
Sector including Industry, Company, Corporation, Society,
Association, Trust, Contactor, Educational Institution,
Hospitals, Business House, Firm /Shop, resource managers,
supervisors, representatives, sales agents, sales
representatives, service providers, paid volunteers,
commission agents, employees, correspondents etc., NGOs,
Press media - Print or Electronic including in clauses (a)
to (g) of sub-section (l) of section 17.
(i) For redemption of Corrupt, the Lokpal should be
armed with two hands (Carrot and Stick theory) – one
that distributes prosecution and deterrence and the other
should be a hand that coerces persuades the public servants
and all those who come under the ambit of Lokpal to
submit their ill-gotten wealth to the Govt. agencies who
can easily display the amount collected on a website with
all its transparency and accountability intact.
(ii) These corrupt individuals should voluntarily or if the
need be, by the Govt. intervention should be forced to
submit their ill-gotten wealth to a treasury chest under the
proper official supervision with in a stipulated time frame
decide by the Central or State machinery for redemption
procedures. A particular time frame should be specifically
declared to the entire nation through mass media, after
which no redemption procedure to be allowed. Such
collected money to be used for national welfare.
(iii) The decision of publicizing the names of persons
adopted this redemption procedures should be vested with
12 3 4
(vi) The suggestions would imply that all
sorts of workforce would be included in the
term public servant. It would make the term
public servant unwisely. The term public
servant as define in [Clause 2(1) (I)] of the
Bill is adequate.
(i) to (vii) The Lokpal Bill 2011 is to provide
establishment of the institution of Lokpal to
enquire into allegations of corruption against
certain public functionaries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The issues relating to voluntary disclosure
of ill-gotten money and grant of amnesty to
such persons are beyond the scope of
Lokpal.
121. Rakesh,
Assistant Professor

477
Government Such wealth to be collected from such
persons. These individuals will have to sign a Promissory
note or any such declaration prepared by the Government
that they will not do any thing amounting to corruption.
(iv) Such individuals to be given barcode numbers and a
receipt, after redemption procedure, for future identification/
tracing by Lokpal or Lokayukta officials regarding their
conduct.
(v) Such persons not to be called corrupt thereafter while
keeping intact their dignity and respect.
(vi) This clause should not be applicable to those against
whom any investigations are carried out or any petitions
filed thereof, related to their corrupt practices in any
court of law or any competent authority vested with
investigation, prosecution and conviction powers.
(vii) Lokpal or Lokayukta shall have the powers for
future investigation and prosecution of such persons after
redemption procedure, taking into consideration the heinous
nature of crime. Lokpal or Lokayukta officials shall take
the decision that who should come under the redemption
procedure clause.
Clause 3(3) (b)
(i) The words “twenty five years” may be replaced with
“fifteen years” as it is very difficult to find such
experienced persons and also the Constitution prescribes
only ten years qualification as Advocate to become the
Judge of Supreme Court.
Clause 49 (1)
(ii) The words ‘five years’ may be replaced with “three
years” as the five-year punishment appears very high for
(i) The eligibility conditions for appointment
as Chairperson and Member of the Lokpal
as given in Clause 3 are sufficient.
(ii) to (iv) The provisions made in Clause
49 to deal with false complaints are adequate.
122. R Karthikeyen
52, Gangai Amman
Koil Street,
V adapalani,
Chennai - 26

478
false or frivolous complainants. Also the words “two
lakh” may be replaced with “one lakh”.
Clause 49(3)
(iii) After the words “was made”, the words “with the
express consent of the LOKPAL” to be included.
Clause 49(5)
(iv) This clause may be deleted completely since prima
facie it appears to attract the Doctrine of Double Jeopardy.
PROTECTION TO WHISTLEBLOWERS
(v) There should be a provision in the Bill for protection
of the Complainants and his family members.
Clause 2(i)
(i) The term ‘minister' should include ‘Prime Minister’.
Clause 2(p)
(ii) The special court to be designated as ‘Lokpal Court’.
Clause 3(4)
(iii) The words “shall not be” should be replaced with the
words “shall not be and shall not have been”. The institution
of Lokpal be kept non political.
12 3 4
But, DOPT is open for suggestions in this
regard.
(v) This is covered under the protection to
Whistleblowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(i) Since the Prime Minister while holding of
office of Prime Minister is outside the
purview of Lokpal, definition of 'Minister'
as given in Clause 2(1)(i) does not include
the Prime Minister.
(ii) The Lokpal will be a quasi judicial body.
Special Courts are to be setting up under
Sub-Section (1) of Section 3 of Prevention
of Corruption Act. 1988.
(iii) The suggestion is of drafting nature.
123. Adv. Sudhir
Deshpande,
FJ-38,
Thakkar
Bazar, Near New
CBS, Nasik – 02

479
Clause 8
(iv) The removal of Chairperson or any Member of
Lokpal be by the process of impeachment only.
Clause 8(3)
(v) The chairperson or any member of Lokpal be given
opportunity of being heard before his removal.
Clause 17
(vi) The incumbent PM should also be covered under the
Lokpal Bill. Whereas some conditions like clearance from
Supreme Court may be introduced in the Lokpal Bill to
prevent black mailing of the PM. Also all the public
servants to be covered and the term "Public Servant"
should expressly include 'retired public servants' as well.
Clause 17(2)
(vii) To be deleted completely.
Clause 24
(viii) The person against whom investigation or inquiry is
proposed should be given express right to defend his case
by engaging any Lawyer of his choice.
Clause 42
(ix) The estimated loss should be recovered as an arrear
of Land Revenue.
(iv) to (v)  The provisions made in the
Clause 8  for removal and suspension of the
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal are
sufficient.
(vi) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Government's set-up. To ensure that the
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the Lok
Pal. However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within the
purview of the Lok Pal.
(vii) Clause 17(2) of the Bill provides that
Lokpal shall not enquire into the conduct of
Members of Parliament on the floor of the
house. This is inconformity of Article 105
of the Constitution.
(viii) Clause 61 of the Bill provides that the
Lokpal may make regulation regarding the
manner and procedure of conducting an
inquiry or investigation. There is no need to
make such provisions in Clause 24.
(ix) The provisions made in Clause 42 of
the Bill for recovery of loss from the
convicted public servant are adequate.

480
Clause 47
(x) The assets of the Public Servant along that of spouse
and children should be declared on the website of the
concerned Department.
Other Suggestions
(xi) The whole institution of Lokpal be brought under the
purview of RTI Act.
SECOND SCHEDULE PART II
(xii) The punishment for proved corruption acts must be
minimum 7 years imprisonment (simple or rigorous)
extendable up to life imprisonment.
(xiii) If any case is pending against any political person,
he may be allowed to contest election, but if he is found
guilty afterwards, he should be deemed to have resigned
from his elected post. Also if occasion of bye-election
arises, whole expenditure should be recovered from him.
CLAUSE 38
(xiv) The sufficient number of Special Courts to be
designated for timely trial of cases. The full of part
expenditure of setting up more Courts may be met from
the fines recovered from convicted public servants.
(xv) The accused should not be acquitted due to very
tiny loopholes in the investigation, and if cash is recovered
from the accused during raids, then it should be presumed
that it was bribe money, if the traces of chemical powder
are seen in ultra violet light on the notes as well as on
the fingers of acceptor.
(x) The Bill provides for declaration of assets
by public servants including that of spouse
and dependent children and publication of
the same on the website of the department.
(xi) The Bill does not provide any exception
to Lokpal under RTI Act.
(xii) The punishment as proposed in the Bill
seems to be adequate.
(xiii) This issues relates to electoral reforms
which is being examined separately by the
concern ministry.
(xiv) Clause 38 of the Bill provides that the
Central Government shall constitute such
number of Special Courts as recommended
by the Lokpal.
(xv) to (xvi) This has to be decided by the
Courts on merit in each case.
12 3 4

481
(xvi) The defense of money landing should not allowed in
trials before the Special Courts merely by saying that the
complainant had been lent the money by the accused in
the past.
(xvii) 10% money should be rewarded to the complainant
out of the total recovered assets/money.
Clause 1(3)
(i) The entire act should enforced from one dated instead
of partial implementation of provisions.
Clause 2(i)
(ii) A proviso need to be added in the definition of
minister which reads: ‘Personnel of Prime Minister’s
Office, including: Minister in-charge shall be included
within this clause.”
Clause 12
(iii) In sub clause (2) substitute words “giving notice to”
of words ‘obtaining consent of’ as it should not be
necessary for Central Government to obtain the consent
of the State Government for investigation of Central
Government. Servants working under the State Government
As a corollary to this modification, the proviso to Clause
17(3) should be deleted.
Clause 17(1)
(iv) In sub clause (d), the expression ‘Group A’ should be
replaced by expression of specific rank of Public Servants.
In clause (f) & (g), the expression ‘or aided by the
Central Government may by notification specify’ should
be deleted along with second Proviso of sub clause (g).
(xvii) The Lokpal Bill 2011 does not contain
any provisions for rewards to the
complainants. The system of rewards may
lead to a flurry of false/incomplete
complaints. Exposing corruption should be
adequate reward in itself.
(i) The date from which as such come into
force shall be decided and notified by the
Central Government.
(ii) The Bill proposes to exclude the Prime
Minister so long as he/she holds the office
of Prime Minister. No exception has been
provided for personnel or other Minister In-
charge of the Prime Minister office.
(iii) This may not be inconformity with
federal polity of the country. This may also
lead to confrontation between Central
Government and the State Government.
(iv) The expression 'Group A' officers
incorporate all the ranks falling in or above
the specified pay scales. With regard to
certain organizations which are only or partly
financed or aided by the Government the
Justice (Retd.)
Kamleshwar Nath
Gandhian Seva &
Satyagraha Brigade
124.

482
(v) Clause 17(2) should be deleted.
Clause 23
(vi) Sub clauses (4) & (6) should be deleted as it suffers
from impropriety of unjust multiple opportunities to
delinquent Public Servant in contrast to practically no
opportunity to Complainant.
Clause 27(3)
(vii) Sub clause (3), which destroys the effect of sub
clause (1) of 27, should be deleted, consequently reference
to sub clause (3) in sub clause (4) should also be done
away with.
Government has to notify the annual income
of such organization or the donation received
by them which are to be covered under
Lokpal so that only such organizations are
brought within the ambit of Lokpal which
utilizes substantial amount of such funds/
donations and the petty organizations are
kept outside the purview of Lokpal.
(v) Clause 17(2) of the Bill provides that
Lokpal shall not enquire into the conduct of
Members of Parliament on the Floor of the
House. This is inconformity of Article 105
of the Constitution. Clause 61 of the Bill
provides that the Lokpal may make regulation
regarding the manner and procedure of
conducting an inquiry or investigation.
(vi) In the interest of natural justice it is
necessary to provide opportunity to the
public servant of being heard, this has also
to be seen in the light of the fact that prior
sanction for prosecution under PC Act 1988
and permission U/s 6(A) of DSPE Act is
proposed to be dispensed with.
(vii) Clause 27 provides that previous
sanction is not necessary for investigation
and initiating prosecution for Lokpal in certain
cases. Sub-clause (3) provides exemption
from Clause 27 for the persons holding office
in pursuance of the provisions of the
constitution and in respect of which a
procedure for the removing of such persons
12 3 4

483
(viii) Clause 29(3) – The Lok Pal’s report should not
only be laid before the Parliament but also should have
some provisions for discussion/debate on the report to
make the citizens aware how the corruption issues are
taken by their elected representatives and also the outcome
of this debate should be reflected in the final orders of
the competent authority.
(ix) Clause 49 should be deleted as it is unjust, excessively
oppressive, uncivilized and denies opportunity of being
heard to the complainant. Even, the complainant has to
bear all the expenses of the court proceedings on his
part.
(x) Clause 51 should be deleted as it destroys the entire
fabric of Lok Pal Bill by providing immunity to accused
Public Servant from any inquiry or investigation by
Lok Pal and it should not be misunderstood with
clause 52.
(xi) Clause 56 should be deleted, as the officers of JS &
above are capable to afford the legal assistance, why
Lokpal should be obliged to afford them requisite
assistance. Even Article 39A of the Constitution or section
has been specified therein.
(viii) The Bill provides for laying of the
report of Lokpal on the table of the House.
It is for the respective House to decide
further course of action on such reports.
However, Clause 29(3) of the Bill provides
that the Competent Authority shall examine
the report and communicate to the Lokpal
within a period of 90 days the action taken
or proposed to be taken on the basis of the
report.
(six) As the false and frivolous complaints
may cause irreparable loss to the innocent
public servants, it is necessary that some
deterrent is there to discourage motivated
complaints. Therefore, the provisions made
in Clause 49 to deal with false complaints
are necessary. However, DOPT is open to
suggestions in this regard.
(x) During the course of discharge of duty
the public servants has to take certain actions
in good faith. Therefore, it is necessary that
no suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings are initiated in respect of
anything which is done in good faith or
intended to be done in the discharge of
official functions or exercise of his duties.
(xi) It is felt that legal assistance needs to
be provided to defend the case to such
persons who makes request for the same.
DOPT is open for suggestions in this regard.

484
304 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 says legal aid
to indigent persons.
Other Suggestions
JUDICIARY
(xii) Higher Judiciary should be left out of Lokpal as
independent Judiciary is a basic feature of the Constitution.
CLAUSE 49 & 50
(xiii) Lokpal Bill is more inclined towards accused public
servant rather than complainant citizen. Provisions of
clauses 17(1) (f) & (g), 49, 50, 51 by creating terror
atmosphere for the complainant and imposes artificial
criminality. This needs to be addressed with fairness and
justice.
CLAUSE 12
(xiv) Lokpal shall be competent to supervise and give
directions regarding investigation by any investigation
agency of Central Government or the agency utilized by
it for corruption cases.
(xii) The judiciary is not within the purview
of Lokpal
(xiii) It is not correct to say that the Bill is
more inclined towards accused public servant
rather than complainant citizen. The Bill has
tried to strike a balance for administration
efficiency as well as to curb the tendency
of corruption within the system.
(xiv) The Lokpal will be having its own
Investigation Wing. It may also utilize
services of officers of Central or State
Government [Clause 32] . The Lokpal is
meant to enquire into allegations of corruption
against certain public functionaries.
Therefore, other Investigating Agencies are
also required to investigate the matters which
12 3 4

485
do not fall in the category of cases
investigated by the Lokpal and there
independence is also required to be maintained.
(xv) The institution of Lokpal is meant to
enquire into the allegations of corruption
against certain public functionaries.
Therefore, it may not be feasible to extend
the jurisdiction of Lokpal to other offences.
(xvi) Clause 19 of the Bill provides for
setting up of benches of Lokpal and the
Lokpal may notify the area in relation to
which each Bench of Lokpal may exercise
jurisdiction.
(i) & (ii)  The Bill seeks to establish the
institution of Lokpal to enquire into
allegations of corruption against certain public
functionaries. It will be a Statutory body
having its own Investigation Wing. The
expenses of Lokpal are to be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India. Therefore, the
proposed Lokpal is an independent body to
enquire into the charges of corruption against
public servants.
(i) The Bill to seek to establish the institution
of Lokpal to enquire into allegations of
corruption against certain public functionaries.
It will be statutory body having its own
investigation wing. The expenses of Lokpal
are to be charged on the Consolidated Fund
OFFENCES UNDER IPC
(xv) Jurisdiction of Lok Pal shall extend to offences
besides those under PC Act, also to those under Sections
166 to 171 of IPC 1860.
REGIONAL LOKPAL
(xvi) There should be Regional Lokpals to cover the
remaining personnel of Government of India (Below DS
level). One Regional Lok Pal may consist of a group of
some States with, Head Quarters in an accessible city
with the same set up of Central Lok Pal.
(i) The nature of the Lokpal to be defined clearly. It
should be guided by the principle of separation of powers
as globally it has been seen that it will lead to creation of
an institution to check corruption. Thus, such an institution
to be created either as an independent ombudsman or as
an independent anti-corruption agency (ACA) with
investigating and prosecutorial powers.
(ii) The model of an independent anti-corruption agency
vested with powers of investigation, prevention and
education is the ideal institutional structure for the Lokpal.
Under this model, Lokpal will be functionary within
executive branch that exercises limited judicial powers.
(i) All the agencies dealing with corruption or economic
offence should be free from the control of the executive/
Government but not to be put in the hands of any single
person of group. The each agency should have 7-11 members
who should be selected on the by way of referendum/vote by
public putting their particulars on print or electronic media.
125.
126.
Prashant
Reddy T.
B.R. Lal, IPS (Retd.)
H.No. 150,
Sector 31,
Gurgaon – 01

486
CLAUSE 17
(ii) All the public servants from peon to PM to be treated
equally. PM must come under Lokpal. No permission
under Section 26 of CVC to investigate or prosecution
sanction under Section 19 is required and both the
provisions need to be repealed. Judiciary not to be brought
under Lokpal.
(iii) The principle of separation of powers to be followed
instead of vesting the powers of investigation, prosecution,
vigilance, administration including the powers of
punishment only in Lokpal.
(iv) Anti Corruption Wing and Economic Offence Wing of
CBI not to be separated and brought under different agencies
as proposed in Jan Lokpal Bill but should be under a
statue and made accountable to an independent body that
will be free from the Government functionally as well as
financially. The CBI along with ED should look after all
the investigations and Lokpal to administrative vigilance.
The CVOs of PSUs to be put directly under Lokpal.
of India. Therefore, the proposed Lokpal is
a independent body to enquire into the
charges of corruption against public servants.
(ii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Government's set-up. To ensure that the
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the Lok
Pal. However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within the
purview of the Lok Pal. In so far as the
lower bureaucracy is concerned, if the same
is also included within the purview of Lokpal,
it will over burden system. Further Clause
27 of the Bill provides that previous sanction
is not necessary for investigation and initiating
prosecution by Lokpal in certain cases.
(iii) The Bill do not propose to invest all the
powers of investigation, prosecution,
vigilance, administrative punishment in one
institution.
(iv) The CBI and Enforcement Directorate
are two different entities. The anti corruption
work of CBI is supervised by CVC which is
another Statutory independent body. The
CVOs are reporting to CVC. The existing
system is adequate.
12 3 4

487
Lokpal shall create a mechanism for grievances redressal
for PSUs and the cases in this regard referred by Lokpal
shall be registered and investigated by investigation agencies.
(v) The corruption and black money related laws need to
be stricter and the punishment under PC Act should
increase with the quantum of corruption extending up to
life imprisonment. The law need not be inclined towards
accused person rather should protect the whistle blower.
(vi) The whole money involved in corruption or in
economic offence should be recovered from the accused
or his family members.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM should be covered in the jurisdiction of Lokpal but
there should be checks and balances. Any complaint
against PM to verified by the full Lokpal Bench for prima
facie vidence and then be referred to the full bench of
Supreme Court. After position opinion from SC, Lokpal
will notify the ruling dispensation of imminent inquiry
proceedings with a few days notice giving the time to re-
elect a new PM.
(ii) Ministers, MPs, CMs, State Ministers, MLAs & MLCs
including their conduct inside the respective houses should
come under the jurisdiction of Lokpal but sufficient
protection needs to be given to members for their behavior
in the house. Any complaint against a member of any
house to be sent to the Presiding Officer of the house by
Lokpal, who, within a well defined time, either approve
the conduct of inquiry or if wants to reject, he will refer
it to the bench of Supreme Court/High Court for validation
of the rejection.
(v) The Bill also seeks to amend PC Act
1988 and to enhance the punishment from 7
years to 10 years. The laws relating to
black money are to be examined separately
by the concerned department.
(vi) Clause 42 of the Bill provides for
recovery of the loss from the convicted
public servant.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Government's set-up. To ensure that the
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the Lok
Pal. However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within the
purview of the Lok Pal.
(ii) As regards Chief Minister, State Ministers,
MLAs and MLCs it is stated that they are to
be covered under the Lokayukta of respective
state. Setting up of Lokayukta falls in the
domain of States and the respective States
have to take decision in this regard.
Regarding conduct of MPs on the floor of
the house, it is stated that the same has to
be kept outside the purview of Lokpal in the
light of the Constitutional provision as
127. V inay Avasthi

488
(iii) All the officers of supervisory positions need to be
brought under Lokpal. For this, CVC & other equivalent
agencies in states need to be merged into Lokpal. For the
non-supervisory officials (like clerks, peon etc.) should
be handled with departmental disciplinary mechanism. All
the supervisors should be held responsible for the
corruption within a department and if there more than a
certain number of complaints against the non-supervisory
employees, automatically it should trigger an inquiry against
the Supervisor by Lokpal.
JUDICIARY
(iv) Judiciary should not come under Lokpal, else it
should be covered under an effective Judicial Accountability
Bill.
DEFINITION OF CORRUPTION
(v) Corruption to be defined in terms of money or favour
demanded to get something done. Incompetence or decision
gone wrong with best intentions should not be the issue
of Lokpal.
LOKAYUKTAS IN STATES
(i) There is no provision in the Bill for the appointment
of Lokpal or Lokayukt at the State level. Even the Selection
committee is Government dominated with 5 members
directly from Government
CLAUSE 4 & 8
(ii) The appointment as well as removal of Lokpal in
contained in Article 105.
(iii) All the 'Group A' and above officers are
within the purview of Lokpal.
(iv) The judiciary is not within the purview
of Lokpal.
(v) The bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not define in this Act
but defined in PC Act 1988 shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
(i) Setting up of the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution it may be left for the State to
decide.
(ii) The provisions for appointment and
12 3 4
128. Sushil Kumar
Mishra,
Chairman, Indian Civil
Union & Adv.
Allahabad High Court,
Allahabad

489
removal of Lokpal and its Members as
provided in the bill are adequate. [Clause 8]
(iii) Clause 12 of the Bill provides that the
Lokpal shall constitute an Investigating Wing
for the purpose of conducting investigation.
Since, the Investigation Wing is to be
constituted by the Lokpal itself, it is quite
natural that it will be answerable to Lokpal
itself.
(iv) It is not understood that how the
preliminary inquiries will lead to wiping of
offence by the accused. The time lines for
completion of inquiry have been provided in
Clause 23.
(v) In the proposed Bill the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of Lokpal
once he/she demits the office.
However, the MPs are within the purview
of Lokpal. The conduct of MPs on the floor
of the house is not within the purview of
Lokpal in view of the provisions contained
in Article 105 of the Constitution.
(vi) Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the
Lokpal to recommend transfer or suspension
of the public servant. Sub-Section 2 of
Clause 35 provides that the Central
Government shall ordinarily accept the
recommendations of the Lokpal, except for
the reasons to be recorded in writing in
case where it is not feasible for administrative
Lokpal Bill is in the hands of executive which shall make
the Lokpal a Dummy of the Government
CLAUSE 12
(iii) The Bill does not tell whether the investigation wing
shall be answerable & accountable only to Lokpal or not.
Even there is no provision for extension of this Act to the
states unless the consent of the State is taken.
CLAUSE 23
(iv) The provision of preliminary inquiry before full fledge
inquiry may lead to wiping out of evidence by the accused.
Even there is no fixed time limit for completing the
Investigation.
CLAUSE 17
(v) PM to be kept out of the Lokpal and why Lokpal has
no authority to enquire into any matter in respect of MPs.
CLAUSE 35
(vi) The power given to Central Government under clause
35(2) of accepting or rejecting the recommendation of
Lokpal is arbitrary, as no guidelines have been provided.

490
Clause 49
(vii) Provision of 2 to 5 years punishment and fine for
false complaints would discourage honest complaint.
Clause 54
(viii) Fix period of 7 years, for reporting old corruption
cases, is unreasonable.
Clause 56
(ix) There is no provision for providing defense assistant
to the complaint.
(x) The punishment for a convicted officer should not be
less than life imprisonment.
(xi) Lokpal should be under constitutional obligation to
declare the assets & property while entering into office as
well as after end of tenure.
(xii) There should a three tier Lokpal System, i.e. at
Central level, State level & District level, and the term of
Lokpal should be fixed for 3 years extendable up to 2
years.
reasons. Since, the Central Government has to
record its reasons if a decision is taken contrary
to the recommendations of Lokpal under Clause
35, there is no reason to say that the powers
to the Government are arbitrary.
(vii) The provisions made in Clause 49 & 50
to deal with false complaints are adequate but
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(viii) The limitation period of 7 years as
provided in Clause 54 is reasonable.
(ix) It is felt that no such assistance is
required by the complainant.
(x) The punishment has to be as per the
prevailing laws.
(xi) Since, the conditions of services of
Chairperson shall be the same as those of
Chief Justice of India and that of Members
shall be the same those of Judges of Supreme
Court, the rules applicable in their case will
also applicable in the case of Lokpal and its
Members.
(xii) The proposed institution of Lokpal will
be a Central level Lokpal. The State level and
District level institutions i.e. Lokayukta falls
in the domain of States. Keeping in view of
the federal structure of the Constitution, it
may be left for the States to decide.
12 3 4

491
COMMENTS OF DoPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of the Suggestions/Comments Comments of DoPT
No. Organisation/
Individual
12 3 4
Dr. (Maj) Balbir
Singh Bhasin, Flat
No. 212, Dhudial
Appt. Madhuban
Chowk, Pitrampur,
Delhi-34
CLAUSE 19
(i) The area of Investigation, Enquiry of all the Members
of Lokpal should be fixed according to the ranks of the
officers against whom the enquiry is being conducted.
Also there should not be any clash between the powers
and functioning of the Lokpal at Centre and Lokayukta at
State level.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) PM, Judiciary and the Organizations created for religious
purposes and receiving public donations should be outside
the purview of Lokpal.
CLAUSE 12
(iii) Lokpal should have its own agencies like Police or
Para Military Forces.
CLAUSE 35
(iv) The Lokpal should have the liberty of recommending
(i) Distribution of work between the Benches
of the Lokpal and the Members is a matter
to be decided by the Lokpal itself. Further,
the area of functioning in respect of the
Lokpal is the Central Government whereas
the Lokayuktas are meant for State level
matters.
(ii) In the proposed Bill, the Prime Minister
will come within the purview of the Lokpal
once he/she demits the office [Clause 17].
The judiciary is not within the ambit of the
Lokpal. Further, as per proviso to Clause
17(1), the trusts/societies created for religious
purpose are outside the purview of the
Lokpal.
(iii) The Bill envisages setting up of
Investigation Wing and Prosecution Wing by
the Lokpal and the investigation officers of
the Lokpal shall have powers of police
officers in the matter of investigations of
offences under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988. [Clause 12 & 13]
(iv) The Bill provides that the Lokpal may
129.

492
12 3 4
129.
transfer or suspension of public servants in corruption
cases and an independent power to do so in case of
urgency.
CLAUSE 38
(v) The Lokpal should have right to set up Special Courts
to decide corruption cases without any unnecessary delay
under the proposed Lokpal Bill.
CLAUSE 47 & 48
(vi) The Lokpal should have the full right to make the
public servants to declare their assets and liabilities and
defaulters to be punished. Also Lokpal should have powers
for prosecution of false or frivolous complaints.
(i) 
Clause 17 (d) & (e)  – Group “A” public servants are
under the jurisdiction of Lokpal to inquire into the offences
committed under PC Act, 1988 as the Jurisdiction of
CVC has also extended to Group ‘A’ & All India Service,
accordingly CVC Act, 2003 has not been amended to
remove Group “A” from the jurisdiction of CVC.
CLAUSE 54
(ii) It may be noted that PC Act, 1988 does not have any
statute of limitation for any of the offences. It means that
the offences committed by the public servants under the
recommend transfer or suspension of public
servant connected with the allegation of
corruption. The recommendations ordinarily
shall be accepted by the Government,
however, in case of it is not feasible for
administrative reasons, and the Government
will have to record the reasons for not
agreeing to the recommendations of the
Lokpal. [Clause 35]
(v) The Bill provides that the Government
shall constitute such number of Special
Courts as recommended by the Lokpal to
hear and decide the cases arising out of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or under
this Act. [Clause 38]
(vi) The Bill provides for declaration of assets
by the Public Servants and action against
the public servants for non-declaration of
assets. [Clause 47 & 48]. The power to
punish false and frivolous complainant lies
with the Special Court.
(i) Placing the public servants as mentioned
in Clause 17 (d) & (e) under jurisdiction of
the Lokpal may require amendment to CVC
Act. 2003. This is under consideration of
the Government.
(ii) The limitation provided in Clause 54 of
Bill appears to be adequate. This does not
debar initiation of action as per the provisions

493
of other applicable Laws for the time being
in force.
(iii) The exemptions available in normal laws,
viz . Official Secrets Act, etc. would
automatically be applicable in this case as
well.
(iv) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are adequate. But,
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(i) to (iv) The Bill provides that the words
and expressions used but not defined in this
Act but defined in PC Act 1988 shall have
the same meaning as assigned to them in
that Act. As regards the extent of jurisdiction
of the Lokpal, the provisions made in Clause
17 of the Bill are adequate.
jurisdiction of Lokpal will not be investigated if the
complaint is made 7 years after the alleged offence. This
limit can be extended to 10 years as recommended in
1998 and 2001 Bills.
(iii) 
Clauses 17(1), 23(7), 24, 26 & 57  – This Bill do not
include any provision to safeguard information related to
national security and public safety. For example, the Lokpal
Act will override other existing laws such Official Secret
Act, 1923, which penalizes any person for committing
certain acts, deemed to be prejudicial to the safety or
interest of the state. Even the Bill gives the accused the
right to inspect any record in relation to the case and
exact information that is considered necessary to defend
his case etc.
(iv) Clause 49(1) – The penalty amount of `25,000 to
`2 lakh for false complaints may act as a deterrent for
people to complain against a public official.
Definitions
(i) “Actions” – Means any action taken by a public
servant while discharging his functions and includes
decision, recommendation or finding or in any other manner
and includes willful failure or omission to act and all
other expressions relating to such action shall be construed
accordingly.
(ii) “Allegation” – In relation to a public servant includes
any affirmation that such public servant –
(a) has indulged in misconduct, if he is a government
servant;
(b) has indulged in corruption
130. Bharat Bharti
Bhagyodaya
Foundation,
Bangalore

494
12 3 4
(iii) “Misconduct” – means misconduct as defined in
relevant conduct rules, which has vigilance angle.
(iv) “Public Servant” – Includes PM, Ministers, MPs, CM
& Ministers, MLAs, Speakers/Chairman of the Houses of
Parliament & State Legislatures, Judges of SC & HCs,
Chairman/Vice Chairman or a member of a local authority/
body/corporation established by a law or under the control
of Government including co-operative society and company
under Companies Act, 1956, and members of any
Committee/Board constituted by the Government. Also the
Media House, print/electronic, a member of governing
body/Management Committee including Editors/Group
Editors/Chief Editor/Managing Editor are included in the
category of Public Servants.
Institutions of Lokpal and Lokayukta
CLAUSE 3-11
(v) The Institution of Lokpal shall consist of a Lokpal
and Lokayuktas for each State & UT. The Lokpal shall
consist of one individual office known as Lokpal (elected
by the citizens of India on the basis of Universal Adult
Franchise by Election Commission. The will not only be
Chairperson of Lokpal body but also of Lok Ayuktas of
all States & UTs (elected by the citizens of the State/UT
treating it as one constituency) along with its officers and
employees.
(vi) The President shall appoint first Lokpal and Lokayuktas
within three months after the enactment of this Act and
Government of India would set up this institution with all
its logistics and assets. Lokpal/Lokayukta shall hold the
office for a non-renewable 5 years term or upto the age
of 70 years.
(v) to (viii)  Setting up the institution of
Lokayukta falls within the domain of the
States. Keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for  the
States to decide. The proposed Bill is for
setting up of the institution of Lokpal at the
Central level and its composition and method
of appointment etc. are given in Chapter II
[Clause 3 to 11] of the Bill.

495
(vii) The President and Election Commission of India
shall ensure the filling up a vacancy of the Lokpal or
Lokayukta caused due to –
(a) Retirement, 3 months before the retirement of
incumbent
(b) Any other unforeseen reason, within a month of
such vacancy arising.
(viii) Lokpal or the Lokayukta shall not be a member of
either the Parliament or the State Legislature and never
been a member of any political party and shall not hold
any office or trust of profit or carry on any business or
practice any profession.
Functions and Powers of Lokpal and Lokayukta
CLAUSE 23-29
(ix) Lokpal/Lokayukta shall be responsible for receiving
complaints where there are allegations of acts of omission
or commission punishable under PC Act, financial
misconduct by a government servant, grievances and the
complaints against the respective staff of Lokpal/Lokayukta
including the complaints from whistle blowers.
CLAUSE 41
(x) Lokpal shall ensure the integrity of its own staff and
employees (temporary or otherwise) and shall be competent
enough to take all actions to ensure that.
CLAUSE 23-29
(xi) Lokpal will be authorized to send a complaint/
grievances to the concerned Lok Ayukta and get a report
on the enquiries or investigations. Lokpal or Lokayukta,
as the case may be, shall have the powers:
(a) to close the case in absence of prima facie
evidence.
(b) Initiate prosecution against public servants as well
as those private entities included in the Act,
(ix) The procedure in respect of inquiry and
investigations by the Lokpal has been
prescribed in Chapter VII [Clauses 23 to
29] and the same appears to be adequate.
(x) Complaints against the officials of the
Lokpal will have to be processed as per
Clause 41 of the Bill.
(xi) As far as the allegations of corruption
against the public servants as given Clause
17 of the Bill are concerned, the procedure
as given in Clause 23-29 of the Bill will
have to be followed. As far as public
grievances are concerned, a separate
mechanism is required to be set up for
which the Department of Administrative

496
12 3 4
(c) Recommend imposition of appropriate penalties
(d) Order cancellation or modification of a license or
lease or permission or contract or agreement,
which was the subject matter of investigation.
(e) Blacklisting of the company or contractor involved
in corruption activities.
(f) Issue appropriate directions to the authorities for
redressal of grievances and directions, from time
to time, to appropriate authorities to make
necessary changes in their work practices,
administration or the other system so as to reduce
the scope and possibility of corruption,
misconduct, public grievances and whistleblower
victimization.
(g) Invoke its powers for the compliance of its orders
and to impose fine on the officials responsible
for non-compliance of orders.
(h) All the permissions required for initiating
investigations/prosecution under any Act shall be
deemed to have been granted once Lokpal/
Lokayukta grants such permission.
(i) Lokpal shall have the powers of a civil code
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
(j) For the purpose of Section 36 read with Section
154 to 173 of CrPC, 1973, Lokpal, Lokayukta
and the offices their investigation wing shall be
deemed to be Police Officers.
(k) Lokpal/Lokayukta shall have powers to  issue
Letters Rogatory in any case pending with them.
(l) Lokpal shall be completely independent of  the
government in all matters including administrative,
financial and functional.
(m)Lokpal, in consultation with Lokayuktas, shall
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same and a Draft Bill has been prepared by
that department. The matters relating to the
States are to be looked into by the Lokayuktas
of the concerned State.

497
take all the Policy level decisions including formulation of
regulations, developing internal systems for functioning of
Lokpal, assigning functions to  various officials in Lokpal,
delegation powers to  various functionaries etc.
Reports of Lokpal
CLAUSE 46
(xii) The Lokpal shall submit annually a consolidated
report in the prescribed format on its performance to  the
President whereas the Lokayuktas would submit a detailed
to the Lokpal. Subsequently, the report shall be placed
before the Parliament.
CLAUSE 23
(xiii) The Lokpal/Lokayukta shall publish the complete
details of  the cases including action taken on its website
on monthly basis.
(xiv) Lokpal shall give the Adult Citizens of  India the
Right to Response and to  the accused the Right of
Defense and Right to  Silence.
Complaints Mechanism
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL
(xv) Any citizen may make a complain to any office of
Lokpal/Lokayukta on a plain paper, supported by an
Affidavit with Proof of Identity, but should contain all
such details as prescribed by Lokpal. It shall be the duty
of that office of Lokpal/Lokayukta to transfer it to the
concerned Lokpal/Lokayukta.
CLAUSE 23
(xvi) On receipt of the complaint, the Lokpal shall decide
whether it is an allegation or a grievance or a request for
whistle blower protection or a mixture of two or more of
(xii) Clause 46 of the Bill stipulates that the
Lokpal shall furnish returns and statements
and such particulars in regard to any matter
under the jurisdiction of the Lokpal as
prescribed from time to time. The matter of
Lokayuktas falls in the domain of the State
Governments.
(xiii) Clause 23(13) of the Bill provides that
the website of the Lokpal shall display to
the public the status of number of complaints
pending before it or disposed of by it.
(xiv) The Bill provides for the accused to be
heard. [Clause 23].
(xv) For public grievance redressal, a separate
mechanism is required to be set up for
which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same and a Draft Bill has been prepared by
that department.
(xvi) On receipt of the complaint the Lokpal
has to make a preliminary inquiry or
investigation to ascertain whether there exists

498
12 3 4
these. Every complain shall have to be compulsorily
disposed off by Lokpal/Lokayukta.
Punishment
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(xvii) Punishment shall not be less than one-year rigorous
imprisonment and may extend upto life imprisonment and
it will be more severe for high rank official. Same way
if a business entity is found guilty, the loss caused due
to corruption shall be charged five times more from the
accused and recovery may be done from the assets of
the business entity and from the personal assets of all its
Director, if the assets of accused are inadequate.
Dealing with complaints against Judges of SC/HCs
(xiii) Any complaint against any judge of SC/HC shall be
dealt only by the office of Lokpal. Each complaint shall
be screened by the Lokpal in consultation the relevant
Lokayukta of State/UT  and three other Lokayukta to
determine prima facie  evidence. Then the findings of will
be submitted to the full bench of Lokpal with atleast 9
Lokayuktas in case of SC Judge and 7 in case of HC
Judge apart from Lokpal. The case of SC judge shall not
be investigated by an office below the rank of IG and in
case of HC Judge, not below DIG. The case would be
registered only after the approval of Full bench and also
it will decide whether to initiate prosecution on completion
of investigation.
Whistle Blower Protection
(xix) Lokpal/Lokayutka shall provide protection to whistle
blowers against threat, professional or physical victimization.
a prima facie  case for proceeding in the
matter. [Clause 23(1)].
(xvii) The punishment as proposed in the
Bill seems to be adequate. Moreover, the
quantum of the punishment is to be decided
by the Courts depending upon the facts of
each case.
(xiii) The judiciary is outside the purview of
the Lokpal Bill as a separate Bill, Judicial
Standards Accountability Bill, is already under
consideration of the Parliament.
(xix) The recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on the
Whistle Blowers’ Bill are under consideration.

499
Grievance Redressal
(xx) Lokpal Shall appoint a Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO)
in each public authority who will not be from the same
public authority. Further, the CVO will designate sufficient
number of vigilance officers known as Appellate Grievance
Officers. The CVO shall be responsible for accepting
complaints against any public authority and shall transfer
the complaints related to other public authorities within
two days of receipt. All the grievances shall be received
and disposed by the Chief Vigilance Officer, if citizen is
not satisfied from Public Grievance Office (Vigilance
Officer) on behalf of Lokpal who will be assisted by the
Vigilance Officers of the concerned Public Authorities.
Repeal and Savings
(xxi) The CVC Act shall stand repealed. However, things
done under this Act shall be deemed to have been done
under this Act and all inquiries, investigations and other
disciplinary proceedings pending before CVC and which
have not been disposed off, shall stand transferred to and
be continued by the Lokpal. The Secretary, officers and
Staff of CVC shall stand transferred to the Lokpal office.
Even all vigilance administration under the control of all
Deptts. of Central Government, Ministries, corporations,
Government Companies, Societies and Local Authorities
owned or controlled by the Central Government shall
stand transferred, along with its personnel, assets and
liabilities to Lokpal for all purposes and such personnel
shall be deemed to be on deputation for all purpose for
period of 5 years from the date of transfer.
Investigation Wing
CLAUSE 12
(xxii) Lokpal shall have its own investigation wing with
the offices as decided by the Lokpal. That part of Delhi
(xx) For public grievance redressal, a separate
mechanism is required to be set up for
which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same and a Draft Bill has been prepared by
that department. As far as appointment of
CVOs is concerned, it has to be done by
the appropriate appointing authority.
(xxi) CVC has served the purpose and has
expertise, and it is felt that it should be
strengthened A mechanism has to be worked
out whereby the supervision of complaints
of corruption against lower bureaucracy is
done by CVC.
(xxii) Clause 12 of the Bill provides for
setting up of Investigation Wing by the

500
12 3 4
Special Police Establishment, which deals with offences
under PC Act, shall stand transferred, along with its
employees and assets to Lokpal for all purposes.
Prosecution Wing
CLAUSE 15
(xxiii) Lokpal shall have a prosecution wing. This bench
will decide whether the cases forwarded by investigation
should be prosecuted or not within a fortnight, else
prosecution wing shall be deemed to have decided to
initiate prosecution. Certain categories of cases as
prescribed by Lokpal, the permission to prosecute or
deny shall be decided by the a bench of Lokpal.
Complaints against Officers/Employees of Lokpal
CLAUSE 41
(xxiv) Complaints against officers/employees of Lokpal
shall be heard by a three member bench of Lokpal & in
case of CVO & above, the full bench of Lokpal.
Investigations into such complaints shall be completed
within a month of its receipt. If during the investigation,
it is felt that the charges are likely to be sustained, such
officer shall be divested of all his responsibilities and
powers and would be suspended. If the charges are
established, it is decided to prosecute that person under
PC Act or for any misconduct or for dishonest enquiry/
investigation, that person shall not work with Lokpal
anymore. Lokpal shall either dismiss that person or shall
repatriate him (if on deputation), with an appropriate
recommendation.
Protection
CLAUSE 52
(xxv) No suit or prosecution/legal proceedings shall lie
against the Lokpal/Lok Ayukta or against any office,
Lokpal. Since, the Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing, the anti corruption unit
of CBI need not be merged with the Lokpal.
(xxiii) The Bill provides that the Lokpal may
constitute a Prosecution Wing for the purpose
of prosecution of public servants in relation
to any complaint by the Lokpal under this
Act. [Clause 15].
(xxiv) The provisions for complaints against
the officials of Lokpal have been given in
Clause 41 and seems to be adequate.
(xxv) Clause 52 of the Bill provides that no
suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings

501
agency in respect of any thing which is done in good
faith while discharge their duties under this Act.
CLAUSE 28 & 29
(xxvi) No proceedings or decision of Lokpal shall be
liable to be challenged, reviewed, quashed or called in
question in any court of ordinary Civil Jurisdiction.
Miscellaneous
CLAUSE 47 & 48
(xxvii) Every public servant shall declare his assets &
liabilities including of his family members in a form,
prescribed by Lokpal, to HOD of his Public Authority
within three months from the commencement of this Act
and thereafter before 30
th June of every year. And the
HOD shall ensure that all such statements are placed on
the website by 31 st August of that year. If the public
servant fails to do so, HOD shall direct him to declare
within one month otherwise his salary to be stopped till
such statement is submitted. Lokpal may initiate prosecution
against such public servant under section 176 of IPC.
Also if any property, which not declared by public servant
at the time of declaration and found owned by him, such
property shall be deemed to have been acquired by corrupt
means.
(xxviii) In the above case, if public servant does not give
satisfactory answer, Lokpal shall immediately confiscate
all such properties and inform IT deptt. for appropriate
action. All properties confiscated shall be auctioned and
proceeds shall be deposited in the Consolidated Fund of
India.
shall lie against the Lokpal or against any
officer, employee, agency or any person, in
respect of anything done in good faith or
intended to be done under this Act or the
rules or the regulations made there under.
(xxvi) As per the procedure proposed in the
Bill, the Lokpal is to file a report in the
Special Courts. [Clause 28 & 29]
(xxvii) & (xxviii)  Clause 47 and 48 of the
Bill provides for declaration of assets by
public servants and presumption as to
acquisition of assets by corrupt means in
certain cases.

502
12 3 4
CLAUSE 23
(xxix) The preliminary enquiry to be completed within
one from the date of complaint and investigation into any
allegation to be completed within six months, in any case,
not more than one year from the date of receipt of
complaint. And the trial in any case filed by Lokpal
should be completed within one year. Adjournments should
be granted in rarest circumstances.
(xxx) Lokpal shall post all the records of the cases on its
website for public scrutiny except such info which may
cause threat to whistle blower or lead to external or
internal security threat.
CLAUSE 49
(xxxi) If the Lokpal finds that a complaint lacks any basis
or evidence and it is meant only to harass certain
authorities, Lokpal may impose such fine on the
complainant as it deems fit, but total fine should not
exceed `1 lakh. A complaint or allegation once made
under this Act shall not be allowed to be withdrawn.
Amendment in PC Act, 1988
(xxxii) It shall be an offence for any person under
sections I3(1)(d)(iv), (v), (vi), (vii) & (viii), to suppress
the knowledge or evidence of corruption for personal
gain, to deny to the citizens the knowledge about incidents
of corruption through misuse of official position, to exert
pressure or exercise his/her personal influence on any
public servant for private interests, to grant affiliation/
license to any private individual/body/institution/NGO/trust
to carry out any public service, that is to without
prescribing the preconditions.
(xxix) The time line for completion of inquiry
has been given in Clause 23. The preliminary
inquiry is required to be completed within
30 days, which may be extended for a
further period of 3 months. The inquiry is
to be completed within a period of 6 months,
which may be extended for a further period
of 6 months.
(xxx) Clause 23(13) of the Bil1 provides
that the website of the Lokpal shal1 display
to the public the status of number of
complaints pending before it or disposed of
by it.
(xxxi) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are adequate. But,
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(xxxii) The criminal misconduct as defined
in Section 13 of the PC Act, 1988 seems to
be adequate.

503
(i) The Judicial Standards Accountability Bil1
and the Public Interest Disclosure &
Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures
Bil1 have already been introduced and are
under consideration
(ii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Government’s set-up. To ensure that the
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the Lok
Pal. However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within the
purview of the Lok Pal.
(iii) In order to curb the corruption, it is
necessary that the provisions as contained in
the Clause l7(1)(g) are retained.
(iv) The number of Members of the Lokpal
as proposed in the Bill is adequate. [Clause
3(2)(b)].
(v) The composition of the Selection
Committee as provided in the Clause 4 of
(i) To create adequate legal framework to tackle the
corruption, it is necessary that Bills like Judicial
Accountability Bill and The Public Interest Disclosure &
Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures Bill are also
introduced and passed.
DEFINITIONS
(ii) “Minister” means a Union Minister including PM; and
add the following proviso:
(a) Provided that no investigation would be launched
against PM unless a reference has been made by
a full bench of the Lokpal to the CJI and that the
CJI has formed a full bench of Supreme Court
which has examined the complaint and the relevant
grounds & evidence and has reached to the
conclusion that such an investigation is warranted.
(b) Provided that where the PM is of the opinion
that some information that is asked for by the
Lokpal as part of an investigation is such that its
disclosure might compromise national security or
other critical national interests, the PM would in
confidence brief the CJI, whose decision whether
the information should be disclosed to the Lokpal,
and if so, under what conditions, would be final.
(iii) Delete Clause 17(1)(2).
(iv) Clause 3(2)(b) - Replace word “eight” with word
“ten”
(v) Clause 4(1) - Selection Committee to be reconstituted
as under:-
131. Maj (Retd.) S.K.
Lamba

504
12 3 4
(a) PM – Chairperson
(b) Speaker of Lok Sabha
(c) Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha
(d) Chief of Defence Staff or COAS/CNS/CAS
(e) One sitting Judge of Supreme Court to be
nominated by CJI – member
(f) Advocate General of India
(g) CEC
(h) C&AG
(i) Chairman, UPSC
(vi) Clause 4(3)  – The following to be added at the last”
“Provided that no member of Search Committee shall be
considered from amongst the members/  NGO’s who have
submitted their draft versions of Lokpal Bill or offered
comments to the Govt. on Lokpal Bill.
(vii) Clause 8(1)(ii)  – to be deleted as it stipulates
intervention by political class.
(viii) Clause 17(1)(a)  – Delete the words “after he has
demitted the office of Prime Minister”.
the Bill is adequate. Further, associating the
Chief of Defence Staff in the process of
selection of Lokpal may not be desirable as
it may lead to politicization of the armed
forces.
(vi) This would debar all such persons who
are advocating the need to have institution
of Lokpal.
(vii) The political class, or any class of
society cannot be alienated. To be effective,
all sections of society have to work in
cooperation and on the basis of mis-trust,
an effective and viable institution to fight
corruption may not be effective.
(viii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Government's set-up. To ensure that the
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the Lok

505
(ix) Clause 17(1)(g)  – to be deleted as the office bearers
of NGOs that do not receive Govt. funds cannot be
treated as Public Servants.
(x) Clause 23(4)  – to be deleted as there is no statutory
right given to the accused even under Code of Criminal
Procedure.
(xi) Clause 24  – The following proviso to be added :–
“Provided that where the complaint involves allegations or
information from a whistleblower or a witness who wishes
to have his identity protected, the Lokpal shall ensure that
advance notice is given to whistleblower and/or witness
and they are given an opportunity of being heard prior to
the accused being given access to any records: provided
further there in no case would the identity be revealed
without their prior consent in writing.
(xii) Clause 38(2)  – following to be added in
continuation: –
“Provided further that no case would be closed on the
basis of the trial not having been completed within two
years. However, wherever a trial continues beyond two
years, a mandatory reference would be made to the
High Court which shall examine matter and pass such
directions as it might deem necessary to bring the trial
to an early conclusion and, where the High Court
Pal. However, after the Prime Minister has
demitted the office, he will come within the
purview of the Lok Pal.
(ix) In order to curb the corruption, it is
necessary that the provisions as contained in
the Clause 17(1)(g) are retained.
(x) In the interest of natural justice,
opportunity has to be provided to the public
servant of being heard, especially in view of
dispensing with prior sanction for prosecution
under the PC Act and permission under
Section 6A of DSPE Act.
(xi) Protection to the complainants acting as
Whistle Blowers is to be provided as per the
Whistle Blowers' Bill and the
recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on the Bill are under
consideration.
(xii) The provisions of Clause 38 of the Bill
do not contemplate closing of the trial if it
not completed within two years. However,
the suggestion needs to be examined by the
Legislative Department and the Department
of Legal Affairs.

506
thinks it appropriate, pass strictures against the trial
judges.”
(xiii) Clause 49 (1)  – the words “two years to be
replaced with the words “one month” and the words
“five years” with the words “six month”.
(xiv) Clause 56  – Add proviso as under:–
“Provided that where the accused is finally found guilty
of any of the charges made against him, by the special
court provided for in the Act, and subject to further
appeals, the accused would be required to refund the total
cost of assistance so provided”
(i) Clause 9 (1) (i)  – Chairperson or Member of Lokpal
may be eligible for reappointment for next subsequent
term(s) based on his/her performance during the tenure
as outstanding & unbiased performers might and always
be given another chance.
(ii) Clause 42  – In this clause the sentence “It may make
an assessment....” To be read as” It 
will  make an
assessment...” and the “and may order recovery of such
loss....” To be replaced with” and 
will order recovery of
loss...”
(iii) Clause 49 (1)  – The person making false or frivolous
complaint to be punished with fine and/or imprisonment
for any amount or term as may be decided by the Special
Court based on the severity of the crime.
Clause 49 (1)  – to be reconstituted as under:–
“The person of public servant against whom false or
frivolous or vexatious complaint has been made; may
(xiii) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are adequate but
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(xiv) DoP&T may not have any objections
to add the suggested proviso.
(i) The tenure of Chairman and Members of
the Lokpal has been restricted to five years.
However, if any Member has not completed
the tenure of five years, he would be eligible
for appointment as Chairman.
(ii) The provisions proposed for recovery of
loss appears to be adequate.
(iii) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are adequate. But,
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
12 3 4
132. C.M. Kushwaha,
D-7, Pusa Campus,
New Delhi – 12

507
seek, if he so desires the conduct of prosecution by
public prosecutor and all expenses connected with such
prosecution shall be borne by the Central Government.
Whistle Blowers
(iv) The provisions regarding Whistle Blowers as proposed
in Jan Lokpal Bill (Chapter XI) with amendment that the
identity of the whistle blower might be protected thruhg
out his life and any loss in any form to whistle blower
may be treated as breach of protection and consequently
be a punishable offence, and the following may be adopted:
(a) Any public official or any other person having
information of any corruption in any public authority
would be encouraged to send information confidentially to
the Lokpal, which shall be inquired by Lokpal and if
necessary, to be investigated.
(b) Lokpal to provide full protection to whistle blower
against any physical harm or administrative harassment.
Also the identity of the whistle blower to be protected the
whistle blower desires so. In this regard, the Lokpal shall
have the powers to pass suitable direction/orders, within
a month from the date of complaint and to any security
agency for providing security as well as to any other
authority for not causing any harassment. Immediate action
will be taken in cases of a threat of physical victimization.
(c) The investigations in complaints by whistle blowers
facing physical or professional victimization shall be fast
tracked and completed within three months.
CLAUSE 42
(v) No immunity should be granted to any bribe giver
after paying bribe and taking illegitimate benefits whatever
(iv) These are covered under the protection
to Whistle Blowers Bill. The recommendations
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
the Bill are under consideration.
(v) Under Clause 42 of the Bill, any person
who conspired with the public servant and

508
the reason may be.
(i) There should be appropriate representation of SCs/
STs/OBCs & Minorities in the Search Committee &
Selection Committee as well as in the appointment of
Lokpal & its members.
DEFINITIONS
(ii) Definition of Corruption to be expanded to include
Non-earmarking of funds under SC Sub Plan/ST Sub
Plan in proportion to the population, Non formulation of
Schemes exclusively for the benefit of SC & ST, non
utilization of funds, diversion of these funds for the
schemes other than the welfare of SC/ST, deprivation of
rights and safeguards provided in the Constitution of
India and other laws passed by Parliament, State Assembly
and official Orders/Notification.
(iii) The same provisions must be made in the constitution
of Lokayukta in the States.
(iv) The prescribed qualification of Lokpal or its member
must have the provision that the Lokpal or any Member
must be free from caste bias and no Judge or Chief
Justice will be eligible for such appointment, if he/she has
even passed adverse judgment on important dalit issues.
has obtained benefits is also liable to make
good the loss to the exchequer.
(i) There is no concept of reservations for
SCs/STs/OBCs & Minorities in the Search
Committee or appointment as Chairman and
Member in such institution. However, normal
rules of reservations to fill up the various
posts under the Lokpal will have to be
followed as per the policy of the Government.
(ii) The bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not define in this Act
but defined in PC Act 1988 shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act. Non-earmarking of funds under SC/ST
Sub-Plan in proportion to the population,
non formulation of schemes exclusively for
the benefit of SC and ST, non utilization of
funds, diversion of these funds for schemes
other than the welfare of SC/ST etc., cannot
be said to be act of corruption.
(iii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(iv) The suggestion does not appear to be
practicable.
12 3 4
133. P.L. Punia, MP &
Chairman, National
Commission for SCs

509
CLAUSE 12 & 32
(i) CBI’s institutional experience and expertise in Anti-
Corruption Investigation and Prosecution needs to be
utilized, be it under the statutory, administrative/operational
control of the Lokpal or outside. CBI’s mandate &
jurisdiction, after promulgation of Lokpal Act, needs to be
clarified.
(ii) Clause 13 & 32  – There is a need to bestow upon
the similar powers to the investigation officers who come
from within the Lokpal and the offices from outside the
Lokpal for conducting inquiry/ investigation.
(iii) Clause 17  – As there is no bar for including any
person of any society/association or trust, be they
constituted for religious purposes, within in the ambit of
sections 8 & 9 of PC Act, 1988, if they found to be
engaged in criminal misconduct. Therefore, the clause 17
(1) (g) to be deleted in order to bring the Lokpal Bill in
line with the PC Act, 1988.
(iv) Clause 17 (3)  – a proviso to be added in the bill that
any person including those referred in 17 (1) who is
charged and/or convicted of any offence under the PC
Act, their acts and omissions to be administratively
addressed by the victims (be they Govt. Deptt., Ministry,
Board or Body), by empowering them to employ suitable
administrative actions and deterrent measures such as
barring him/her and all commercial entities he/she is
associated with from participating in the Govt. contracts
for time period or for endless time or advising changes
in management practices or personnel.
(v) Clause 24  – There should be no access to inspection
of documents at the preparatory stage, unless the
provisions of section 8 & 10 of RTI Act are fully met.
(i) & (ii)  For investigation of cases, the
Lokpal will have its own Investigation Wing
[Clause 12]. However, Clause 32 of the Bill
provides that for the purpose of conducting
any inquiry, the Lokpal may utilize services
of any officer or investigation agency of the
Central Government or any State Government.
(iii) In order to curb corruption, it is
necessary that the provisions as contained in
the Clause 17(1)(g) are retained.
(iv) Action against the associates of the
corrupt public servants, if found guilty, has
to be taken as per the law. To debar such
persons/entities from participation in
Government contracts/tenders etc. provision
has to be made in the appropriate laws.
(v) In the interest of natural justice,
opportunity has to be provided to the public
servant of being heard, especially in view of
134. J.B. Mohapatra

510
dispensing with prior sanction for prosecution
under the PC Act and permission under
Section 6A of DSPE Act.
(vi) The provisions made in Clause 28
provide that competent authority shall initiate
disciplinary proceedings within thirty days,
and also sent a report to the Lokpal intimating
the action taken or proposed to be taken of
within six months of initiation of such
disciplinary proceedings.
(vii) These are typographical mistakes which
will be rectified at the time of finalization of
final draft.
(viii) There seems to be no harm in
bestowing the Lokpal with the powers to
attach property of the corrupt public
servants. To make the Lokpal Act self-
sufficient it is necessary that such powers
are specified in the Act itself.
(ix) Action against the entities mentioned in
Clause 17(1) (c) and (d) has to be taken by
the respective House to which these persons
belong.
Even it will adversely affect the complainant who has
sought anonymity. Also, it is detrimental to the process of
investigation/inquiry to allow the public servant the right
of un-hindered access of any information under this clause.
(vi) Clause 28  – A provision to be incorporated, which
will allow the Disciplinary Authority to consider the
recommendations of Lokpal, and after objective
consideration of the facts on record, to arrive at a
determination whether disciplinary proceedings are attracted,
and if yes, the specific nature of proceeding, major or
minor.
(vii) Also, The public servants referred in clauses 28 &
29, since incorrectly mentioned, needs to be corrected.
Accordingly, Public servants mentioned in clause 17(1)
(d) & (e) should come in clause 28 and Public servants
in Clause 17(1) (b) & (c) too come in clause 29.
(viii) Clauses 33 & 34  – There is an overlap of the
provisions contained in these clauses of Lokpal Bill
regarding attachment/confiscation of any proceeds of
corruption under the PC Act, with the provisions of
Prevention of Money Laundering (PML) Act. Therefore,
the powers of attachment/confiscation of tainted property
being proceeds of corruption should remain either with
the Lokpal Bill or with the PML Act.
(ix) Clauses 28, 29 & 35  – In these clauses, the public
servants mentioned in Clause 17 (c) & (d) are only
subject to the Disciplinary proceedings such suspension
under the Disciplinary Rules apart from the proceedings
under PC Act, on disclosure of commission of an offence
after the inquiry/investigation of Lokpal under the PC Act,
12 3 4

511
there should be a similar provision for suspension of the
entities mentioned in sub clauses (b) & (c) of clause 17.
(i) Clause 3  – The following should be added after Sub
Clause 2(b) :–
(a) Of the total number including Chairperson and
other Members, not less than 15% shall be from
the SCs, not less than 7.5% from STs and not
less than 27% from the BCs including BCs of
Religious Minorities, in such a way that the total
number of these social classes does not exceed
50% of the total strength of the Lokpal.
(b) Of the total number including Chairperson and
other Members, not less than one-third shall be
women.
(ii) Clause 4 – to be amended giving suitable representation
of one member belonging to OBCs, SCs, STs & Minorities
& Women in the Selection Committee. Also the Selection
Committee should include the Chairmen of National
Commission for BCs, SCs, STs, and Minorities & Women
to ensure unbiased selection of Lokpal members.
CLAUSE 17
(iii) The Lokpal/Lokayukta and its constitutional framework
should cover all Government/public functionaries, Public
servants, private operators engaged or connected with
Government functions or performing any function related
with the public, such as Private Sector, NGOs, Media
Sector, Charitable-Religious Trusts or any organization
dealing with the public money.
(i) & (ii) There is no concept of reservations
for SCs/STs/OBCs/Minorities & Women for
appointment as Chairman and Member or on
the Selection Committee in such institution.
(iii) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as provided
in Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate. If its
jurisdiction is extended to lower bureaucracy
and also to private operators engaged or
connected with the Government functions,
it would over burden the institution of Lokpal
which may put undue stress on the resources,
thereby making the system ineffective.
135. V . Hanumantha Rao,
MP (RS) &
Convenor
Parliamentary Forum
of OBC MPs

512
CLAUSE 23
(i) The guilty Govt. servant should be given one chance
of appeal.
DEFINITION
(ii) The definition of corruption should be wide and
should be measured by a device like the Ritcher Scale.
This Scale of corruption would relate to acceptance of
hard cash, opening of accounts in India & abroad, flats
etc.
(iii) CVC to be attached to the Lokpal and deal with the
lower bureaucracy.
CLAUSE 12
(iv) There should be an independent investigating agency
attached to the Lokpal to investigate independently and
also supervise the CBI.
CLAUSE 17
(v) The Media, NGOs getting foreign contributions &
Corporate houses should be brought under the purview of
Lokpal.
(i) The right to defend and appeal under the
appropriate laws will be available to the public
servants.
(ii) The bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act 1988 shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
(iii) CVC has served the purpose and has
expertise, and it is felt that it should be
strengthened A mechanism has to be worked
out whereby the supervision of complaints
of corruption against lower bureaucracy is
done by CVC.
(iv) The Lokpal will have its own
Investigation Wing [Clause 12]. CVC
exercises superintendence over the
functioning of the CBI in so far as it relates
to the investigation of offences alleged to
have been committed under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 or an offence with
which a public servant specified in sub-
section (2) may, under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same
trial, it is felt that the existing system may
continue.
(v) As regards the corruption by Media/
Corporate are concerned, it is stated that
the scope of the Lokpal is to enquire into
Dr. G. Sundaram,
IAS (Retd.),
Former Secy. to
GOI, A-601, Dugar
Appartments,
KP Puram,
Greenways Road,
Chennai – 28
12 3 4
136.

513
CLAUSE 33 & 34
(vi) There should be provision to attach and confiscate
the ill-gotten wealth and punishment should be severe.
(vii) Judiciary must be out of Lokpal Jurisdiction. Also
PM to be excluded but with the safeguards.
the complaints of alleged corruption against
certain public functionaries. If MNCs and
Media are also to be covered under the
Lokpal, in that case, the definition of the
public servant would be required to be
modified to include such entities. In order
to tackle corruption by private parties, which
include MNC and media, Ministry of Home
Affairs, in consultation with the States, is
already examining amendment to the IPC.
However, Clause 17(3) of the Bill provides
that the Lokpal may inquire into any act or
conduct of any person other than those
referred to in sub-section (1) of Clause 17,
if such person is associated with the
allegation of corruption under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988. The Government
has also introduced Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of
Public International Organisations, Bill, 2011
in the Lok Sabha. As far as NGOs are
concerned, NGOs receiving government
monies and public donations [Clause
17(1)(f) & (g)]  are covered in the present
Bill.
(vi) Clause 33 and 34 of the Bill provide for
attachment of assets of the corrupt public
servants.
(vii) The judiciary is outside the purview of
the Lokpal in the proposed Bill. In the context
of the Indian polity, the Prime Minister
occupies a pivotal position in the
Governments’ set up. To ensure that Prime
Minister is able to discharge his functions

514
(viii) Appeals against the decisions of the Lokpal should
be to the Supreme Court.
(ix) There should be separate Lokayuktas for the States
on the same line of Lokpal.
(x) If a Lokpal exceeds limits, the Collegium of Supreme
Court should be able to intervene. The “Institutional
Integrity of Lokpal should be justifiable as in the recent
case of the CVC.
CLAUSE 9
(xi) The members of Lokpal, after demitting the office,
can contest election only as an independent candidate. No
nominations by the Govt. to the Rajya Sabha.
CLAUSE 4
(xii) The Selection Committee should be body of people
of proven integrity and should be small under the Supreme
Court with the PM & Leaders of the Opposition.
without any interference from any quarter, it
is felt that the Prime Minister may be kept
outside the purview of the Lokpal. However,
after the Prime Minister has demitted the office,
he will come within the purview of the Lokpal.
(viii) On conclusion of investigations/inquiry,
the Lokpal has to file a report in the Special
Court, and the Court is to pass appropriate
orders. Appeals etc. are to be preferred as
per the laws.
(ix) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(x) The intent of the suggestion is not clear.
(xi) The restriction on contesting the elections
by the Chairperson and Members of Lokpal
as proposed in Clause 9 of the Bill seems to
be adequate.
(xii) The Selection Committee as proposed
in Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate. Further,
it may not be desirable that the Selection
Committee works under the Supreme Court
wherein Prime Minister and Leaders of the
Opposition are the Members.
12 3 4

515
(i) The proposed Lokpal Bill should not be a standalone
law nor should it be an all-encompassing legislation for
the anti-corruption framework. There should be separate
legislations for each aspect of anti-corruption strategy and
integrate them with the Lokpal Institution.
CLAUSE 17
(ii) Lokpal Bill should not apply to Judiciary and the
conduct of the Members of Parliament inside the House.
Further, for the reasons of stability of the Govt., it should
be applied to PM after he demits the office.
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
(iii) The Lokpal Bill should include the function of enquiring
into maladministration and grievance redressal. There is
need to keep vigil on the administrative actions for fixing
the responsibility on wrongdoers. The Lokpal institution
needs to be utilized to improve preventive vigilance.
(iv) CVOs to be made the part of the Lokpal to undertake
preventive vigilance activities and exposing corruption and
maladministration.
CLAUSE 23
(v) There should be a provision to collect and publish
performance data on public domain, which ought to be
sine qua non for analyzing the performance of the Lokpal.
The monitoring and reporting system provided under
Section 25 of RTI Act is a good example.
Clause 2(1)
(vi) The definition should refer to an “action” as well as
an allegation of an “act of Corruption”. It means that the
definition part should include the definition of “action”
and “act of corruption” too. The definition of “action”
can be taken from the Lokpal Bill, 1968 and “act of
(i) The proposed institution of Lokpal is to
inquire into allegations of corruption against
certain public functionaries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(ii) The judiciary and the conducts of the
MPs inside the House are outside the purview
of the Lokpal. The Prime Minister will be
within the ambit of the Lokpal after he
demits the office. [Clause 17]
(iii) For matters relating public grievances, a
separate mechanism is required to be set up
for which the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(iv) The CVOs are reporting to CVC. The
existing system is adequate.
(v) Clause 23(13) of the Bill provide that
the website of the Lokpal shall display to
the public, the status of number of
complaints pending before it or disposed of
by it. Further as per Clause 46, the Lokpal
has to furnish annual report giving a summary
of its activities during the previous year to
the Central Government.
(vi) The bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act 1988 shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
137. Madhumit D. Mitra,
Advocate,
C-4/8, Sahyadri
Appartments, Plot 5,
Sector 12, Dwarka,
New Delhi – 78.

516
corruption” could include the various sections on bribery
and criminal misconduct contained in PC Act, 1988. Even
the definition of “Maladministration” & “grievances” may
drawn from Lokpal Bill, 1968 and included in the Lokpal
Bill, 2011. If the “National Grievance Redressal Bill, 2011”
is enacted, the definition of “grievance” in that law could
be referred to in the Lokpal Bill for uniformity. Also the
appropriate authority under the “National Grievance
Redressal Bill, 2011” should enable to file a complaint.
before Lokpal seeking investigation based its findings on
the grievances of the citizen. The definition of “Public
servant” should be as mentioned in PC Act, 1988.
Establishment of Lokpal
(vii) CVC should be entrusted the task of enquiring into
the complaints against non-group A officers by giving the
same powers as Lokpal and under the supervision and
control of Lokpal.
Investigation Wine
CLAUSE 12
(viii) The investigation Wing of Lokpal should be created
under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946
and retained under CBI, but a separate entity, with
supervision, control and discipline of the Lokpal. For the
purpose of Lokpal, the investigation to be done by an
investigation officer or the rank of DSP or above. The
appointment of officers of the Investigation Wing should
be made by the Lokpal whereas the President will be the
appointing authority.
(vii) CVC has served the purpose and has
expertise, and it is felt that it should be
strengthened A mechanism has to be worked
out whereby the supervision of complaints
of corruption against lower bureaucracy is
done by CVC.
(viii) The Bill proposes to set up independent
Investigation Wing by Lokpal [Clause 12]
which seems to be adequate.
12 3 4

517
(ix) Clause 15 of the Bill provides for
constitution of Prosecution Wing and
appointment of Director of Prosecution and
such other officers and employees for the
purpose of prosecution of public servants in
relation to any complaint by the Lokpal under
this Act.
(x) In the interest of natural justice,
opportunity has to be provided to the public
servant of being heard, especially in view
of dispensing with prior sanction for
prosecution under the PC Act and
permission under Section 6A of DSPE Act.
Hence, provision for being heard are
incorporated in Clause 23.
(xi) The Bill specifically provides that no
sanction or approval shall be required by the
Lokpal for the purpose of making inquiry by
the Lokpal or investigation by its Investigation
Wing into any complaint against any public
servant or for filing of any complaint in
respect thereof before the Special Court
under this Act.
(xii) The Bill provides for attachment of assets
of the corrupt public servants by the Lokpal
in the manner provide in the Second Schedule
to the Income Tax Act, 1961. Further, the
question of amendments to the PC Act, 1988
to incorporate the provisions for attachment
of property of corrupt public servants is
under consideration of the Government.
Prosecution Wing
CLAUSE 15
(ix) The Bill should make provisions for maintaining panel
for Special Councels.
(x) Clause 23 (6) – The public servant should be given
a single opportunity of being heard during the preliminary
enquiry stage and once a regular investigation confirms
the wrongdoing, charge sheet should be filed in the
Special Court. Such public servant will have the opportunity
of being heard in court.
(xi) Clause 27 –  Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946 requiring prior approval of Central
Govt. for investigation against the officers of decision
level making should be deleted in the spirit of this
provision.
Clause 33 – Powers of Lokpal
(xii) This clause does not address the issues like security
and administration of attached property, its disposal, appeals
against attachment etc. The attachment of property should
be dealt under the provisions of Criminal Law Amendment
Ordinance, 1944 and not as per IT Act and the Special
Judge is empowered to order attachment under PC Act.
The PC Bill 2008 to be resurrected, with the
recommendations of the Law Commission (166
th Report)

518
12 3 4
dealing with the proceeds of corruption, and passed to
take care of this Issue.
(xiii) Clause 39 –  The point regarding “contract state” is
not clear. If  it refers to Letters Rogatory (LR), the
procedure under section 166A of CrPC may be maintained
with the Special Court under the PC Act. Also the
combined wisdom of CVC & CBI to be considered to
make provisions in this Clause that would address the
problems relating to LR.
(xiv) 
Clause 47  – Declaration of Assets.  There should
also be provision under this clause for supervision and
scrutiny of assets declared by the public servants. CVO’s
office be used on a regular basis for integrity checks on
public servants through these reporting measures.
(xv) 
Clause 56  – Legal assistance to be provided only to
the poor Public Servants.
Selection Panel of the Lokpal
Clause 4 -
(i) The following three criteria to be satisfied in the
selection of the Lokpal members:–
(a) Eminence, credibility and integrity
(b) Experience, record of service and insights in fights
against corruption
(c) Impartiality and non-partisan selection
(xiii) The provisions made in the Bill to
letter of request to a contracting state seem
to be adequate.
(xiv) The provisions made in the Bill in
respect of declaration of assets by the public
servants are adequate.
(xv) It is felt that legal assistance needs to
be provided to defend the case to such
persons who makes request for the same.
DOPT is open for suggestions in this regard
(i) The selection procedure as prescribed in
the Bill is adequate.
138. Foundation for
Democratic Reforms
– Lok Satta

519
Also, two nominees under section 4 (1) (h) & (i), i.e,
one eminent jurist and one eminent person from public
life, to be nominated by the other seven members of the
Lokpal and not by the Central Govt.
Jurisdiction
Clause 17(1) (a) –
(ii) If the serving PM is to be brought under the
Jurisdiction of Lokpal, for enquiry against the allegations
against PM, the following Proviso to be inserted in this
clause of Lokpal Bill:–
“Provided that specific allegations backed by prima facie
evidence against the serving PM may be enquired  into bu
the Lokpal, if a majority of not less than two-third of
total membership of Lokpal refers the matter to a
sanctioning committee comprising the Vice President, the
Speaker of Lok Sabha and the Leader of Opposition in
Lok Sabha and if that sanctioning committee on the basis
of material available sanctions the enquiry of the Lokpal.”
“Provided no such sanction of enquiry be sought or given
against the serving PM for the allegations on matters
related to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of the State, friendly relations with Foreign States
and public order.
Clause 17(2) –
(iii) To be deleted as such a provision will destroy the
credibility of Legislatures, and defame the fair name of
and reputation of the vast majority of MPs/MLAs just for
the bribe taking by few of them.
(ii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments' set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(iii) The conduct of the MPs on the floor of
the House is kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal in view of the immunity available to
them under Article 105(2) of the Constitution.

520
12 3 4
(iv) The Judiciary to be kept out of the Lokpal and shall
be accountable to the National Judicial Commission. Also
if the judiciary is brought under Lokpal, the provision of
the Lokpal Bill for removal of Lokpal members by the
President on the grounds of misbehavior after the Supreme
Court has held an enquiry is contradictory as how it can
held enquiry once it is already under the Jurisdiction of
Lokpal.
(v) Chief Ministers to be brought under the Lokpal at
national level.
(vi) The Bill to be renamed as “Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Bill, 2011”. A separate chapter on Lokayukta in each State
and Local ombudsman in each City/District under
Lokayukta should be incorporated as Parliament, under
Article 253 of the Constitution of India, has the power to
make legislation on matters relating to corruption, a strong,
independent authority to curb corruption in States in
pursuance of the United Nations Convention Against
Corruption.
Clause 28 –
(vii) The following proviso to be added in this clause: -
“Provided that the Lokpal/Lokayukta may make a
recommendation to the appointing authority to impose a
punishment of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank
on a public servant if he is satisfied that the evidence
warrants such an action on grounds of commission of an
offence or misconduct, or willful omission to perform a
duty or gross incompetence in preventing an offence.”
(iv) The Judiciary has been kept outside the
purview of the Lokpal.
(v) The Chief Ministers are to be covered
under the Lokayuktas of the respective
States.
(vi) The proposed Bill is to set up the
institution of Lokpal only. Hence, the current
name is appropriate. Further, setting up the
institution of Lokayukta falls within the
domain of the States. Keeping in view the
federal structure of our Constitution, it may
be left for the States to decide.
(vii) The provisions made in Clause 28
regarding action on inquiry in relation to
public servants not being Ministers or
Members of Parliament is adequate.

521
“Provided further that no such recommendation such
recommendation shall be made without giving such public
servant a reasonable opportunity of being heard further
that such a recommendation of Lokpal/Lokayukta shall be
binding on the appointing authority, and such a public
servant shall be awarded the punishment forthwith without
further enquiry.”
(viii) CVC to be integrated with the Lokpal and CVC
Chairman & Members should be made ex-officio members
of Lokpal, and they should be appointed and removed in
the same manner as member of Lokpal as and when new
members of CVC are appointed.
(ix) CBI should be split into two separate agencies. The
agencies dealing with corruption cases, money laundering
and benami properties should be accountable to CVC and
should function under its overall superintendence and
guidance. Enforcement Directorate too should be under
the superintendence and guidance of the CVC.
CLAUSE 27
(x) Section 6A of Delhi Special Police Establishment Act
should be repealed.
(xi) Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
and section 19 of PC Act, 1988 should be amended by
the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act to provide for ordering of
Prosecution by the CVC and Lokayukta respectively, and
not the respective Governments.
(viii) CVC has served the purpose and has
expertise, and it is felt that it should be
strengthened A mechanism has to be worked
out whereby the supervision of complaints
of corruption against lower bureaucracy is
done by CVC.
(ix) Since Lokpal will have its own
independent Investigation Wing, it is felt that
there is no need to split the CBI.
(x) Clause 27 of the Bill provides that no
sanction or approval shall be required by the
Lokpal for the purpose of making inquiry by
the Lokpal or investigation by its Investigation
Wing into any complaint against any public
servant or for filing of any complaint in
respect thereof before the Special Court
under this Act.
(xi) This needs to be examined by the
Ministry of Law.

522
12 3 4
CLAUSE 12
(xii) Likewise, the law should provide that ACB should
function under the supervision and guidance of the
Lokayukta. All appointments in ACB should be made by
a committee comprising of Lokayukta and Chief Secretary
of the State. Prosecution shall be ordered by Lokayukta.
CLAUSE 15
(xiii) Lokpal/Lokayukta shall appointment independent
prosecutors to prosecute all corruption, money laundering
and benami properties cases, and the prosecutors shall
function under their overall supervision and guidance.
(i) Clause 2(1)(d)  – The Lokpal should be empowered to
suo-moto initiate a complaint.
(ii) Clause 2(1)(q)  – Definition of Corruption to be
inserted in this clause. The definition of corruption, along
with the definitions existing in various laws, should include
opportunity loss to the exchequer as mentioned above and
to citizen(s) who suffer at the hands of the officials on
account of their motivated actions.
(iii) Clause 3(2)  – Qualifications for the Lokpal and
members to be left to the wisdom of Selection Committee.
(iv) Clause 4(1) – The selection committee should consist
of the following:–
(a) PM or nominee
(b) Leader of Opposition
(xii) Lokpal will have its own Investigation
Wing [Clause 12] , therefore, there is no
need that ACB function under Lokpal. The
appointments to any post is to be made as
per the statutory rules.
(xiii) Clause 15 of the Bill provides for
constitution of Prosecution Wing and
appointment of Director of Prosecution and
such other officers and employees for the
purpose of prosecution of public servants in
relation to any complaint by the Lokpal under
this Act.
(i) Clause 2(l)(d) defines the meaning of the
“complaint”.
(ii) The bill provides that the words and
expressions used but not define in this Act
but defined in PC Act 1988 shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
(iii) The qualification of the Lokpal and
Members cannot be left to the discretion of
the Selection Committee.
(iv) The composition of the Selection
Committee and the Search Committee as
given Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
139. IITians for Clean
India C/o Somnath
Bharti, Advocate,
NIL-26AB, Malviya
Nagar, New Delhi-17

523
(c) to (j) people should be persons of integrity and
eminence in public life with wide knowledge and
experience in anti corruption policy, public
administration, vigilance, policy making, finance
or law, who are apolitical and are not drawing
any remuneration from the Public Exchequer. The
selection should be transparent and in consultation
with citizens.
The Search Committee to be formed often people with
similar background as in (c) to (j).
(v) Clause 6  – Lokpal should be a person of 35 – 60
years of age.
(vi) Clause 8(1) & 40  – The complaints against the
Lokpal and his staff should be made directly to Supreme
Court and hearing should be made mandatory. Fraudulent
complaints can be discouraged by imposing heavy fines.
(vii) Clause 12(1)  – Investigation Wing of CBI dealing
with Corruption cases, all departmental vigilance and CVC
to be integrated with Lokpal.
(viii) Clause 17(1)  – NGOs need not be covered under
Lokpal as there is no impediment in the present system
to protect them for their wrongdoings.
(ix) Clause 23 (4), (11) & 24  – No special treatment
should be given to the accused. The CrPC should be
followed in respect of showing of evidence to the accused,
as for the other citizens. No sanction required for Lokpal
to investigate any case of corruption.
(v) There seems to be no justification to
provide for age group of 35-60 years for
Lokpal.
(vi) The system of complaint against the
Lokpal and his staff as proposed in the Bill
is adequate.
(vii) The Lokpal is meant to inquire into the
allegation of corruption only. For other
vigilance related matters, the departmental
vigilance set up is required to cater to needs
of the Department concerned.
(viii) There is rampant corruption in the NGOs
and the NGOs utilizing public funds needs to
be brought under the purview of Lokpal.
(ix) In the interest of natural justice,
opportunity has to be provided to the public
servant of being heard, especially in view of
dispensing with prior sanction for prosecution
under the PC Act and permission under
Section 6A of DSPE Act.

524
(x) Clause 28 (b) &(c)  – When the case is filed as per
Clause 28 (a); disciplinary action should not be initiated.
(xi) Clause 29  – Copy of report along with findings to
the Competent Authority should be kept confidential and
not be shown to the Accused.
(xii) Clause 33  – The Immovable assets and bank
accounts of the accused and his family members need to
be attached till the case is over.
(xiii) Clause 35  – Accused should remain suspended till
the case final and on proven guilty should be dismissed.
(xiv) Clause 42  – The losses should be fully recovered
from the accused and his family members and victim to
be compensated adequately. Also the provisions of Benami
Property Act are incorporated for recovery of properties
purchased in the name of relatives and others.
(xv) Clause 49  – Fraudulent complainants with ulterior
motives should be penalized financially only.
(xvi) Clause 54  – There should not be any time limit for
reporting cases of corruption.
CLAUSE 17
(i) The serving PM to be under the ambit of Lokpal but
he/she should hold office till proved guilty to run Govt.
smoothly. Apart from this all category of Public Servants
(i.e from Group “A” to Group “D”) of Central Govt.,
(x) The competent authority has to take
disciplinary action as per rules.
(xi) The Bill provides for laying of the report
on the table of the House.
(xii) The Bill provides for attachment of
assets which have been acquired by corrupt
means.
(xiii) The Lokpal has powers to recommend
transfer or suspension of public servant
connected with allegations of corruption till
such period as may be specified in the order.
(xiv) The loss to be recovered has to be
assessed by the Special Court. [Clause 42].
(xv) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are adequate but
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(xvi) The limitation period of 7 years as
provided in Clause 54 is reasonable.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
12 3 4
140. Prashant Shriram
Narwade,
Sankalpit CHS Ltd.,
Polt No. 1240,
Vitthalpadaq, Chincolo

525
State Govt. PSUs, Local Self Govt. like Municipalities
etc. should come in the ambit of Lokpal/Lokayukta.
(ii) There should be Lokayukta in all the States, functioning
under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 23
(iii) Lokpal should act Suo Moto  on the complaints of
corruption which come to its notice by news etc. The
complaint/FIR to be made after the consultation with
Chairman and all members (action on complaint by majority
of members).
(iv) All the documents of Lokpal Proceedings to be
scanned and copy to be preserved; and extra copies to
made for references. These documents along with original
one should be kept safely.
(v) There must be a clause of “Benami” Property in this
Bill.
(vi) Procedure should be transparent & short and all
process activities to be recorded or CCTV to be installed.
(vii) There is no need of giving opportunity to the accused
of being heard at every stage. If the prima facie is found,
the accused to be charge sheeted without any delay.
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(ii) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(iii) The Bill provides for inquiry/investigation
by Lokpal on receipt of complaint. On
conclusion of inquiry/ investigations, the
Lokpal has to file a report in the Special
Court. [Clause 23].
(iv) The records of the case are to be
retained as per the standard practice.
(v) Benami property is covered under the
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act 1988.
(vi) Due procedure for inquires/investigations
etc. has to be followed by following the
principles of natural justice.
(vii) In interest of natural justice, due
opportunity has to be provide to the accused
of being heard.
Bunder Road, Malad
(W), Mumbai – 64

526
CLAUSE 17
(viii) The following sub-clauses has been added in Clause
17 in the jurisdiction clause:
(a) any Group “B” to “D” public servants working in
Central and State Govt. undertakings;
(b) any public servant from Group “A” to Group “D”
public servants working in Local Self Central/State Govt.,
Municipalities, Mahanagarpalika or Municipal Corporation;
NEW CHAPTER : “ESTABLISHMENT OF LOKAYUKTA
IN ALL STATES”
(ix) As from the commencement of this Act, there shall
be established, for the purpose of making inquiries in
respect of complaints made under this Act, an institution
to be called the “Lokayukta” under Lokpal in every State
of India.
DEFINITIONS
(x) The definition of Minister – means a Union Minister
or State Minister.
(xi) in the last line of sub-clause (d) of clause 17 of
Lokpal Bill, the words” or State” to be added after the
word “Union”.
CLAUSE 17
(i) PM to be brought under Lokpal Jurisdiction and PM’s
corrupt acts must be inquired into but there should be
strong safeguard to protect him against motivated
complaints. For this, a full bench of the Supreme Court
should hear a complaint of corruption against the PM. If
(viii) If lower bureaucracy is also brought
under the purview of the Lokpal, it will over
burden the system, and may put undue
strains on the resources. Further, the
employees of the State Governments are to
be covered under the Lokayuktas of the
respective States.
(ix), (x) & (xi) Setting up the institution of
Lokayukta falls within the domain of the
States. Keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for the
States to decide.
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
12 3 4
141. V inod K. Maurya, IC
Centre for
Governance

527
the Supreme Court finds sufficient merit in the complaint,
it could entrust the investigation to the Lokpal.
(ii) Judiciary to be kept out the purview of Lokpal and
there should be a separate Judicial Accountability Act.
The conduct of MPs inside the house to should be out
of Lokpal powers. Lower bureaucracy to be included in
p the jurisdiction of the Lokpal. NGOs funded by the
Govt. and accepting foreign remittances should be covered
under Lokpal.
CLAUSE 8 & 40
(iii) The complaints against the members of Lokpal should
lie in the Supreme Court and Special Investigation Team
constituted by the Supreme Court should investigate the
investigation in corruption cases against them
CLAUSE 12
(iv) Anti – Corruption Branch of CBI as well as the ACBs
of States should be transferred to the Lokpal and Lokayukta
respectively. The sole focus of Lokpal and Lokayuktas
should be on detection, investigation and prosecution of
persons involved in corrupt acts.
CLAUSE 4
(v) Selection Committee as well as Search Committee
should not be controlled by the Govt. of the day.
Constitutional authorities like CEC, Chairman UPSC and
CAG apart from Judges of the Supreme Court should be
in the Selection Committee.
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(ii) The judiciary and the conduct of the
Members of Parliament on the floor of the
House is outside the purview of the Lokpal.
If the lower bureaucracy is also brought
under the purview of the Lokpal, it will over
burden the system, and may put undue
strains on the resources. As far as the NGOs
are concerned, those of the NGOs who are
utilizing the Government monies or public
donations are covered under the ambit of
the Lokpal.
(iii) The complaints mechanism as prescribed
in Clause 8 and 40 of the Bill is adequate.
(iv) The Lokpal will have its own independent
Investigation Wing [Clause 12], therefore,
there is no need to put the Anti Corruption
Branch of CBI under the Lokpal. As far as
the ACBs of States are concerned, it is for
the respective State Governments to take a
view in the matter.
(v) The Selection Committee and Search
Committee as provided in the Bill are
adequate. It is to be noted that the affairs of
the State cannot be run on ‘trust deficit’.

528
(vi) Lokayuktas to be created under this Act and if not
possible, a model bill should be suggested for the
consideration of the State Governments. Also there should
be a separate Whistleblower Protection Act. The
responsibility to deal with whistleblowers should be on
the Lokpal/Lokayukta.
CLAUSE 28
(vii) Lokpal should not order the removal of the Govt.
servants, as it would amount to usurping the powers of
appointing authority including the President of India. Also
Lokpal should not have powers to tap the phones and
Lokpal should follow the normal procedure followed by
CBI.
CLAUSE 37
(viii) Powers of delegation by Lokpal to explained clearly
in this Bill.
CLAUSE 49
(ix) False or frivolous complaints should punishable with
fine upto Rs. l lakh or imprisonment upto 6 months or
both.
CLAUSE 4
(i) To make Lokpal impartial and effective, it is crucial to
have the kind of rigorous screening and selection that Jan
Lokpal Bill proposes in its Clause 4.
(ii) There should be a uniform anti-corruption Act for the
State Governments and Legislatures too.
(vi) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide. The Whistleblowers Act has been
introduced by the Government and the
recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee are under examination.
(vii) As per the provisions of the Bill, on
conclusion of the inquiry/investigation, the
Lokpal will send a report to the Special
Court and also recommend to the competent
authority for initiation of disciplinary
proceedings under the relevant rules. The
Bill does not propose to give powers to the
Lokpal to tap the telephones.
(viii) The provisions of Clause 37 of the Bill
are quite clear.
(ix) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are adequate but
DOPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(i) The selection process as provided in
Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.
(ii) These matters falls in the domain of the
State Governments and keeping in view the
federal structure of the Constitution, the
respective State Governments have to take a
12 3 4
142. Krishna Rao,
12 Shiv Krupa,
Kulupwadi Road,
Borivli East,
Mumbai – 66.

529
decision in the matter.
(iii) The provisions made in Clause 49 and
50 to deal with false complaints are adequate
but DoPT is open to suggestions in this
regard. The Lokpal Bill, 2011 does not
contain any provisions for rewards to the
complainants. A system of rewards may lead
to a flurry of false/incomplete complaints.
Exposing corruption should be adequate
reward in itself.
(iv) The Lokpal is not empowered to
pronounce departmental penalties. It is for
the competent authority to do so after
following the due process of law.
(v) The judiciary is outside the purview of
the LokpaI.
(vi) The concept envisages covering the
public servants both at centre and States.
Further the matters relating protection to
whistleblowers are covered under the
Whistleblowers Bill.
CLAUSE 49 and 50
(iii) The proposed punishment/fine for frivolous or false
complaints in Lokpal Bill should be reduced to a maximum
punishment of one month and fine should be a maximum
of Rs. 5000/-, otherwise it will discourage the genuine
complaints too. There should also be a provision in Lokpal
Bill for rewarding the whistle blowers – may be rewarded
with minimum Rs. 20000/- or maximum of @% of the
estimated savings to the exchequer in one year along with
a citation and a place in a hall of fame.
CLAUSE 28
(iv) Lokpal not to attempt to replace departmental vigilance,
enquiry and disciplinary action. Therefore, it must not be
empowered to pronounce departmental penalties like
demotion, suspension etc.
(v) Judges of Supreme Court and High Court must not
be under Lokpal Bill whereas they shall be subjected to a
separate Judicial Accountability Bill which under
consideration.
(vi) 
Creation of Multi Lokpal type Authorities by
Three Separate Laws.
These can be called: (1) Khaas Lokpal (2) Aam Lokpal
(3) Whistleblower Lokpal.
Khaas Lokpal
It shall be almost exactly as Govt. Lokpal Bill and shall
cover both the Centre and States, i.e. PM, CMS (after
they demit office), Ministers/past Ministers, MPs, MLAs
(except to vote and speeches in the House), Group “A”

530
officers in Central and State Govt., heads of all PSUs etc.
The complaints should be entertained only under Prevention
of Corruption Act & IPC.
Aam Lokpal  – Should have jurisdiction over the Center
and States in respect of Govt. officers and the rank and
file of employees and should entertain complaints made
under PC Act, IPC, Public Record Act and breach of
provisions of specific GRS, Govt. circulars, directives,
guidelines and Manual of Procedure as per the procedure
in Govt. Lokpal Bill. It will take care of open and hidden
forms of corruption.
Whistleblowers’ Lokpal
It shall have both the above jurisdictions, but only where
complaints, RTI applications etc. has resulted in backlash
or threat. The main focus of this Lokpal must be on the
need to issue directions for providing protection and
investigation victimization, including murder of
whistleblowers. For the investigation and prosecution of
corruption, the case must be transferred to either Khaas
Lokpal or Aam Lokpal.
(i) 
Clause 2(d)  – “Complaint” should include complaint
of ‘any kind of abuse of discretionary powers by public
functionary’ and of offence coverable under IPC sections
119, Chapters IX, X, XVIII and Sections 403, 409, 420
and complaint of a whistle blowers against victimization.
(ii) 
Clause 3(1)  – The composition of Lokpal to be
considered as per Jan Lokpal Bill’s clause 4(2).
12 3 4
(i) The definition of ‘complaint’ as provided
in the Bill is adequate.
(ii) The composition of the Lokpal as given
in the Bill [Clause 3] is adequate.
143. B.L. Bairwa,
National President,
All India SC and ST
Railway Employee
Association,
167/A, Devi Nagar,
New Sangner Road,
Jaipur – 19

531
(iii) Clause 3(4) – Provisions to debar ex-politicians to be
made.
(iv) Clause 4 and 5  – Clause 4 and 5 of Jan Lokpal Bill
along with the following amendments to be adopted:–
CLAUSE 4
(a) The search committee shall call for applications/
nominations by publishing an advertisement in widely
circulated newspapers and on the website of Lokpal.
(b) The Search committee shall adopt the following
parameters of eligibility criteria:–
Individual Integrity - 10 marks
Intolerance to Corruption - 50 marks
Professional Efficiency - 10 marks
Knowledge of cause of corruption - 20 marks
Intention behind joining - 10 marks
(c) Each member of Search Committee shall have freedom
of evaluation for each of candidate and the merit list will
be prepared. All the records of the proceeding to be
maintained for atleast three years after short listinga and
publish the short list.
(d) Now the Selection Committee finalize the names from
the short list by awarding numerical ratings and shall
keep the record of the proceedings.
(e) if any candidate tries to influence any of the member
of the Search/Selection committee, he/she may declared
ineligible.
(iii) As per the provisions of the Bill, the
Chairman or a Member shall not be a Member
of Parliament or a member of the Legislature
of any State or Union territory.
(iv) The provisions for appointment of
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal as
provided in Clause 4 of the Bill is adequate.

532
(v) Clause 8 –  The Chairperson or a member shall not
be removed from his office except by an order made by
the President on the ground of proved misbehavior or
incapacity or corruption after an inquiry made by committee
consisting of the CJI and two other judges of Supreme
court next to the CJI in seniority, after informing the
Chairperson/Member of their charges and giving
opportunity of being heard.
(vi) 
Clause 41 –  For the complaints against Lokpal
officials, the clauses 15 and 16 of Jan Lokpal Draft with
the following modifications in the clause 15(4) of Jan
Lokpal :–
(a) After investigation, the competent authority shall not
impose punishment less than (a) dismissal and launch
criminal prosecution if found guilty of criminal misconduct
or disproportionate assets, dishonest/unfair/incorrect
investigation (b) removal if found guilty of gross
negligence/unreasonable delay in more than 20% cases in
completing the investigation.
(b) Citizens will also be entitled to file a complaint before
a first class Magistrate under section 200 of Cr PC
against any Lokpal official for the offences attracting IPC
or PC Act or any other Act.
(vii) 
Chapter VII –  Lokpal shall prescribe and publish
rules for procedure for conducting inquiry, which cannot
be deviated in any case without recording cogent and
germane reasons. The complaint received by the Lokpal
should be treated as FIR under CrPC Act.
12 3 4
(v) The provisions for removal of the
Chairperson and Members of Lokpal, as
provided in Clause 8 of the Bill are adequate.
(vi) The provisions to deal with the
complaints against the staff of Lokpal as
given in Clause 41 of the Bill are adequate.
(vii) The procedure in respect of inquiry
and investigation by Lokpal as given Clause
23-29 are adequate.

533
(viii) Clause 23(4) – No opportunity of hearing should
be given to accused before search and seizure,  whichever
it may be considered necessary, so that accused could
not get opportunity to disappear or temper with the
evidence and illegal assets etc.
(ix) 
Clause 28 –  Instead of its recommending powers,
Lokpal should have the powers to conduct inquiry and
order of removal/dismissal after taking into consideration
the opinion of the Disciplinary Authority.
(x) 
Clause 42 –  The provisions of Jan Lokpal Bill for
recovering five times the loss to exchequer from the
private body to adopted in this clause.
(xi) 
Clause 44 –  Lokpal should have the authority to
grant sanction for deciding the strength of staff, creation
of posts, acquisition of resources, equipments etc.
necessary for meeting the prescribed time limits for
completion of investigation into the complaints received.
(xii) 
Clause 49 –  This clause to be deleted as IPC
Sections 177, 182, 203 etc. can take care of criminal
prosecution for false complaints. There should not be
more that Rs. 20,000 fine for false complaints but higher
fine can be imposed on habitual false complainants.
(xiii) 
Clause 54 – The exemption from the time limit of
seven years should be provided in the cases where the
(viii) In the interest of natural justice,
opportunity has to be provided to the public
servant of being heard, especially in view of
dispensing with prior sanction for prosecution
under the PC Act and permission under
Section 6A of DSPE Act.
(ix) The powers of the competent authority,
i.e.  the appointing authority cannot be
exercised by the Lokpal. Even the various
courts, including the Apex Court, give
recommendations for compliance by the
competent authority.
(x) The assessment of loss and recovery
thereof is to be decided by the Special
Courts. [Clause 42].
(xi) Clause 11 of the Bill provide that the
appointment of Secretary and other officers
and staff of the Lokpal shall be made by the
Chairperson or such Member of officer of
the Lokpal as the Chairperson may direct.
Further, the appointment in respect of any
post or posts as may be specified in the
rule, shall be made after consultation with
the Union Public Service Commission.
(xii) The provisions made in Clause 49 to
deal with false complaints are required but
DoPT is open to suggestions in this regard.
(xiii) The limitation period of 7 years as
provided in Clause 54 is reasonable.

534
contracts/MoUs/Lease/Deed/Sanction etc. are still in effect
or not closed or not completed.
(xiv) There should be provisions for reservation for SCs
and STs in the institution of Lokpal from top to bottom
level posts, to protect the interest of these classes, whether
it filled by deputation or by the recruitment.
(i) There should be a Lokpal or Rashtriya Lok Ayukta
at National level, Pradesh or State Lok  Ayukta  at State
level and in the grassroots level Local Bodies Lok Ayukta
or Ombudsman. Ombuds Office  to be instituted in all
organizations/institutions that operates in public sphere, in
public interest or welfare, deals with public or Govt.
money for redress of grievances and in all Public or
Govt. offices at the Local level.
Jurisdiction of Lokpal
CLAUSE 17
(ii) PM and Judiciary should remain outside the jurisdiction
but there should an appropriate mechanism to be put in
place to eliminate corruption and abuse of authority, such
as National Judicial Commission or Judicial Standard and
Accountability Bill for judiciary and all the personnel
including MoS in PMO to be brought under the Lokpal.
The Conduct of MPs amounting to corruption in respect
of any thing said or a vote cast by any MP in Parliament
or in any committee thereof.
(iii) “Public Duty” in PC Act to be redefined to incorporate
the private entities role of providing public services.
Therefore, all institutions, bodies, groups, organizational
and associations NGOs that exists or operates in the
(xiv) The normal reservation will have to be
provided as per the policy of the Government
on the subject.
(i) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(ii) The Prime Minister is kept outside the
purview of the Lokpal. However, after the
Prime Minister has demitted the office, he
will come within the purview of the Lokpal.
Other Ministers, including those working in
the PMO are covered under the Lokpal. The
conduct of the MPs on the floor of the
House is not within the purview of Lokpal
as they enjoy immunity under Article 105(2)
of the Constitution.
(iii) It may not be feasible to expand the
definition of ‘public duty.’ to include private
entities role in providing public services.
12 3 4
144. Dr. Sowesh Pattanaik,
New Delhi

535
public sphere – public, private/Govt. and non-Govt. – that
deals with the public money and involved or engaged in
public affairs and interests, should come under the Lokpal
Act.
(iv) Private sector and NGOs too come under the
Jurisdiction of Lokpal.
Establishment of Lokpal
CLAUSE 3
(v) Lokpal should have as many members equivalent to
that of full Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court.
The “Impeccable Integrity” should be must criteria for all
the members including Chairperson with no exemption or
exception. CVC to be made a member of Lokpal.
Selection Committee
CLAUSE 4
(vi) This Committee under the chairmanship of PM should
comprise Home Minister, Leader of Opposition in both
the Houses, CVC, C&AG, a member of UPSC, one eminent
jurist, who shall not ever been a Law Officer in the
Centre/State Govt. and two persons of eminence in public
life with knowledge and expertise on governance, public
administration, law, policy making and 15 years of
experience in public or social work. No person to be
selected on the ground of being a recipient award or title,
national or international.
Search Committee
CLAUSE 4
(vii) If Selection Committee feels it necessary, it may
constitute a three member Search Committee for preparing
a panel of persons for the consideration for the appointment
of Lokpal members.
(iv) The NGOs utilizing Government funds
and public donations are within the ambit of
the Lokpal. However, it will not be practicable
to include private sector within the ambit of
Lokpal.
(v) The composition of the Lokpal as given
in Clause 3 of the Bill is adequate.
(vi) The composition of the Selection
Committee as provided in the Bill is adequate.
(vii) The composition of the Search
Committee as provided in the Bill is adequate.

536
(viii) The oath as prescribed in the First
Schedule of the Bill is adequate.
(ix) It may not be desirable to make ineligible
the Chairperson from contesting the elections
for ever. The restriction of fives to contest
the election is sufficient.
(x) Clause 12 of the Bill  provides for setting
up of an independent Investigation Wing by
the Lokpal and Clause 32 provide for
utilization of services of officers of the
Central or State Governments by the Lokpal.
(xi) For matters relating to public grievances,
a separate mechanism is required to be set-
up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions is
working on the same.
Oath or Affirmation
(viii) 
Clause 3(5)  – The prescribe form of oath should
also include:
“an undertaking of oath by the Chairperson and every
member that he/she has never committed any act of
corruption and shall never commit corruption act during
his/her tenure in Lokpal and shall show zero tolerance
towards corruption including total transparency and
accountability in its functioning.
(ix) 
Clause 9(1)(iv)  – Any member including Chairperson
who has been in Lokpal, shall be ineligible forever to
contest any election.
Investigation
(x) Lokpal to have its own independent investigation
agency and when it uses the services of the existing
central/State Govt. agencies, the concerned investigation
agency shall function under the direct control and
supervision of the Lokpal. No Investigation Officer shall
serve for more than five years in the Lokpal Investigation
Wing and shall not handle more than 6 full fledged cases
per year to ensure quality and timely completion of
investigation.
Citizen charter/citizen rights
(xi) Citizens’ Charter to be brought out immediately by
all the Departments and Institutions whether public or
Govt., private or non-Govt., dealing in public welfare
etc. Also to formulate and ensure immediate
implementation of Code of Ethics for Ministers, MPs,
12 3 4

537
MLAs, Political parties, Govt. servants, Citizen and voters
and Trade and Industry.
Appeal
(xii) Appeal from Lokpal shall lie in the High Court and
subsequently to Supreme Court as per the appeal provisions
of Code Criminal Procedure including section 372 of
CrPC.
(i) It should be decided whether Lokpal shall be limited
upto Group ‘A’ officers or to extend their authority to all
other employees in the Union Govt. either directly or
through the Anti corruption and Vigilance set up of the
Govt., primarily CBI and CVC. The future of these
statutory bodies to be decided while ensuring that they
continue to serve the purpose for which they were created.
(ii) Regarding creation and functions to be performed by
the Lokayuktas in the States/UTs, it should be decided
whether to leave this matter entirely to the State
Legislatures to formulate their respective Acts, or moded
bill to be formulated within or outside the Lokpal Act.
(iii) While discussing the Lokpal and Lokayukta legislations,
the related administrative and judicial processes will have
to be looked into. Also, the local self-Governments, i.e.
Panchayats, Muncipal bodies should not be over looked.
(iv) There is a need to identify or set up the Anti
corruption and Vigilance units right from the Central level
to Local self-Government level including State, District
and the block level, while creating an independent chain
of accountability, resulting in the office of Lokpal at
Centre and in the offices of Lokayuktas in the State/UT
Govts.
(xii) The Lokpal will file its report with the
Special Courts. Therefore, the appeals etc.
are to be made as per the applicable law.
(i) The Lokpal is intended to inquire into the
allegations of certain public functionaries.
The jurisdiction of the Lokpal has been
elaborated in Clause 17 of the Bill which is
adequate.
(ii) and (iii)  Setting up the institution of
Lokayukta falls within the domain of the
States. Keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for the
States to decide. Further, the provisions of
the Bill are to be in addition to other laws.
(iv) The Anti Corruption and Vigilance units
are already in place in so far as the Central
Government is concerned. For State level
machinery, it is for the State Governments
to take appropriate steps.
145. Shri Amod K. Kanth,
Chairman
Delhi Commission for
Protection of Child
Rights, Govt. of
NCT of Delhi, Delhi

538
(v) Simultaneously, in order to strengthen our machinery
and to fortify our strategy to fight against corruption, the
following Draft Laws which are already under process,
to be made:–
(a) Whistle Blowers Protection Bill, 2010
(b) Judicial Accountability Bill
(c) Administrative Reforms Bill
(d) Amendments in the Representation of People Act
(e) Benami Transactions Prohibition Ordinance, 1989
(f) The Corrupt Public Servant (Confiscation of Illegal
Wealth) Ordinance
(v) These issues are to be examined
separately.
12 3 4

539
COMMENTS OF DoPT ON THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE – EXAMINATION OF
‘THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011’
Memoranda Name of the Suggestions/Comments Comments of DoPT
No. Organisation/
Individual
12 3 4
Justice Venkatchaliah
and Justice Verma
(i) Hon’ble justices has advocated for the establishment of
a Constitutional body to combat corruption, citing some
key advantages of constitutional body, such as
Independence, immunity from influence, protection from
challenges in court of law etc. For this purpose, they
have put a draft for discussion to amend the constitutions
to make provisions for the establishment of Lokpal and
Lokayukta.
(ii) A Constitutional amendment Act, to be called the
“Constitutional (One Hundred and Sixteenth Amendment)
Act, 2011, be enacted to insert a new Part XV A and
Article 329C and D after Part XV of the Constitution,
with the following provisions:–
Part XVA
LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTA
329C.Lokpal
(iii) There shall be a Lokpal for Govt. of India and UTs. The
powers of superintendence, direction, control of investigation
and prosecution of any alleged offence of corruption under
any law, and all powers necessary and incidental thereto
shall vest in the Lokpal in accordance with and as specified
by law made by Parliament in that behalf.
(i) and (xiv)  The Department may not have
any objection for making Lokpal a
constitutional body.
196.

540
12 3 4
(iv) Lokpal shall be an independent and autonomous body
with a Chairperson and such number of members as
prescribed by law made by Parliament in this behalf.
(v) The appointment of the Chairperson and Members of
the Lokpal shall, subject to the provisions of any law
made in that behalf by the Parliament, to be made by the
President of India.
(vi) Subject to the provisions of the law made by
Parliament in this behalf, the conditions of service and
tenure of the office of Lokpal shall be such as the
President may by rule determine, provided that the
Chairperson or a member shall not be removed from the
office except in a manner and on the grounds as a judge
of Supreme Court and the conditions of service shall not
be varied to his/her disadvantage after appointment of
Chairperson/Member.
(vii) Every person appointed, as Chairperson and Members
shall take oath or affirmation in a prescribed form before
the President of India.
(viii) The Chairperson and Members of Lokpal shall not
be eligible for any Govt. office of State/Centre after
demitting the office of Lokpal.
329D. Lok Ayukta
(ix) There shall be a Lok Ayukta for every State in India.
The powers of superintendence, direction, control of
investigation and prosecution of any alleged offence of
corruption in the State under any law, and all powers
necessary and incidental thereto, shall vest in the Lok
Ayukta in accordance and with and as specified by law

541
made by the appropriate legislature in that behalf.
(x) Lok Ayukta shall be an independent and autonomous
body with a Chairperson and such number of members
as prescribed by law made by appropriate legislature in
this behalf.
(xi) The appointment of the Chairperson and Members of
the Lok Ayukta shall, subject to the provisions of any law
made in that behalf by the appropriate Legislature, to be
made by the Governor.
(xii) Subject to the provisions of the law made by
appropriate Legislature in this behalf, the conditions of
service and tenure of the office of Lok Ayukta shall be
such as the Governor may by rule determine, provided
that the Chairperson or a member shall not be removed
from the office except in a manner and on the grounds
as a judge of High Court and the conditions of service
shall not be varied to his/her disadvantage after appointment
of Chairperson/Member.
(xiii) Every person appointed, as Chairperson and Members
shall take oath or affirmation in a prescribed form before
the Governor.
(xiv) The Chairperson and Members of Lok Ayukta shall
not be eligible for any Govt. office of State/Centre after
demitting the office of Lokpal.
The Team Ambedkar has submitted its own draft Bill
called “Ambedkarite Multi-Lokpal Bill” rather than giving
suggestions on the Govt. Lokpal Bill 2011. However, the
new features of this Bill are as follows:–
197. Prof. L.
Karunyakara and
Others,
Team Ambedkar

542
Establishment of Multi Lokpal
(i) The Multi-Lokpal shall consist of Jan Lokpal as
administrative Head of Multi Lokpal and other Lokpals to
deal with the specific jurisdiction to deal with the corruption
cases. Every Lokpal shall have five members including
Chairperson.
Lokpal for inquiry against Public Servants
(ii) The following Lokpal are envisaged in the Multi
Lokpal Bill to inquire into any matter involved in or
arising from, or connected with, any allegation of
corruption by a public servant made in complaint by any
person:–
(a) 
Lokpal for prevention of corruption among political
executives and legislature – to deal with the corruption
complaints against PM, Minister and MPs.
(b) Lokpal for prevention of corruption in Higher Judiciary–
to deal with the corruption complaints against the Judges
of Supreme Court and High court including CJI and Chief
Justices.
(c) 
Lokpal for prevention of corruption in higher
bureaucracy – to deal with the corruption complaints of
any Group A officers or equivalent in connection with the
affair of the Union including those in any Board or
Corporation, or authority or company or society or
autonomous body established or constituted under an Act
of Parliament or wholly or partially financed by the Central
Govt. or controlled by it.
12 3 4
(i) The structure and jurisdiction of the
Lokpal as provided in the Bill are adequate.
(ii) - (a) to (f) The concept of the Multi
Lokpal is not feasible as it will require
creating of multi organizations with
overlapping functions, which may lead to
conflict amongst themselves. Further, this
will also involve logistics problems. The
proposed institution of Lokpal is to enquire
into the allegations of corruption against
certain public functionaries as defined in the
Bill. The judiciary is not within the ambit of
the Lokpal. For judiciary, a separate Bill, viz.
Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill is
already under consideration of the Parliament.
Further, creating different Lokpals for
different areas may not be effective as it
may lead to conflict amongst multiple
organizations. Regarding lower bureaucracy,
it is stated that if lower bureaucracy is also
included within the purview of the Lokpal, it
will put strain on the resources, and the
Lokpal may be over burdened. However,
CVC may be entrusted to conduct the PE
and subsequent investigation through various
agencies. As far as the question of issues

543
(d) Lokpal for prevention of corruption in lower
bureaucracy –
➣ To deal with the corruption complaints against
any employee of the Central Govt. except Group
A officers as mentioned above.
(e) 
Lokpal for prevention of corruption in SC/ST affairs–
➣ To deal with corruption cases related to Special
Component Plan for SCs, Tribal sub Plan (TsP)
for STs; implementation of reservation in jobs
(f) 
Lokpal for prevention of corruption in BC and Minority
affairs –
➣ To deal with the corruption cases related to the
implementation of Govt. policies for BC castes
and Minorities
(iii) 
Lokpal for inquiry against Private person** or
society or trust or company
(a) 
Lokpal for prevention of corruption in private body or
society or trust or company –-
➣ To deal with the any act or conduct of a private
person or a private body other than referred
above, associated with the allegation of corruption
under the PC Act, 1988.
relating to SCs/STs, OBCs and Minorities
are concerned, to deal with these, already
independent bodies like National Commission
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,
etc. are in place.
(iii) (a) & (b)  The provisions proposed in
the Lokpal Bill envisages to bring in its
ambit such of the societies, trusts etc. which
are receiving funds from the Government
and also received donations from the public.
Further, in order to tackle corruption by
private parties needs house etc. MHA in
consultation with the States is already
examining amendment to IPC. Section 12 of
the PC Act 1988 deals with the matters

544
➣ To deal with any act or conduct of any society
or association or trust or company or corporate
or private persons engaged or connected with
Government functions or performing any function
related with the public such as private sector,
NGOs or Media sector, Charitable-Religious
Trusts, and bodies dealing with public money.
➣ To deal with corruption complaints against any
Chairperson or member in any private body or
Board or corporation or authority or company or
society wholly financed by the private management
or controlled by it, MNCs, Media Companies,
Board of a company, Board of Directors of
company registered under the Companies Act or
any other related law for the time being in force.
➣ Any director, manager, secretary or other officer
of every other society or association of persons
or trust wholly or partly financed by the Govt.
or in receipt of money under the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Act or any donation
from public.
** Private Person –  means a person referred above; and
engaged or connected with Government functions or
performing any function related with the public such as
private sector, NGO, media sector, charitable trusts or
bodies, any organization or society or trust or private
company within the meaning of the Companies Act and
that deals with public money that is given by Govt. or
private persons.
12 3 4
connected with abetment of offences as
defined in section 7 or 11 of the PC Act
which may include bribe givers. Therefore,
the jurisdiction of the Lokpal as proposed in
Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.

545
(b) Lokpal for prevention of corruption in higher educational
institutions –
➣ To deal with the corruption cases against/in
Central Universities, IITs, IIMs and other premier
Govt. institutions and higher educational institutions
under the management of private persons like
Private universities, colleges etc.; and Vice
Chancellor, Director, Professors, Principals and
other teaching and non teaching employees of
academic institutions of central Govt. or private
management.
(c) 
Lokpal for dealing with cases of public grievances
and protection of whistleblowers –
➣ To deal with the matter relating to the public
grievances and protection of whistleblowers
including the complaints of non-implementation
of Citizens’ Charters.
(iv) Each Lokpal shall have five members, out whom at
least one shall be a SC/ST member and one shall be a
judicial Member.
(v) There shall be a Management Committee of the Multi
Lokpal comprising all the members and Chairpersons of
Lokpals, to supervise overall general administration of the
Multi Lokpal.
(vi) Management Committee of the Multi Lokpal by a
majority of vote shall have powers to direct any Lokpal:-
(a) to investigate a close of corruption against public
servant of State Govt. or private person or society
or trust or company operating within the
(iii) (c) For matters relating to public
grievances, a separate mechanism is required
to be set-up for which the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Pensions is
working on the same.
(iv) The structure and composition of the
Lokpal as proposed in the Bill is adequate.
(v) The affairs of the Lokpal are to be
managed by the Lokpal itself. The concept
of multi Lokpal is not feasible.
(vi) Giving directions to the Lokpal any sort
of management committee would mean to
curtail the powers and functions of the
Lokpal. The proposed provisions for inquiry
and investigation of complaints relating to
corruption are adequate.

546
jurisdiction of any State;
(b) to intervene or investigate a case referred in
clause (a) above even if it is investigated by
Lokayukta or any other State Govt. agency.
Jurisdiction
(i) PM shall be included in the ambit of Lokpal but will
remain excluded for all the matters connected with public
order, national security, foreign affairs and energy security.
Permission of CJI shall be must to investigate against
PM. MPs shall be included in the ambit of Lokpal except
any thing done or said on the floor of the House.
(ii) Judiciary shall be kept out of the purview of Lokpal
but shall be subject to a separate Judicial Accountability
and Standards Bill, which should be passed within six
months after this Act.
(iii) Lower Bureaucracy to be included in the ambit of
Lokpal.
(iv) NGOs, any society or association or trust (whether
registered or not) wholly or partly financed by the Govt.
or in receipt of any sums under the foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act or any donation from public.
12 3 4
(i) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(ii) The judiciary has been kept outside the
purview of the Lokpal.
(iii) If lower bureaucracy is also included
within the purview of the Lokpal, it will put
strain on the resources, and the Lokpal may
be over burdened.
(iv) The Bill contains the provisions to bring
such organizations under the purview of the
Lokpal.
198. K.C. Law College,
Dinshaw Bachha
Road, Churchgate,
Mumbai – 20

547
(v) CBI shall remain an independent agency and shall be
used by the Lokpal as Principal Investigative Agency as
and when directed by Lokpal. But for the purpose of
investigation against PM or a Minister or a member of
CBI, a separate investigation wing shall be set up directly
under the Lokpal.
(vi) There should be a model Lokayukta Bill for all the
States.
Whistleblower Protection and False complaints
(vii) All Whistleblower shall be given due protection if the
complaints are in good faith. The punishment for false/
frivolous complaints shall range from 6 months to 2
years and fine shall be Rs. 50000/- to 2 lakh.
Punishment for Corruption
(viii) Lokpal shall only be an investigative and prosecuting
body whereas for imposing penalties, Special courts will
be set up to try the corruption cases. All cases must be
completed within one year and extensions only for special
reasons.
Composition of Lokpal and Selection Committee
(ix) Lokpal shall consist of a chairperson and nineteen
members with at least eight judicial members. The
Chairperson and members shall be appointed by the
President on the recommendations of Selection Committee
consisting of:–
(v) The Bill provides for independent
Investigation Wing and Prosecution Wing by
the Lokpal. The Bill also provides the Lokpal
may utilize services of any Central or State
Government employee.
(vi) Setting up the institution of Lokayukta
falls within the domain of the States. Keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(vii) Protection to the Whistleblowers is to
be provided as the Whistleblowers Bill which
is under consideration of the Parliament.
(viii) The Bill provides that on completion of
the investigations, the Lokpal shall file report
with the Special Court for prosecution of
the corrupt public servant. Timelines have
been provided in the Bill to complete such
inquiry/investigation and action thereon.
[Clause 23-29].
(ix) The composition of the Lokpal and the
Selection Committee as proposed in the Bill
are adequate.

548
(a) PM as Chairperson (b) Former chairperson Lokpal
and in his absence the Speaker of Lok Sabha (c) Leader
of Opposition in Lok Sabha (d) CJI (e) One sitting Judge
of Supreme Court nominated by CJI (f) One sitting Chief
Justice of High Court nominated by CJI (g) Senior Most
National Professor of Law (h) Cabinet Secretary as
Secretary (i) CEC of India.
Powers
(x) Lokpal shall have the powers to punish for contempt
Lokpal to take permission from judiciary to tape the
phones and it would be kept secret
(i) The Role of Lokpal should be limited to monitoring of
Ministers, MPs, Secretaries of Govt. of India and Heads
of PSUs. PM to be excluded from its jurisdiction.
(ii) An anti-corruption cell selected by Lokpal from
amongst Govt. officials should be formed to investigate
offences against public servants under the Lokpal’s
purview.
(iii) Lokpal to supervise the functioning of the CBI
regarding offences under PC Act Performance appraisal
of Director CBI and CVC to be initiated by the Chairman
Lokpal.
12 3 4
(x) Clause 31 of the Bill provides that the
Lokpal shall have powers of Civil Courts in
certain cases such as summoning and
enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him; production of any documents;
receiving evidence as affidavits, etc. For
phone tapping, no such powers are envisaged
to be provided to the Lokpal as the existing
procedure for phone tapping is adequate.
(i) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as proposed
in the Bill is adequate.
(ii) The Bill provides for setting up of
independent Investigation Wing by the Lokpal.
The Bill also provides that the Lokpal may
utilize services of any of the Central or
State Government employees.
(iii) The Superintendence of the Delhi Special
Police Establishment (CBI) so far as it relates
to investigation of offences alleged to have
been committed under the Prevention of
199. Lok Jan Sakti Party

549
(iv) Lokpal Board to sanction the prosecution of public
servants under the Lokpal.
(v) Lokpal to be empowered to attach property or assets
acquired by corrupt means, to recommend cancellation of
lease, license or contract obtained by corrupt means and
to recommend to public authorities changes in work
practices to reduce the scope of corruption. Even Lokpal
to have contempt powers.
(vi) Lokpal should have constitution status like CEC and
with adequate representation of SCs, STs, Minorities,
OBCs and Women.
Complaints
(i) Complaints must in the form of affidavit. The
punishment for false complaints should not be of extreme
nature and penalty/punishment should not be harsh or
heavy.
(ii) False complaints to be distinguished from the failure
of the complainant to prove the complaint. Complaint and
name of the complainant and the person against the
complaint is made should not be publicized in media till
the final disposal by the Lokpal.
(iii) Lokpal should be exempted from the provisions of
the RTI.
Corruption Act, 1988, vest in the Central
Vigilance Commission and the existing
provisions are adequate.
(iv) The procedure for inquiry and
investigation as provided by the Bill are
adequate. The Lokpal, on completion of
investigations, shall file a report in the Special
Court through its Prosecution Wing.
(v) Clause 33 and 34 of the Bill provides for
attachment of property of corrupt public
servants.
(vi) The Department may not have any
objection for making Lokpal a constitutional
body.
(i) and (ii)  The rules for making complaints
are to be notified separately. The provisions
made in Clause 49 and 50 to deal with false
complaints are adequate. But, DOPT is open
to suggestions in this regard.
(iii) There are no justifications to exempt
the Lokpal from the provisions of the RTI.
200. Justice  R. J. Kochar,
Former Judge
Bombay High Court,
10 DG Chambers,
100-104 First Floor,
Nagindas Master
Road, Nanik
Motwani Lane, Fort,
Mumbai-01

550
Establishment of Lokpal
(iv) There will be three members Lokpal. No politician or
retired or bureaucrat should be a part of Lokpal. Tenure
should be 5 years and till the age of 75 years of age.
There must also be Dy. Lokpal.
(v) No Lokpal shall hold any office or post after ceasing
to work as Lokpal.
Jurisdiction
(vi) PM and Higher Judiciary to be excluded from the
ambit of Lokpal. PM’s Office should come under Lokpal.
Investigation
(vii) Lokpal should have its own independent investigation
Deptt. headed by a retired Police Commissioner and this
to be vested with all the required powers under CrPC.
(viii) Lokpal and Dy. Lokpal should be the prosecuting
authorities.
Other provisions
(ix) All the decisions/reports of the Lokpal must be
accepted and implemented by the Central/State Govts, as
the case may be, within a time frame not more than 3
months.
12 3 4
(iv) The composition of the Lokpal, the
tenure of the Chairperson and Members of
Lokpal and their eligibility conditions as
provided in the Bill are adequate.
(v) The restrictions on employment after
ceasing to Chairperson and Members of the
Lokpal as provided in the Clause 9 of the
Bill are adequate.
(vi) The Prime Minister and the judiciary is
not within the ambit of the Lokpal.
(vii) The Bill provides for setting up of an
independent Investigation Wing by the Lokpal
to investigate the cases.
(viii) On completion of investigations, the
Lokpal shall file a report in the Special Court
through its Prosecution Wing for prosecution
of the offending public servant.
(ix) The procedure for inquiry and
investigations of the complaints provides that
on completion of the inquiry/investigation the
shall file a report in the Special Court and
also send it to the competent authority for
taking disciplinary action as per the applicable
rules and a report has to be made to the

551
(x) There must be provision for Lokayukta and Dy.
Lokayukta in every State.
(xi) Lokpal should be financially independent under the
Constitution.
Clause 9(1)
(i) The provision of restriction of employment by
Chairperson and members after ceasing to hold should be
retained.
Clause 12, 13 and 14
(ii) the provisions for investigation wing are sufficient.
Clause 17
(iii) PM to be included in the Jurisdiction but to be excluded
in matters related to defence and security issues. The NGOs
receiving donation/aid from foreign countries and those
receiving donations from corporate/private sector companies,
of the amount not less than 5 crore too be brought under
the Lokpal apart from the NGOs aided by the Govt.
Lokpal by the competent authority of the
action taken in the matter. Timelines have
been provided in the Bill for various activities.
Further, during the course of inquiry the
Lokpal may also recommend suspension/
transfer of the accused public servant. Such
recommendations, normally, shall be accepted
by the concerned competent authority.
(x) Setting up of the institution of Lokayuktas
falls within the domain of the States keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(xi) The Bill provides that the expenses of
the Lokpal shall be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India. [Clause 16]
(i) This is in agreement to the provisions of
the Bill.
(ii) This is in agreement to the provisions of
the Bill.
(iii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
201. ABVP

552
Citizens’ Charter
(iv) All the Govt. offices must declare ‘Citizens’ Charter’
mentioning prescribed time schedules, procedure and
responsible officer for every service. A Group “A” should
be made responsible for the implementation of Citizens’
Charter equipped with the disciplinary authority on
employees for failures and failure of the charter to be
treated as corruption leading to prosecution of that Group
A officer under Lokpal.
Offences and Penalties
(v) The prescribed punishment for false complaints is
relatively more. Lokpal should promote and protect
common people to come forward to file complaints against
corruption and non-performing public servants. However,
the habitual false complainant after the five times repeatedly
doing so to be punished for misguiding Lokpal.
The punishment of upto 10 years imprisonment for the
corrupts is not sufficient and should be proportionate to
the rank of Public servant and volume of corruption, may
extended upto life imprisonment and stopping all the further
financial benefits of public servants.
12 3 4
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal. The organizations
receiving public donations and foreign
Contribution are already included in the Bill.
(iv) For matters relating to Public Grievance
or separate mechanism is required to be set-
up for which Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(v) The provisions made in Clause 49 and
50 to deal with the false complaints are
adequate. But DOPT is open to suggestions
in this regard. Further, the quantum of the
punishment provided in the Bill for various
offences seems to be adequate.

553
Protection to Whistleblowers
(vi) The Bill should have provisions for Whistleblowers.
Lokayukta
(vii) There must be Lokayuktas in every State.
Jurisdiction for Inquiry
(i) Lokpal should have powers to take suo moto cognizance
of the corruption, investigate and trial.
Jurisdiction
(ii) Corporate Sector/Corporates should be covered by
Lokpal to the extent they are involved in Collusive
Corruption like the Mining Scam in Andhra Pradesh and
2G Scam, and only in eventuality that such corrupt
practices can not be dealt by any other law in existence.
(iii) The ambit of Lokpal to extended to officers of all
rank and class. All the officers involved in initiating and
granting of Licenses and permissions must be covered
under Lokpal irrespective of the level.
(vi) Protection to the Whistleblowers is to
be provided as the Whistleblowers Bill which
is under consideration of the Parliament.
(vii) Setting up of the institution of
Lokayuktas falls within the domain of the
States keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for the
States to decide.
(i) The Bill does not provide such powers to
the Lokpal.
(ii) Section 12 of the PC Act 1988 deals
with the matters connected with abetment
of offences as defined in section 7 or 11 of
the PC Act which may include bribe givers.
In order to tackle corruption by private
parties needs house etc. MHA in consultation
with the States is already examining
amendment to IPC.
(iii) The Bill proposes to bring Group ‘A’
and equivalent officers within the ambit of
the Lokpal. If lower bureaucracy is also
included within the purview of the Lokpal, it
will put strain on the resources, and the
Lokpal may be over burdened.
202. Shri Arun Chawla,
Assistant Secretary
General, FICCI,
Federation House,
Tansen Marg, New
Delhi – 01.

554
Citizen’s Char ter
(iv) The huge delay in discharging public services to be
treated as corruption.
Definition of Corruption
(v) The definition to be widened by including “willfully
giving any undue benefit to any person or entity,
causing loss to the public exchequer and betraying
public trust.
Lokayukta
(vi) The Bill should provide for a uniform Lokayuktas in
the States just like the establishment of Information
Commissions through a single RTI Act.
Protection of Whistleblower
(vii) The Bill should have provisions for protection to
Whistleblowers, witnesses and victims of corruption by
concealing their identity etc. Reward may be considered
for whistleblowers.
Title
(i) The Act may be called “Effective Governance and
Counter Mechanism Bill”
12 3 4
(iv) For matters relating to Public Grievance
or separate mechanism is required to be set-
up for which Department of Administrative
Reforms and Pensions is working on the
same.
(v) The Bill provides that words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.
(vi) Setting up of the institution of
Lokayuktas falls within the domain of the
States keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for the
States to decide.
(vii) Protection to the Whistleblowers is to
be provided as the Whistleblowers Bill which
is under consideration of the Parliament.
(i) There is no need to change the name of
the present Bill.
203. Ms. Srishti Purohit,
R/o 33-C, Pocket-A,
G.T.B. Enclave,
Delhi – 93

555
Structure of Lok-Rakshak
(ii) The Institution of Lok-Rakshak shall consist of one
Chairperson and a vice chairman and 15 other members
and its officers and employees, it will be called as Lok-
Rakshak Committee. This committee will have proportionate
representation from minorities, SC/ST, OBC and women
(Gen – 7, SC/ST – 3, OBC – 2, Minorities – 2, Female
– 3).
Selection Committee
(iii) The Selection Committee chaired by Chief Justice of
Supreme Court shall consist of 5 senior most judges of
Supreme Court of India including Chief Justice and a
joint parliamentary committee (number of members to be
decided by Lok Sabha Speaker).
Functions of Lok-Rakshak
(iv) Lok-Rakshak shall be responsible for receiving:
(a) Complaints where there are allegations of such
acts of omission or commission which are
punishable under PC Act.
(b) Complaints of allegations of misconduct by a
govt. servant including complaints from whistle
blowers and grievances within the deptt. or
interdepartmental.
(v) Lok-Rakshak after getting such inquiries and
investigations done as it deem fit, may close the case, if
prima facie , the complaint is not made out or initiate
prosecution or impose appropriate penalties under CCS
conduct rules, order cancellation or modification of a
M.O.U. or license or lease or permission or contract or
(ii) The composition and structure of the
Lokpal as proposed in the Bill is adequate.
(iii) The composition of the Selection
Committee is adequate.
(iv) The powers and functions of the Lokpal
as given in the Bill are adequate. Regarding
protection to the Whistleblowers is to be
provided as the Whistleblowers Bill which is
under consideration of the Parliament. For
matters relating to Public Grievance or
separate mechanism is required to be set-up
for which Department of Administrative
Reforms & Pensions is working on the same.
(v) The provisions for inquiry and
investigations as given in the Bill are adequate.

556
agreement including blacklisting the concerned firm or
company or contractor or any other entity involved in
corruption. Invoking its powers under this Act on non
compliance of its orders.
(vi) Suo moto  initiate appropriate action under this Act
and take necessary action to provide protection to
whistleblowers.
(vii) Lok-Rakshak shall be deemed to be “Disciplinary
Authority” or “appointing authority” for the purpose of
imposing penalties under CCS Conduct rules.
(viii) Lok-Rakshak Committee shall be deemed to be
police officers for the purposes under section 36 of
CrPC.
Recovery of loss to the Government
(ix) The trial court will quantify the loss caused to the
govt. and aportion that amount to various convicts from
whom this money must be recovered as arrears of land
revenue.
Citizens’ Charter
(x) Each public authority shall be responsible for the
preparation and implementation of Citizens’ Charter, within
a reasonable time and to designate Public Grievance
Redressal Officer to look into the matter.
(xi) Lok-Rakshak to appoint CVO in each public authority
or govt. undertaking.
12 3 4
(vi) No such powers are envisaged in the
present Bill.
(vii) Functions of the disciplinary authority
and the appointing authority cannot be
delegated to other authorities.
(viii) Clause 13 of the Bill provides that the
Investigating Officers of the Lokpal shall
have police powers.
(ix) Clause 42 of the Bill provide for
assessment of loss and recovery thereof by
the Special Courts. The proposed provisions
are adequate.
(x) For matters relating to Public Grievance
or separate mechanism is required to be set-
up for which Department of Administrative
Reforms & Pensions is working on the same.
(xi) The existing provisions for appointment
of CVOs through CVC is adequate.

557
(xii) CVC Act shall stand repealed. All vigilance
administration under the control Deptt./Ministries of Central
Govt. or Corporates/PSU etc under the Govt. or established
under Central Act shall stand transferred with its
establishment to Lok-Rakshak for all the purposes.
(xiii) Lok-Rakshak shall rotate the personnel and create
vigilance wing of each deptt. and to ensure that no
personnel from the same department get posted for vigilance
functions in the same deptt.
Investigation Wing
(xiv) Lok-Rakshak shall have an investigation wing and
that part of Delhi Special Police Establishment, in so far
it relates to investigation and prosecution of offences
alleged to have been committed under PC Act, shall stand
transferred along with its staff and assets.
Delegation of Powers
(xv) Lok-Rakshak shall be competent to delegate its powers
and assign function to officials working under it.
Establishment of Lokpal
(i) The Lokpal shall have a Chairperson and 10 members,
appointed by the President on the recommendations of
the Selection Committee.
(xii) CVC has served the purpose and has
developed expertise in dealing with the cases
involving corruption. The measures to
strengthen CVC may have to be explored.
(xiii) This would amount to taking up the
administrative powers of the various
authorities, which may be counter productive
in controlling the officers.
(xiv) Since the Lokpal shall have its own
Investigation Wing, there is no need to merge
the any part of the CBI with the Lokpal.
(xv) Clause 37 of the Bill provides that the
Lokpal may direct that any administrative or
financial power conferred on it may also be
exercised or discharged by such of its
Members or officers or employees as may
be specified in the order.
(i) The structure of the Lokpal as provided
in the Bill is adequate.
204. Shri Vivek Garg,
Advocates
International, Shakti
Nagar, Delhi

558
Independent Complaint Authority
(ii) There shall be one or more complaints authority
consisting of 5 members under Lokpal to deal with the
complaints against any officer or staff of the Lokpal. The
Complaint Authority shall be chaired by retired High Court
Judge and shall have two retired civil servants and two
members from civil society.
Investigation and prosecution against High
Functionaries
(iii) No investigations or prosecution shall be initiated
without obtaining permission from a 7 member bench of
the Lokpal against the President, Vice President, Prime
Minister, any judge of Higher Judiciary or any recognized
political party of India.
Punishment & Penalty
(iv) After the completion of an investigation against any
government servant the Lokpal may either initiate
prosecution against such public servant or may initiate
proceedings for imposition of penalty or both.
(v) The punishment for any act of corruption shall not be
less than one year of rigorous imprisonment and may
extend upto life imprisonment.
.
Miscellaneous
(vi) The part of Delhi Special Police Establishment, dealing
12 3 4
(ii) The mechanism for complaints against
the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal;
and the complaints against the officers and
staff of the Lokpal as provided in Clause 40
and 41 of the Bill is adequate.
(iii) The procedure for inquiry and
investigation as given in Clause 23-29 of the
Bill is adequate.
(iv) After completion of an investigation, if
there is prima facie case against the accused
public servant, the Lokpal shall file a report
before the Special Court and it is for the
appropriate Courts to impose the penalties
etc.
(v) The quantum of punishment provided in
the Bill is adequate.
(vi) Since the Lokpal shall have its own

559
with investigation and prosecution of offences committed
under PC Act, shall stand transferred along with its staff
and assets and it will be a part of Lokpal Investigation
wing and the Govt. shall cease to have any control over
the DSPE in this matter.
The same suggestions/views are already submitted vide
Memorandum No. 199.
Selection Committee
(i) The Selection Committee shall consist of Prime Minister
(Chairperson), Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha, CJI,
CBI Director, CVC Director and CEC. The committee
shall have its own transparent selection procedure.
Investigation Wing
(ii) Lokpal shall have its own investigation wing and the
investigating officers shall have the Police Powers similar
to sub sections (2) & (3) of Section 5 of DSPE Act.
Judicial Bench of Lokpal
(iii) Powers of Lokpal shall be exercised through its
Judicial Benches/Courts. There will be three Judicial
Benches of Lokpal and each Bench shall have one
Chairperson and five members including one jurist.
(i) Lokpal Samiti shall have 5 tier system, i.e. Gram
Lokpal, Central/Ward Lokpal, District Lokpal, State Lokpal
and Centre Lokpal.
(ii) Central/Ward Lokpal Samiti shall monitor and control
the development work of amount upto Rs. 5 Crore.
205.
206.
207.
Shri Abdul Khaliq,
Lok Jan Shakti Party
Hansraj Jain,
Chairperson, JGM
Public School
Shri Tukaram Omkar
Jadhav, Distt.
Jalgaon, Maharashtra
Investigation Wing, there is no need to merge
the any part of the CBI with the Lokpal.
Separate comments are not required.
(i) The composition of the Selection
Committee as provided in the Bill is adequate.
(ii) The Bill provides for setting up of
Investigation Wing by the Lokpal and the
Bill provides that the Investigating Officers
of the Lokpal shall have police powers.
(iii) Clause 19 of the Bill provides for setting
up of Benches by the Lokpal.
(i) to (iv)  The structure and composition of
the Lokpal as provided in the Bill is adequate.
As regards the Lokpal at State or District
level is concerned, it is stated that setting
up of the institution of Lokayuktas falls
within the domain of the States keeping in
view the federal structure of our Constitution,
it may be left for the States to decide.

560
(iii) District Lokpal Samiti shall monitor and control the
development work of amount from Rs. 5 crore.to
Rs. 100 crore.
(iv) State Lokpal Samiti shall monitor and control the
development work of amount upto Rs. 100 crore to
Rs. 1000 crore.
(v) Centre Lokpal Samiti shall monitor and control the
development work of amount upto Rs. 1000 Crore &
above.
(vi) The public money shall be utilized under the control
and monitoring of the concerned Lokpal Samiti in their
respective area of jurisdiction. The Lokpal Samities shall
monitor the activities of the Govt. servants to ensure that
they are working honestly.
Lokayukta in States
(i) A uniform institution of Lokayukta to be set up in each
State through this Act incorporating the similar provisions
for Lokayukta in the States to deal with public servants
in the respective states.
Selection Committee
(ii) The Selection Committee shall consist of PM
(Chairperson), Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha, two
Judges of Supreme Court and two permanent Chief
Justices of the High courts selected by collegium of the
Supreme Court, CEC, C&AG and last three Chairperson
of Lokpal.
12 3 4
(v) The function of the Lokpal is to enquire
into the allegations of corruption against
certain public functionaries and not to
monitor and control development work.
(i) Setting up of the institution of Lokayuktas
falls within the domain of the States keeping
in view the federal structure of our
Constitution, it may be left for the States to
decide.
(ii) The composition of the Selection
Committee as provided in the Bill is adequate.
208. Representatives of
Team Anna

561
CBI
(iii) The DSPE shall stand transferred along with its
employees and assets to the Lokpal and it will form the
investigation wing of Lokpal.
Jurisdiction
(iv) The entire bureaucracy must be covered within the
purview of Lokpal Judiciary may be brought under the
purview of anti corruption system through a separate Bill.
“Minister” to be defined as means a Union Minister.
Independence and autonomy of Lokpal
(v) Lokpal shall have administrative, financial and functional
independence from the Govt. Lokpal shall have the powers
to make rules for the terms and conditions of service of
officers and staff of Lokpal and shall have the powers of
the recruit judicial officers, prosecutors, senior counsels
etc.
Independent Complaints Authority
(vi) In  each State, one or more complaints authority
would be established by the Lokpal to entertain complaints
against any officer or staff of the Lokpal. A similar
authority at National level to be made.
(iii) The Lokpal shall have its own
Investigation Wing. Further, the CBI
investigates the cases other than the
corruption cases, hence the existence of the
CBI is also required. Therefore, the CBI
need not be merged with the CBI.
(iv) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
in Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.
(v) To make Lokpal independent, the Bill
provides that the expenses of the Lokpal
shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund
of India. Further Clause 61 of the Bill
provides that the conditions of service of
the secretary and other officers and staff of
the Lokpal and the matters which in so far
as they relate to salaries, allowances leave
or pensions, require the approval of the
President. Hence, the existing provisions are
adequate.
(vi) Clause 41 of the Bill provides for
provisions relating to complaints against the
officers and staff of the Lokpal.

562
Punishment for frivolous or malafide complaints
(vii) Lokpal may impose such fines on frivolous/ malafide
complaints as it deems fit but total fine in any case shall
not exceed Rs. One lakh.
Suo motu  Action
(viii) Lokpal shall have powers to initiate suo motu
appropriate action under the Act on receipt of any
information form any source.
Compliance of Orders
(ix) A Lokpal bench may punish a public servant with
imprisonment up to 6 months or with fine or both, if it
fails to comply with its orders for ensuring their
compliance.
Phone Tapping
(x) Lokpal Bench shall be deemed to be designated
authority to allow phone tapping etc for the purpose of
investigation of offences of corruption under Section 5 of
Indian Telegraph Act.
Punishments
(xi) For any act of corruption, the punishment shall not
be less than six months of rigorous imprisonment and
may extend upto life imprisonment.
12 3 4
(vii) The provisions made in clause 49 and
50 of the Bill to deal with false complaints
are adequate. However, DOPT is open to
suggestion in this regard.
(viii) The Bill does not provide such powers
to the Lokpal.
(ix) Clause 31 of the Bill  provides that the
Lokpal shall have powers of Civil Courts in
certain cases such as summoning and
enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him; production of any documents;
receiving evidence as affidavits, etc.
(x) The powers for phone tapping are not
envisaged for the Lokpal. The existing system
of phone tapping is adequate.
(xi) The quantum of punishment provided in
the Bill is  adequate.

563
Jurisdiction
(i) Higher judiciary to be kept out of Lokpal. PM may be
included but with specific safeguards. MPs for corruption
cases whether outside or inside the Parliament to be
included in the jurisdiction of the Lokpal.
(ii) Whole bureaucracy not be brought under the Lokpal
as suggested by Jan Lokpal.
(iii) The Lokpal to have jurisdiction beyond PC Act and
also to cover offences under sections 166-177 of IPC.
Also NGOs to be brought under the Lokpal.
CVC & CBI
(iv) CVC & CBI not to be merged with Lokpal. Lokpal
to have supervisory powers not control in matters linked
with corruption as High Court have the powers under
article 227 of the Constitution.
209. Gandhi Seva &
Satyagraha Brigade,
Lajpat Nagar, New
Delhi
(i) The judiciary has been kept out side the
purview of the Lokpal. As regards the Prime
Minister, it is to seen that in the context of
the Indian polity, the Prime Minister occupies
a pivotal position in the Governments’ set
up. To ensure that Prime Minister is able to
discharge his functions without any
interference from any quarter, it is felt that
the Prime Minister may be kept outside the
purview of the Lokpal. However, after the
Prime Minister has demitted the office, he
will come within the purview of the Lokpal.
Further, in view of the Constitutional
provisions, the conduct of the MPs on the
floor of the House has to kept out side the
purview of the Lokpal.
(ii) The do not proposes to bring whole of
the bureaucracy under the ambit of the
Lokpal.
(iii) The Lokpal shall be enquiring into the
allegations of corruption against certain public
functionaries. The NGOs which financed by
the government, or are in receipt of
donations, and foreign contributions are
covered under the Lokpal.
(iv) The provisions of the Bill do not envisage
merger of the CVC and CBI with the Lokpal.

564
Uniform Lokayukta Legislation
(v) The Lokpal bill should not cover the Lokayukta concept
but a uniform Lokayukta Legislation in all States can be
made compulsory by Central Legislation as in case of
Human Rights Act.
Suggestions specific to Govt. Lokpal Bill
(vi) Lokpal to have adequate powers to search and seizure
documents and property on pattern of section 10 of
Karnataka Lok Ayukta Act.
(vii) Section 49, 50, 51 to be deleted.
(viii) There should also be discussion on the Lokpal
Report and the findings and recommendations of Lokpal
should have finality and should be binding on Govt.
12 3 4
(v) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(vi) Clause 30 of the Bill provides for powers
of the Lokpal to search and seizure.
(vii) Clause 49 and 50 of the Bill provides
for action against false complaints. However,
it is felt that there is scope for improvement
in these provisions. Further, Clause 51 of
the bill Protection of action taken in good
faith by any public servant, which, it is felt
is necessary to prevent unnecessary
victimization of the public servants.
(viii) The Lokpal shall, on completion of the
investigations, file report before the Special
Courts, and also give it to the competent
authority, for taking disciplinary authority for
taking action under the applicable rules.

565
Jurisdiction
(i) Judges of Higher Judiciary not be brought under
Lokpal. PM not be included in Lokpal Jurisdiction but if
included the following provision to be made under section
17(1 )(a) :–
Provided that specific allegations with prima facie evidence
against the serving PM may be enquired into by the
Lokpal, if referred by a two-third the Lokpal Committee
to a sanctioning committee comprising Vice President,
Speaker of Lok Sabha and Leader of Opposition in Lok
Sabha if this committee on the basis of the evidence
available sanctions the enquiry.
(ii) Section 17(1) (g) and 17(2) to be removed.
(iii) All the Chief Ministers of the States should be under
Lokpal (preferably) or the Lokayukta.
Lokayuktas in S tates
(iv) A Chapter should be incorporated in the Lokpal Bill
dealing with Lokayuktas and Local ombudsman under
Article 253. Lokayukta should have powers to appoint
local ombudsman for each district and city to deal with
the Govt. matters and lower bureaucracy under the
supervision of Lokayukta.
Seamless integration of CVC
(v) CVC (Chairman + 2 members) should be ex-officio
members of Lokpal, and should be appointed in the same
manner as Lokpal. CVC will perform all functions as
envisaged under law, except that the allegations against
Group A officers and above will be referred to the Lokpal.
(i) to (iii) The jurisdiction as given in Clause
17 of the Bill is adequate.
(iv) The Chief Ministers of the States are to
be covered under the Lokayuktas. Setting
up of the institution of Lokayuktas falls
within the domain of the States keeping in
view the federal structure of our Constitution,
it may be left for the States to decide.
(v) The composition and structure of the
Lokpal as provided in the Bill is adequate.
210. Foundation for
Democratic Reforms
and Lok Satta

566
(vi) Section 10 of PC Act should be amended empowering
CVC.
(vii) Section 6A of DSPE Act should be repealed.
Investigating Agencies
(viii) CVC to exercise superintendence over CBI. CBI to
be divided in Crime Investigation Wing and Anti Corruption
wing and the Anti Corruption wing should be accountable
to CVC and not to the Govt.
(ix) In states, ACB will be directly under Lokayukta
supervision and accountable to it.
(x) Lokpal/Lokayukta to appoint independent prosecutors
to prosecute all corruption cases.
False Complaints
(xi) Moreover, the penalty specified in this clause is
harsher than that stipulated in PC Act.
Citizens’ Empowerment
(xii) Citizens’ charter to be enacted by law in the lines of
Public Service Guarantee Act enacted by the States of
Bihar and MP.
12 3 4
(vi)
(vii) Clause 27 of the Bill provides that
previous sanction not necessary for
investigation and initiating prosecution by
Lokpal in certain cases. However, sanction
would be required where CBI initiates cases
on its own.
(viii) The existing provisions of the
supervision of CVC over CBI are adequate.
(ix) It is for the State Governments to
decide.
(x) The Bill provides for setting up of the
Prosecution Wing by the Lokpal.
(xi) The provisions made in Clause 49 and
50 to deal with false complaints are adequate.
But, DOPT is open to suggestions in this
regard.
(xii) For matters relating to Public Grievance
or separate mechanism is required to be set-
up for which Department of Administrative
Reforms & Pensions is working on the same.

567
Clause 2 (1)(i)
(i) It is believed that there is no legal or moral justification
in excluding the Prime Minister from the purview of the
Lokpal Bill. However, we recognize that public and national
interest requires some safeguards. Thus, the clause should
be, “Minister means a Union Minister and includes the
Prime Minister”.
Clause 3
(ii) Suggestion: Broaden the eligibility criteria of those
who can become Chairperson and Members. As there is
no justification in restricting the position to judges, the
eligibility criteria for the chairperson must be widened to
include person otherwise qualified to be a member of the
Lokpal. Preference would be given to a member of the
Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or to a woman.
Clause 4 (1)
(iii) In the existing committee five out of nine members
would be either part of ruling party and/or of the Central
Government. To have a balance between the Government,
the Opposition and the Judiciary, the Selection Committee
may consist of the PM (as Chairperson), the Leader of
the opposition in the House of the People and one sitting
Judge of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the
Chief Justice of India (as members).
Clause 4(3)-(6)
(iv) Normally, Selection Committees do not have the time
to search out appropriate candidates leaving the final
selection to be done by dealing department resulting in
selection of inadequate and/or inappropriate set of choices.
Therefore, there should be a search committee to assist
the Selection Committee with members drawn from Chief
211. National Campaign
for People’s Right to
Information (NCPRI),
New Delhi.
(i) There is no need to change the definition
of the Minister as provided in the Bill.
(ii) The eligibility criteria for selection as
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal as
provided in the Bill are adequate.
(iii) The composition of the Selection
Committee as given in the Bill is adequate.
(iv) The provision for process of selection
of the Chairperson and Members and setting
up of Search Committee are adequate.

568
Justice of India, Judges of Supreme Court, CAGs, CECs,
CICs, former/outgoing Chairpersons of the Lokpal and
former members of the Lokpal.
(v) It may be ensured that minorities, women and weaker
sections of the society are represented in the search
committee, short listed candidates and appropriately
considered for membership of the Lokpal - in a transparent
and participatory manner so as to minimize the chances
of wrong sorts of people getting in.
Clause 8-Addition of 8(1) and 8(2)
(vi) The independence of Lokpal would be compromised
if there is any other authority involved in the removal
process. As the Lokpal would be responsible for
investigating the executive, to give the power to the
executive to remove Lokpal would lead to conflict of
interest. The involvement of Supreme Court would further
ensure transparency in the process of removal. Thus the,
following two sub-classes would be amended:
“8(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the
Chairperson or any other Member shall be removed from
his office by order of the President on grounds of
misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, on a complaint
made to it has, on inquiry, held in accordance with the
procedure prescribed in that behalf, advised that the
Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be
ought to be removed on such ground.
(2) The President may suspend from office the
Chairperson or any other Member in respect of whom a
complaint has been made to the Supreme Court under
sub-section (1), if the Chief Justice of India so advises,
until the President has passed orders on receipt of the
12 3 4
(v) There is no concept of representation
minorities, women and weaker sections in
such institutions.
(vi) The provisions for removal and
suspension of Lokpal as provided in the Bill
are adequate.

569
report of the Supreme Court on such a complaint.”
Clause 17 (1) Jurisdiction of Lokpal on PM
(vii) The jurisdiction of Lokpal shall include incumbent
Prime Minister unless a reference has been made by a full
bench of the Lokpal to the Chief Justice of India and that
CJI has constituted a full bench of the Supreme Court
which examined the complaint and the relevant grounds
and evidence and come to the conclusion that such an
investigation is warranted.
Provided further that complaints regarding actions done
by others where the Prime Minister is not directly involved
but can only be held responsible as the head of the
Government or Cabinet would not be entertained (no
vicarious liability).
Provided further that where the Prime Minister would but
be held liable for non disclosure of information asked for
by the Lokpal as a part of an investigation when in the
opinion of the Prime Minister such disclosure might
compromise national security or other critical national
interests. The Prime Minister would be obliged to brief
the CJI in confidence, whose decision on whether the
information should be disclosed to the Lokpal and if so,
under what conditions, would be final.
(viii) To declare office bearers of NGOs and movements
that do not receive any Government funds as public
servants is neither desirable nor practicable. Hence, those
receive any form of concession, including tax, land or
rental, and those receive foreign funds should be covered
by an amendment to the PC Act.
(vii) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(viii) The provisions in the Bill to include
such of the NGOs who are in receipt of
government funds, donations and foreign
contribution under the ambit of Lokpal are
adequate.

570
Clause 17 (2)
(ix) The concession to MPs is unjustified but as its
deletion would involve amendment to the Constitution,
there should be a Government undertaking to move an
amendment within a year.
Clause 21
(x) This would give enormous power to the Chairperson
which could be used arbitrary to the determent of justice
or of members of Lokpal. This clause needs to be deleted.
Clause 23(4)
(xi) Opportunity of being heard. This need not be a
statutory right of the accused at this stage as this is not
provided under any other criminal procedure. However,
there is nothing to stop Lokpal from hearing an accused
at any stage.
Clause 24
(xii) This needs to be deleted as the accused would in
any case have the right to obtain information under RTI.
Clause 38 (2)
(xiii) The Law should not create a situation where if there
is delay that becomes a basis for the case being closed.
Hence, the clause should include:
“Provided that no case would be closed on the basis of
the trial not having been completed within two years”.
12 3 4
(ix) The provisions made in the Bill are in
conformity with the Constitutional provisions
as contained in Article 105 (2) of the
Constitution.
(x) The apprehensions of the petitioner are
unfounded. It is felt that such powers are
required to ensure smooth functioning of
the Lokpal.
(xi) This is very much justified as the
protection available to public servants under
the provisions of the prior sanctions is
removed.
(xii) A system has to be provided in the Act
itself to provide for inspection of documents
etc. to the accused person.
(xiii) & (xiv) The Bill provides the time line
within which the trial should be completed.
The proposed provisions are adequate.

571
38 (3)
(xiv) If a trial is not completed within a period of two
years, a mandatory reference would have to be made to
the High Court which shall examine the matter and pass
such directions as it deems fit.
Clause 40
(xv) To keep Lokpal independent of Central Government,
these powers and functions related to complaints against
Members of the Lokpal be given to the Supreme Court.
Thus complaints be made to and acted upon by the CJI
under 40(2) and 40(3).
Clause 41(2)
(xvi) In keeping with the philosophy that no institution
should be wholly responsible for investigating and
prosecuting its own officers in matter related to corruption,
an alternate system of Ombudsman appointed for the
purpose by an independent committee be replaced in
clause 41(2) to 41(4).
Clause 49 (1)
(xvii) As it is impossible to objectively define “frivolous”
or “vexatious”, they may be replaced with “ malafide and
false complaints, with malicious intent”. The penalty would
be “with fine which shall not be less than five thousand
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees”.
Clause-56
(xviii) In order to insure that the innocent do not have to
spend large amounts of money that they cannot afford,
the following condition may be added: –
(xv) The provisions for complaints against
the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal
as provided in Clause 40 are adequate.
(xvi) The provisions for complaints against
the officers and staff of the Lokpal as
provided in Clause 41 are adequate.
(xvii) The provisions as contained in Clause
49 of the Bill to deal with false complaints
are adequate. But, DOPT is open for
suggestions in this regard.
(xviii) Clause 56 of the Bill provides for
legal assistance to such person, who make
request for the same. DOPT is open for

572
“Provided that where the accused is finally found
guilty of any of the charges made against him by the
special court provided for in the Act, and subject to
further appeals, the accused would be required to
refund the total cost of the assistance so provided.
In exceptional circumstances where the Lokpal so
determines that the recovery of such dues might
result in unwarranted hardship to the accused or his
family, the amount can be adjusted against confiscation
of property as specified under sections 33 and 34”.
Amendment to Pr evention of Corruption Act
(xix) In order to strengthen the efficacy of anti-corruption
measures in relation to the private sector, including NGOs,
it is recommended that .the Prevention of Corruption Act
be amended and in section 12 a sub-clause be added,
ensuring that:
“Where any person including a private body,
corporation or profit seeking entity, or any NGO
receives from any public authority any grants,
concession or dispensation, including licenses,
subsidies, contracts, orders, quotas, allocations and
clearances and such receipt or its subsequent disposal
is in violation of the law or of any prevailing rules,
such an entity would be deemed to have abetted
corrupt practices and also deemed to have indulged
in corrupt practices”.
12 3 4
suggestions in this regard.
(xix) Section 12 of the PC Act 1988 deals
with the matters connected with abetment
of offences as defined in section 7 or 11 of
the PC Act which may include bribe givers.
In order to tackle corruption by private
parties needs house etc. MHA in consultation
with the States is already examining
amendment to IPC. Further, Prevention of
Bribery of Foreign Public Officials of Public
International Organizations, Bill 2011 is under
consideration of the Parliament.

573
Competence of Parliament to legislate on matters
relating to Lokpal, Lokayukta and Grievance Redress.
(i) A Central law for establishment of Lokpal at the
Centre and Lokayuktas at States be considered for
enactment under Article 246 read with Entries 1, 2 and
11A in List-III of the Constitution.
Lokayukta in Jammu and Kashmir
(ii) Parliament does not have the legislative competence to
make a law requiring the State to establish a Lokayukta-
type institution. However, such a law may be extended to
J&K at the request of the J&K State Legislature.
(i) Any law like Lokpal only could control slightly
corruption of lower level and effective provisions are
required in the Bill to install powerful vigilance over the
big industrial houses to combat corruption at higher level.
(ii) The present Bill will only burden on tax-payers and
would not be able to combat corruption.
(iii) To solve problem of political financing and election
funding, electoral reforms are the need of the day.
212.
213.
Commonwealth
Human Rights
Initiative (CHRI)
(Shri Venkatesh
Nayak)
Shri Bharat Gandhi
Political reformer and
author.
(i) & (ii) Setting up of the institution of
Lokayuktas falls within the domain of the
States keeping in view the federal structure
of our Constitution, it may be left for the
States to decide.
(i) The Lokpal is to enquire into allegations
of corruption against certain public
functionaries. The provisions made in the
Bill in this regard are adequate. Further,
Section 12 of the PC Act 1988 deals with
the matters connected with abetment of
offences as defined in section 7 or 11 of the
PC Act which may include bribe givers. In
order to tackle corruption by private parties
needs house etc. MHA in consultation with
the States is already examining amendment
to IPC.
(ii) There is no doubt that a need is being
felt that the institution like Lokpal is required
for combating menace of corruption in public
life.
(iii) This is an issue requiring examination
by the concerned Department.

574
(iv) Definition of corruption in the Lokpal Bill should be
improved.
(v) The post of Prime Minister should come under Lokpal.
(vi) The Lokpal must be elected. Only Chief Justice of
Supreme Court on election should occupy Lokpal. There
should be participation of SC/ST and OBC. Provision
should be made to enquire taking cognizance in matters
of charitable trust, voluntary organizations and political
parties who are taking various concessions like tax, land,
funds, etc. from the Government. There should be vice
Lokpal for the vigilance of the international parking of
funds, international exchange of black money, artificial
international dearness, and unemployment created by
international competition, international terrorism etc.
(i) 
Clause 1 (3) May be substituted with- It shall come
into force on such date on the day the President accords
his assent.
(ii) 
Clause 3 (2)  The Lokpal shall consist of Chief
Justice of India or a Judge of Supreme Court as Chairman,
12 3 4
(iv) The Bill provides that words of
expression not defined in this Act but advised
in PC Act 1988 shall have the same as
assigned to them in that Act.
(v) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(vi) The composition and selection procedure,
jurisdiction of the Lokpal as provided in the
Bill is adequate.
(i) The existing provision in the Bill is
adequate.
(ii) The composition and structure of the
Lokpal as provided in the Bill is adequate.
214. Rajeev Dhavan
and PILSARC

575
a Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice of a High Court
as Member and a Member who has special interest,
knowledge or expertise in matters relating to anti-corruption
policy, public administration, vigilance, finance and
management with impeccable integrity.
(iii) 
Clause 4  (1) The Selection Committee shall consist
of the PM (Chairperson), ex-officio Chairman of Council
of States, Speaker of Lok Sabha, Leader of Opposition in
Lok Sabha and one sitting judge of Supreme Court
nominated by CJI in consultation with the other judges.
(iv) 
Clause 15(1) Substitute the word ‘may’ with ‘shall’.
(v) Clause 17 (1) (a)  Shall include the incumbent Prime
Minister.
(vi) Clause l7 (1) (d) (i)  Any other class of employees
of the Union of India (other than Group A officers) as
notified by the Government Of India in consultation with
the Lokpal.
(vii) 
Clause l7 (1) (3) The Provision for the consent of
the State Government to take action on a person serving
in connection with the affairs of the State may be deleted.
(iii) The composition of the Selection
Committee as proposed in the Bill is adequate.
(iv) The suggestion may be accepted.
(v) In the context of the Indian polity, the
Prime Minister occupies a pivotal position in
the Governments’ set up. To ensure that
Prime Minister is able to discharge his
functions without any interference from any
quarter, it is felt that the Prime Minister
may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal. However, after the Prime Minister
has demitted the office, he will come within
the purview of the Lokpal.
(vi) The jurisdiction of the Lokpal as given
in the Clause 17 of the Bill is adequate.
(vii) The existing provision in the Bill is
adequate.

576
(viii) Clause 19, 20 and 21 to be deleted
(ix) Clause 23 May be substituted with a new clause to
include the following:–
1. A complaint shall be vetted by a single member
to ascertain if it falls within the jurisdiction of
Lokpal.
2. If found within the jurisdiction, the Lokpal, shall
consider whether prima facie  case is made out
for further investigation to be carried out by an
officer from the investigation wing who shall
deemed to have all the powers of an officer in-
charge of a police station.
3. Following investigation; if the Lokpal feels that a
case is made out, it shall give notice to a person(s)
implicated to be heard with a copy of investigation
report.
4. Following the inquiry, the Lokpal may
a) reject the complaint: or
b) order that a chargesheet be filed: and
c) send a report to competent authority
recommending course of action.
12 3 4
(viii) The existing provisions for constitution
of Benches of the Lokpal [Clause 19],
Powers of Chairperson to transfer cases
[Clause 20]; and Decision by majority
[Clause 21] are required for efficient and
effective working of the Lokpal.
(ix) The provisions relating to complaints
and inquiry and investigation as given in
Clause 23 of the Bill are adequate.

577
5. Lokpal may, at any stage, pass appropriate orders
for safe custody of the documents relevant to
the inquiry as it deems fit.
6. The status of complaints received, pending and
disposed off by Lokpal shall be displayed on its
website.
7. The Lokpal may withhold the records and
evidence, which are likely to impede the process
of inquiry or conduct of a case by it or by the
Special Court.
8. The manner and procedure of conducting inquiry/
investigation shall be as specified regulations.
(x) 
Clause 47 (1) May be substituted with:–
1. Every public servant, including all those employed
in public sector bodies that constitute ‘state’ within
article 12 of the Indian Constitution shall make a
declaration of his assets and liabilities in the manner
as provided by or under this Act.
(xi) 
Clause 54 Substitute the period of ‘seven years’
with ‘three years’ with the following provisos: -
(i) Provided that no complaint shall be entertained in
respect of the period prior to the commencement
of the Act.
(ii) Provided further that nothing shall bar the Lokpal
form inquiring into a complaint as referred to
under section 54 (1) beyond three years for
special reasons to be stated in writing.
(x) The provisions provided in the Bill for
declaration of assets by the Public Servants
are adequate.
(xi) The limitation period of seven years
provided in the Bill is adequate.

578
(xii) Clause 58 to be deleted.
(xiii) As per Article-253 Parliament has power to make
any law for the whole or any part of territory of India
for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention
with any other country etc. this is strengthened by
Schedule List-2 Entries 13 & 14.
We should consider not just on the unconstitutionality
but also the constitution impropriety to develop a
constitutional morality.
While the Lokpal falls under List-l Entry 70, the
Lokayuktas would fall under List-2 Entry 41. It would
be both unconstitutional and improper to legislate for
Lokayuktas
(i) The proposed Lokpal shall be made a constitutional
body like Election Commission.
Clause 4 (1) (h)
(ii) One eminent jurist nominated by Central Government
be replaced with CVC.
12 3 4
(xii) The Lokpal Bill is meant to provide for
an institution to enquire into the allegations
of corruption against certain public
functionaries. These provisions are in addition
to the existing laws. Hence, retention of this
clause is required.
(xiii) The Department may not have any
objection for making Lokpal a constitutional
body. It is felt that the Parliament is
competent to pass such law.
(i) The Department may not have any
objection for making Lokpal a constitutional
body.
(ii) The composition of the Selection
Committee as provided in the Bill is adequate.
215. National Student’s
Union of India
(NSUI)

579
Clause 1 1 (1)
(iii) The appointment of Secretary, other officers and
staff of Lokpal shall be made by Chairman or such
officers as the Chairman may direct provided the President
may by rule require that such appointments be made after
consultation with UPSC/SSC.
Clause 17(e)
(iv) The Provision for the consent of the State Government
to take action on a person serving in connection with the
affairs of the State is not necessary. Instead Lokpal shall
initiate inquiry against such officers by intimating State
Government.
Clause 49
(v) The Bill is too harsh on frivolous complaints. Whistle
blowers might be deterred from making complaints fearing
harsh repercussion if they are unable to convince the
court. Hence the penalty be reduced.
(i) The aspect of clear and transparent process of
allocation of resources may be covered.
(ii) Policy decisions taken in good faith and the public
interest must be encouraged and promoted without any
fear of victimization.
(iii) To enable our legislature and bureaucracy to take
bold and innovative decisions, the conduct that is prohibited
by the statute and subject to investigation be precisely
and exacted defined without any ambiguity. The Prevention
(iii) The provisions made in the Bill are
adequate.
(iv) The existing provision in the Bill is
adequate.
(v) The provisions made in clause 49 of
the Bill to deal with false complaints are
adequate. However, DoPT is open to
suggestion in this regard.
(i) The Lokpal is meant to enquire into the
allegations of corruption, and any act falling
under this category shall be looked into by
the Lokpal.
(ii) Clause 51 of the Bill provides for
protection of action taken in good faith by
any public servant.
(iii) The Bill provides that words and
expressions used but not defined in this Act
but defined in PC Act, 1988, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in that Act.
216. ASSOCHAM India
New Delhi

580
of Corruption Act may be suitably amended.
(iv) Corporate may be encouraged to come forward with
the deviant practices by a strong whistle blower mechanism
with the necessary protection from victimization and
harassment.
(v) As necessary safeguards exists to curb false and
malicious complaints, the proposed mechanism of awarding
prison sentences need reconsideration.
(vi) Judiciary may be kept outside the purview of the
Lokpal Bill.
12 3 4
(iv) The matters relating to Whistleblowers
are covered under the Whistleblowers Bill,
which is under consideration of the
Parliament.
(v) The provisions made in clause 49 and
50 of the Bill to deal with false complaints
are adequate. However, DoPT is open to
suggestion in this regard.
(vi) The judiciary has been kept outsider the
purview of the Lokpal.

581
ANNEXURE-D
[Vide Para 2.5 of the Report]
STATUS NOTE ON THE LOKPAL BILL, 2011
4th August, 2011 – Bill introduced in Lok Sabha.
8th August, 2011 – Referred to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances. Law and Justice by Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha.
10
th August, 2011 – I. Presentation by the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
on the Bill.
II. Oral evidence of :–
(i) Anna Hazare;
(ii) Shanti Bhushan,
(iii) Prashant Bhushan;
(iv) Arvind Kejriwal; and
(v) Kiran Bedi.
23
th September, 2011 – Oral evidence of :–
(i) Shrimati Aruna Roy, National Campaign for People’s Right to
Information; and
(ii) Shri Jayaprakash Narayan, President, Lok Satta Party
24th September, 2011 – Oral evidence of :–
(i) Shri Jayaprakash Narayan, President, Lok Satta Party;
(ii) Shri Ashok Kumar Parija, Chairman, Bar Council of India;
(iii) Shri Pratap Bhanu Mehta, President, Centre for Policy Resarch,
New Delhi;
(iv) Shri Harish N. Salve, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India;
and
(v) Dr. Udit Raj, President, Indian Justice Party.
1
st October, 2011 – Oral evidence of :–
(i) Central Vigilance Commissioner: and
(ii) Director, CBI.
581

582
13th October, 2011 – Oral evidence of :–
(i) Justice M.N. Venkatachalaiah, Former Chief Justice of India; and
(ii) Justice J.S. Verma, Former Chief Justice or India.
14th October, 2011 – Oral evidence of :–
(i) Confeteration of India Industry
(ii) FICCI
(iii) ASSOCHAM
21
st October, 2011 – Oral evidence of :–
(i) National Commission for Scheduled Castes
(ii) Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Right’s
(iii) Federation for Economic Freedom
(iv) United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
(v) Transparency International India
(vi) PRS Legislative Research
(vii) Akhil Bhartiya Vidhyarthi Parishad (ABVP)
(viii) Shri P.S. Krishnan (IAS Retd.)
(ix) Indian Social Institute
(x) Gandhian Sewa and Satyagraha Brigade
(xi) Bharat Raksha Manch
(xii) All India Council of Human Rights, Liberties & Social Justice
(xiii) Consumer Online Foundation
(xiv) Public Interest Legal Support and Research Centre (PILSARC)
(xv) Shri J.B. Mohapatra, former Joint Secretary, Judges Inquiry Committee
(xvi) Civil Society for Truth
(xvii) Confederation of All India Traders
(xviii) 1. Ms. Sandhya Jain, Journalist; and
2. Shri Rohit Srivastava, Journalist.
(xix) Shri Ranjit Singh
(xx) Akhil Bhartiya Sant Samiti
(xxi) Editors Guild of India

583
3rd November, 2011 – Oral evidence of:-
(i) Civil Society headed by Anna Hazare
(ii) NSUI
4
th November, 2011 – Further interaction/Question and Answer Session with Civil Society
headed by Anna Hazare.
14th November, 201 1 – In-house Discussion.
15th November, 201 1 – In-house Discussion.
24th November, 201 1 – In-house Discussion.
30th November, 2011 – In-house Discussion on Draft Report
1st December, 2011 – In-house Discussion on Draft Report
7th December, 2011 – Consideration and adoption of the Draft Report.

584
ANNEXURE-E
[Vide Para 7.21 of the Report]
OPINION OF JUSTICE J.S. VERMA
As desired on behalf of the Standing Committee of the Parliament, I reiterate my views expressed
personally before it on 13 October 2011, and answer the specific issues addressed to me for my
response.
Preface
I am of the firm view that the unanimous demand of the people as well as the avowed commitment
of all political parties for a strong Lokpal can be best met by conferring constitutional status to
the proposed Lokpal for the Union and the Lokayuktas for the States, akin to the Election
Commission and the Union Public Service Commission/State Public Service Commissions. To avoid
any delay in making the needed constitutional amendment for the purpose, the Constitution
Amendment Bill must eschew any contentious issue (all of which can be addressed in the
consequent legislation with all details) containing only the bare minimum required for the purpose.
I have already circulated a rough draft of the suggested Constitution Amendment Bill for
consideration of the Standing Committee before our above meeting, which does not contain any
contentious issue while mandating the Union to constitute the Lokpal and the States to constitute
the Lokayukta. It provides for all the details to be incorporated in the contemplated accompanying
legislation to complete the task.
Such a constitutional amendment would not attract the Proviso to Sub-Article (2) of Article 368
of the Constitution, and, therefore, it would not require ratification by the States. For ease of
reference, Article 368(2) is extracted below:
“An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for
the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House by
a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the members of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the
President who shall give his assent to the Bill and thereupon the Constitution shall stand
amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill:
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in–
(a) article 54, article 55, article 73, article 162 or article 241, or
(b) Chapter IV of Part V , Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI, or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or
(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or
(e) the provisions of this article,
584

585
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half
of the States by resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures before the Bill
making provision for such amendment is presented to the President for assent.”
As would be evident on a plain reading of Article 368(2), the only requirement is for it to be passed
by the majority of total membership of each House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds
of members present and voting.
With the unanimous demand in the people supported by unanimity of all political parties in the
Parliament to constitute a strong Lokpal/Lokayuktas, there can be no doubt of unanimous support
for a constitutional body, which would obviously be the strongest visualized in the constitutional
scheme. Once the constitutional amendment is made. It would become a part of the indestructible
‘basic structure’, immune from any future attempt to erode its status. The exercise for the
accompanying consequent legislation providing the details dealing with the contentious issues can
continue simultaneously since it must follow to complete the process.
There is no occasion to doubt the sincerity of the commitment and resolve or the people and the
political will in this behalf. Therefore, there can be no risk of any delay in this method.
With the above preface, my answers to the specific Issues referred for my opinion are as under:
Issues
(i) Whether the proposed Lokpal legislation to be enacted by Parliament can include in it
the structure for and content of State Lokayuktas by invocation of Articles 253/254
and/or entries 1, 2 and llA of List III of the Constitution and/or any other legal or
constitutional basis?;
(ii) W ould such a national legislation be constitutionally valid (with reasons there for) and,
if not, the reasons thereof ?;
(iii) W ould it be constitutionally and legally feasible to follow the model of the NHRC and/
or the RTI Act, 2005 and/or the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 etc. and/or any other
appropriate central legislation to provide for Lokpal and Lokayuktas in one central
enactment and the basis on which the validity and constitutionality of such a legislation
can be sustained?
Answer
These three issues being connected are combined for their answer.
Consequent upon the aforesaid constitutional amendment the proposed Lokpal legislation to be
enacted by the Parliament by invocation of Article 253 does not require any additional legislative
support. For ease of reference, Artic1c 253 is quoted below:
“Legislation for giving effect to international agreements – Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power to make any law for the whole
or any part of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention
with any other country or countries or any decision made at any international conference,
association or other body.”

586
This confers the legislative competence needed to implement the UN  Convention Against
Corruption, which has been signed and ratified by India. It is relevant to highlight that Article 6
of the Convention enshrines a specific obligation for member–States to establish bodies that prevent
corruption. Article 6 of the Convention is quoted in full below:
“Article 6. Preventive anti-corruption body or bodies
1. Each State Party shall, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system,
ensure the existence of a body or bodies, as appropriate, that prevent corruption by such
means as:
(a) Implementing the policies referred to in article 5 of this Convention and, where
appropriate, overseeing and coordinating the implementation of those policies;
(b) Increasing and disseminating knowledge about the prevention of corruption.
2. Each State Party shall grant the body or bodies referred to in paragraph 1 of this article
the necessary independence, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal
system, to enable the body or bodies to carry out its or their functions effectively and free
from any undue influence. The necessary material resources and specialized staff, as well
as the training that such staff may require to carry out their functions, should be provided.
3. Each State Party shall inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations of  the name
and address of the authority or authorities that may assist other States Parties in developing
and implementing specific measures for the prevention of corruption.”
The directive principle of State policy in Article 51(c), as a principle fundamental in governance
is available as an aid. (Article 51 states: “The State shall endeavour to…(c) foster respect for
international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another...”.)
There is, therefore, no need to look for any  additional support for the legislative competence of
the Parliament to legislate on the subject for the whole territory of India. In addition, it would not
be out of place to  mention that the failure to take effective steps with respect to tbe establishment
of such institutions could lead to India being considered to be in breach of its obligations  under
international law, which must obviously be avoided at all costs.
The Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 providing for the constitution of the NHRC and the
SHRCs was enacted by the Union Parliament for the whole territory of India to implement the Paris
Principles, 1991 for the ‘better protection of human rights’, in addition to the existing constitutional
guarantees and statutory rights with the machinery to enforce them. This was done by invoking
Article 153 for the whole territory of India. Similarly, for ‘combating corruption’ in a more
effective manner a uniform legislation enacted by the Union Parliament by invoking Article 253 can
provide for the Lokpal and the Lokayuktas.
The Parliamentary central enactment made by invoking Article 153 would be constitutionally valid,
such legislative competence in the Union Parliament being expressly provided as a part of the
constitutional scheme, consistent with the nature of federalism created by the Constitution.
Issue No. (iv):
If the answer to the aforesaid is in the affirmative, whether by virtue of Article 254 of the
Constitution of India and/or any other available power, the aforesaid proposed Lokpal Act to be
enacted by Parliament would also be entitled to repeal the existing State Lokayukta enactments?

587
Answer
Once the Union Parliament enacts the central legislation by invoking Article 253 for the whole
territory of India, the existing State legislations relating to the Lokayuktas being repugnant to it shall
be void, by virtue of Article 154(l), which states as under:
“If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision
of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision
of an existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List,
then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law made by Parliament, whether passed
before or after the law made by the Legislature of such State, or, as the case may be, the
existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the
extent of the repugnancy, be void.”
In the light of the above provision, it would be advisable, in order to avoid needless litigation, for
the central law to indicate - with reference to the above Article – that the existing State laws shall
be treated as void and inoperative. It may however be added that this question would become
purely academic in the event that the route or a constitutional amendment (along the broad lines
I have suggested) is adopted, since the proposed amendment envisages parallel laws being enacted
by Parliament and by the State legislatures.

588
ANNEXURE-F
[Vide para 13.12 (d) of the Report]
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
An Act further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty Second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.– (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and
Sixteenth Amendment) Ac t, 2011
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Insertion of new Part XVA after Part XV of the Constitution. The fol1owing Part XV A shall be
inserted, namely:-
PART XVA
LOK PAL AND LOK AYUKTA
329C. LOK PAL  (1) There shall be a Lok Pal for the Government of India and the Union
Territories. The powers of superintendence, direction and control of investigation and prosecution
of any alleged offence of corruption under any law, and all powers necessary and incidental
thereto, shall vest in the Lok Pal in accordance with and as specified by law made by Parliament
in that behalf.
(2) The Lok Pal shall be an autonomous and independent authority with a Chairperson and such
Number of other Members as Parliament may by law prescribe.
(3) The appointment of the Chairperson and Members of the Lok Pal shall, subject to the
provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, be made by the President.
(4) Subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, the conditions of
service and tenure of the office of Lok Pal shall be such as the President may by rule determine,
provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from his/her office except in like
manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and the conditions of service
of the Chairperson and Members shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his/her appointment.
(5) Every person appointed as Chairperson or Member of the Lok Pal shall, before he enters upon
office, make and subscribe before the President of India or some person authorized by the
President in that behalf, an oath or affirmation in the form set out in Schedule xxx.
588

589
(6) The Chairperson and Members of Lok Pal shal1 not be eligible for any other office under the
Government of India or the Government of any state after he has ceased to hold office as
Chairperson or Member of Lok Pal as the case may be.
329D. LOK A YUKTA (1) There shall be a Lokayukta for the Government of every State in the
Union of India. The powers of superintendence, direction and control of investigation and
prosecution of any offence of corruption in the State under any law, and an powers necessary and
incidental thereto, shall vest in the Lokayukta of that State in accordance with and as specified by
law made by the appropriate legislature in that behalf.
(2) The Lokayukta shall be an autonomous and independent authority with a Chairperson and such
number of other Members as the appropriate legislature may by law prescribe.
(3) The appointment of the Chairperson and Members of the Lokayukta shall, subject to the
provisions of any law made in that behalf by the appropriate legislature be made by the Governor.
(4) Subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by the appropriate legislature, the
conditions of service and tenure of the office of Lokayukta shall be such as the Governor may
by rule determine, provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from his office
except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the High Court and the conditions
of service of the Chairperson and Members shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.
(5) Every person appointed as Chairperson or Member of the Lokayukta shall, before he enters
upon office, make and subscribe before the Governor of the concerned State, or some person
authorized by the Governor in that behalf, an oath or affirmation in the form set out in Schedule
xxx.
(6) The Chairperson and Members of Lokayukta shall not be eligible for any other office under
the Government of India or the Government of any State after he has ceased to hold office as
Chairperson or Member of Lokayukta as the case may be.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.