PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 19
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
NINETEENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08)
OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, 
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 MAY, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 14 MAY, 2007)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 MAY, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 14 MAY, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA)MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
NINETEENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08)
OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 TH MAY , 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 14 TH MAY , 2007)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2007/V AISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-37

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—36
CHAPTER –I Overall assessment of the demands for grants of
the Ministry . ........................................................................................... 1—6
CHAPTER –II Major initiatives and schemes of the Ministry .................................. 7—22
CHAPTER –III Recruitment Agencies ............................................................................ 23—25
CHAPTER –IV Central Bureau of Investigation ........................................................... 26—31
CHAPTER –V Central V igilance Commission .............................................................. 32—36
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 37—44

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Dr. P.C. Alexander
9. Shri Tarlochan Singh
10. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
12. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
13. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Dr. C. Krishnan
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
18. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
19. Prof. M. Ramadass
20. Shri Vishvendra Singh
21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
22. Shri Raj Babbar
23. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
24. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
25. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
26. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report
on its behalf, do hereby present this Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
pertaining to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training;
Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and Department of
Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare; Director, Central Bureau of Investigation; Secretary, Staff
Selection Commission; Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission and Joint Director, Lal Bahadur
Shastri National Academy of Administration in its sitting held on 10th April, 2007.
3. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the
following:—
(i) Presentations made by the representatives of the Ministry;
(ii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2007-08;
(iii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Union Public Service Commission for the year
2007-08;
(iv) Explanatory Notes on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) received from the Ministry;
(v) Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 2006-07;
(vi) Annual Report of the Union Public Service Commission for the year 2005-06;
(vii) Annual Report of the Central Vigilance Commission for the year 2005;
(viii) Annual Report of Central Bureau of Investigation for the year 2006;
(ix) Annual Report of Staff Selection Commission for the year 2005-06;
(x) Annual Report of Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie
for the year 2006;
(xi) Annual Report of Kendriya Bhandar for the year 2005-06;
(xii) Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice contained in
its Fourteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry; and
(xiii) W ritten replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaires prepared by the
Secretariat.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its sitting held on 8th May, 2007.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
May 8, 2007 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice

1
REPORT
CHAPTER–I
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY
1.0 The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions is the coordinating agency of
the Central Government in personnel matters, specially in respect of issues concerning recruitment,
training, career development, staff welfare and post-retirement dispensation. The Ministry also
works towards promotion of responsive and people-oriented, modern administration. The Ministry
comprises three Departments, namely:—
(i) The Department of Personnel and Training;
(ii) The Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare; and
(iii) The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances.
1.1 The Ministry is under the overall charge of the Prime Minister assisted by a Minister of
State. All the three Departments of the Ministry functioned under the charge of a Secretary before
1st February, 2007. From 1st February, 2007 the Department of Personnel and Training is headed
by a Secretary. The Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare and the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances is headed by another Secretary. Function-wise, the
Ministry is, at present, divided into eight Divisions. The Divisions are:
(i) Establishment Officer;
(ii) Services and Vigilance;
(iii) Establishment;
(iv) Administrative Tribunal and Administration;
(v) Training;
(vi) Central Services;
(vii) Pension; and
(viii) Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances.
1.2 The Ministry has under its administrative control four attached offices, namely:
(i) Staff Selection Commission (SSC);
(ii) Institute of Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM);
(iii) Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie; and
(iv) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
1.3 The other offices under the administrative control of the Ministry are:
(i) Union Public Service Commission (UPSC), a constitutional body;
(ii) Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), a statutory body;

2
(iii) Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), a statutory quasi-judicial body; and
(iv) Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB), a body set up by a resolution of the
Central Government.
1.4 The budgetary provision for the establishment related expenditure of Central Information
Commission which has been set up under the Right to Information Act, 2005 is made by the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
1.5 The Department of Personnel and Training is the nodal agency for four registered societies
set up for the welfare of Government employees and their families. These societies are:—
(i) The Central Civil Services Cultural and Sports Board;
(ii) Grih Kalyan Kendra;
(iii) Kendriya Bhandar; and
(iv) Civil Services Officers Institute.
1.6 The Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry have been presented to Parliament
under the following Demand numbers:—
Demand No. 69: Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions — Rs.366.00 crore.
Demand No. 76: Union Public Service Commission — Rs.75.12 crore.
1.7 The Non-Plan and Plan, Revenue and Capital; and Charged and V oted break-up of the
total budgetary projections of the Ministry for the year 2007-08 are as given in the following table:—
BUDGET ESTIMATE (2007-08) AT  A GLANCE
(Rs. in crore)
Demand No. Total Plan Non- Revenue Capital Charged V oted
Plan
69-Ministry of 366.00 90.00 276.00 328.49 37.51 16.61 349.39
Personnel,
Public
Grievances
and Pensions
76-Union 75.12 – 75.12 75.12 – 75.12 –
Public Service
Commission
1.8 Out of the total demand of Rs.366.00 crore reflected in Demand No. 69, only
Rs.16.61 crore is charged and the balance is voted. Further, out of the total demand of
Rs.366.00 crore, Rs.276.00 crore is in the category of Non-Plan expenditure and the remaining
Rs.90.00 crore is Plan expenditure.
1.9 Out of the gross Non-Plan provision of Rs.276 crores for 2007-08, Rs.25.86 crores is
meant for establishment-related expenditure of the Central Administrative Tribunals, Rs.24.43 crore
for establishment-related expenditure of the Staff Selection Commission and for expenditure
connected with the conduct of examinations for recruitment of lower grade staff in Central
Ministries/Departments, Rs.39.67 crore for Secretariat Expenditure of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions, Rs.132.79 crore for expenditure of the CBI, Rs.30.99 crore for

3
Training Schemes, Rs.13.26 crore for expenditure of the CVC, PESB, Lok Pal and CIC and
Rs.9.00 crore for Loans to State Governments in respect of House Building Advances paid to All
India Service Officers which is made centrally in the Budget of this Ministry.
1.10 Out of the gross Plan provision of Rs.90 crores for 2007-08, Rs.12 crores is meant for
Plan Schemes of Administrative Reforms Wing, Rs.3 crore for Setting up of Administrative
Reforms Commission and 0.50 crore for New scheme for Pensioners’ Portal, Rs.l crore for
Modernisation of Training Centre of CBI, Rs.11 crore for Construction of Office Building for CBI
Head Quarters, Rs.57.80 crore for Training activities, Rs.2.50 crore for Construction of Office
Building for CIC and Rs.1.50 crore for a new scheme of CIC like digitization of records, setting
up of Video Conference Studio etc.
1.11 Demand No. 76 pertains to expenditure of UPSC. As per the provisions contained in Article
322 of the Constitution, it is a charged expenditure on the Consolidated Fund of India. The demand
for the year 2007-2008 is Rs.75.12 crore as against 59.99 crore in the fiscal year 2006-07. The
entire expenditure falls in the category of Non-Plan charged expenditure. The Demand includes
provision for administrative/establishment related expenditure of UPSC as well as expenditure on the
conduct of various examinations/selections carried out by the Commission throughout the year.
1.12 Demand No. 69 consists of budget provisions in respect of the following Departments/
Offices/Organisations/Schemes:—
(i) Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT);
(ii) Staff Selection Commission (SSC);
(iii) Secretariat General Services — which includes the following Departments:—
(a) Department of Personnel and Training;
(b) Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances; and
(c) Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare.
(iv) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)—including Interpol and Coordination Wing;
(v) Grants-in-aid to the Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA);
(vi) Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA);
(vii) Institute of Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM);
(viii) Other training schemes;
(ix) Central Vigilance Commission (CVC)-(Charged);
(x) Lok Pal;
(xi) Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB);
(xii) Central Information Commission (CIC);
(xiii) Capital Outlay on Police (CBI);
(xiv) Capital Outlay on Public Works (LBSNAA & CIC); and
(xv) Loans and advances to the State Governments towards payment of House Building
Advances to the All India Service Officers.

4
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(DEMAND No. 69)
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. Description as Major BE (2006-07) RE (2006-07) BE (2007-08)
No. shown in the Head
Expenditure
Budget V ol. II Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total
Plan Plan Plan
Revenue
Section
1. Secretariat 2052 28.00 34.29 62.29 14.10 31.14 45.24 15.50 39.67 55.17
General
Services
2. Administration 2014 0.00 24.87 24.87 0.00 24.85 24.85 0.00 25.86 25.86
of Justice
3. Public Service 2051 0.00 24.22 24.22 0.00 22.91 22.91 0.00 24.43 24.43
Commission
4. Police 2055 2.00 115.39 117.39 1.00 124.06 125.06 1.70 132.78 134.48
5. Other 2070 37.37 42.13 79.50 41.47 35.24 76.71 44.30 44.25 88.55
Administrative
Services
T
OTAL: 67.37 240.90 308.27 56.57 238.20 294.77 61.50 266.99 328.49
Capital
Section
6. Capital outlay 4055 10.00 0.10 10.10 2.00 0.10 2.10 11.00 0.01 11.01
on Police
7. Capital outlay 4059 17.93 0.00 17.93 4.93 0.00 4.93 17.50 0.00 17.50
on Public
Works
8. Loans and 7601 0.00 9.00 9.00 0.00 11.00 11.00 0.00 9.00 9.00
Advances to
State
Governments
T
OTAL: 27.93 9.10 37.03 6.93 11.10 18.03 28.50 9.01 37.51
GRAND T OTAL: 95.30 250.00 345.30 63.50 249.30 312.80 90.00 276.00 366.00
Non-Plan outlay
1.13 The Committee observes that the Non Plan allocation in respect of the Ministry has
increased from Rs.250 crore in BE (2006-2007) to Rs.276 crore in BE (2007-2008). The increase
of Rs.26 crores is mainly meant for meeting normal increase in pay and allowances of the
establishment.
Plan outlay
1.14 The Ministry has stated that funds to the tune of Rs.90 crore have been provided in Annual
Plan for the year 2007-08 for carrying out various Plan schemes of the Ministry as against the
provision of Rs.95.30 provided in BE (2006-07).

5
DEMAND NO :—76 (UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION)
1.15 The Union Public Service Commission is a constitutional body, created under Article 315 of
the Constitution. The Commission’s charter of duties is given in Articles 320 and 321 of the
Constitution. In brief, it is the duty of the Commission to conduct examinations for appointment
to services of the Union and to advise Government on all matters relating to framing of recruitment
rules, method of recruitment and the principles to be followed in making promotions and transfers
from one service to another. The Commission is also required to be consulted in respect of
disciplinary matters affecting a civil servant including appeals and memoranda filed by individual
Government servants.
1.16 Article 322 of the Constitution envisages, inter-alia, that the expenses of the UPSC
including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to members and staff of the Commission shall
be ‘charged’ on the Consolidated Fund of India.
1.17 A statement indicating the actual (2005-06) and BE and RE (2006-07) and BE (2007-08) in
respect of Demand No. 76 is given in the accompanying table:—
(Rs. in crores)
Actuals 2005-06 BE 2006-07 RE 2006-07 BE 2007-08
57.61 59.99 64.49 75.12
1.18 It may be observed from the above table that the budget allocation in respect of the
Commission has been increased.
1.19 The variations between BE (2006-07) and BE (2007-08) and RE (2006-07) and BE
(2007-08) in percentage terms are given below:—
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
(Rs. in crore)
Demand No. Actuals B E RE B E V ariation Variation
(2005- (2006- (2006- (2007- between BE between RE
06) 07) 07) 08) (2006-07) and (2006-07) and
(2007-08) BE (2007-08)
69 - Ministry of 253.13 345.30 312.80 366.00 +21.30 +54.00
Personnel, Public (+6.17%) (+17.26%)
Grievances and
Pensions
76 - Union Public 57.58 59.99 64.49 75.12 +15.13 +10.63
Service (+25.22%) (+16.48%)
Commission
1.20 The Committee observes that the budget allocation for the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions has increased from Rs 345.30 crore in 2006-07 to Rs.366
crore in the current year, reflecting a hike of Rs.21.30 crore, i.e., 6.17% increase over the
previous year, whereas for UPSC, it has incr eased from Rs.59.99 crore to 75.12 crore
reflecting a hike of Rs.15.13 crore i.e. , 25.22% increase over the previous year. The
Committee expects that this enhanced allocation would be optimally utilised. Out of the
total budget allocation of Rs.366 crore, Rs.276 crore is devoted to Non Plan expenditure. A

6
sum of Rs.90 crore only is left for various Plan schemes/programmes of the Ministry. The
Committee is of the opinion that this Ministry, being the nodal agency for wide ranging
matters like personnel policy, training, Administrative Reforms, public grievances and
pensions, has a far greater role to play in formulating as well as implementing the Plan
schemes in these fields, for which infrastructure and assets are to be created which requires
more focus on Plan expenditure instead of Non-plan expenditure.

7
CHAPTER–II
MAJOR INITIATIVES AND SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY
Special incentives to All India Service Officers Serving in the North East
2.0 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, in view of the difficult and challenging working
environment faced by officers working in the North East States due to inadequacy of infrastructure
facilities, including health and medical facilities, combined with disturbed law and order situation
and insurgency in some of the States, the Department of Personnel and Training has given fresh
incentives to All India Service Officers posted in the North East.
2.1 The representatives of the Ministry, while making a presentation before the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry, highlighted the major special incentives as:
(i) Inter-cadre deputation to North East permitted for 9 years
(ii) W aiver of cooling off for deputation to North East
(iii) Preferred domains may be indicated after 5 years deputation in North East
(iv) Period of stay in North East to be a positive factor for empanelment
(v) Long-term foreign training between 9 and 15 years of service and short term courses
every 5 years after 20 years of service
(vi) Annual Home Travel Concession by air permitted
(vii) Education allowance for children
(viii) Voluntary retirement possible after 15 years instead of 20
(ix) Army/cantonment hospital facilities for lady officers in North East
(x) Credit of earned leave @ 40 days per year instead of 30.
2.2 The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry and is optimistic
that such steps would motivate officers to opt for tenures in North East.
Stability of Tenure of All India Service Officers
3.0 In the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has been stated that with a view to improve
governance and efficiency in administration, a notification has been issued to provide for minimum
tenure in cadre posts for All India Service Officers. The Central Government have recently issued
notifications on 24th August, 2006 amending the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;
Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954 and Indian Forest Services (Cadre) Rules, 1966 to
provide for minimum tenure in consultation with the State Government concerned of all or any of
the cadre posts specified for the State concerned in item 1 of the Schedule to the Indian
Administrative Service (Fixation of Cadre Strength) Rules, 1955; Indian Police Service (Fixation of
Cadre Strength) Rules, 1955 and Indian Forest Services (Fixation of Cadre Strength) Rules, 1966.
3.1 The Ministry, in its written reply, has stated that as per this amendment, a ‘Committee of
the Minimum Tenure’ is required to be constituted by the State Government concerned and that
an officer may be transferred before the minimum prescribed tenure only on its recommendation
7

8
as specified in the Schedule annexed to the rules. It has also stated that the consultation with the
States for prescription of minimum tenure for cadre posts of IAS, IPS and IFS is being jointly
done by Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of
Environment and Forest respectively.
3.2 The representatives of the Ministry deposed before the Committee that the minimum tenure
is to be ensured except in the event of promotion, retirement, deputation outside the State or
training exceeding two months.
3.3 The Members of the Committee stressed upon the need to ensure stability of tenure of All
India Service Officers, as under:
“...If the officers are given full power with the tenure that he will not be shifted without
any reason from his post, then he will be able to cope up with the responsibility he is
shouldering...if you are not confident that you will not be shifted immediately, efficiency
can’t come...’’.
3.4 The Committee is of the opinion that frequent, and many a times arbitrary transfers
lower the morale of honest and efficient officers. It is of the considered view that if the
incumbent is unsure of his tenure, he/she will not be able to master the situation at the
workplace. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry, along with Ministry of Home
Affairs and Ministry of Environment and Forest, is making positive concerted efforts for
carrying on the process of consultation with the State Governments for determining the
minimum tenure for all cadre posts in the All India Services. This would go a long way in
improving governance and ef ficiency in administration and ensure that the All India Service
Officers are able to fulfill their duties efficiently.
3.5 The Committee is of the considered opinion that allowing the officials to remain in
a specific Department for a considerable period, coupled with in-service training in IIM, IIT
and other specialised institutions, will make them specialists and professionals in such
fields. In the globalised economy and WTO regime, specialists and professionals are needed,
rather than generalists. Hence transfer policy should be based on specialisation and
professionalisation in the job.
Special Recruitment Drive
4.0 Clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution of India enables the State to make reservation
of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the
State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State. Clause (4A) of the same Article
enables the State to provide reservation for the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in the matter of promotion. Article 335 declares that the claims of the members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the
maintenance of efficiency of administration in the making of appointments to services and posts
in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State. Proviso to the said Article empowers
the State to make any provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes for relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the standards of evaluation,
for reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of services or posts in connection
with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
4.1 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the National Common Minimum Programme also
stipulates that all reservation quotas, including those relating to promotions will be filled in a time-
bound manner. Accordingly, a Special Recruitment Drive was launched in August, 2004. Through
the drive, about 50,000 backlog vacancies were filled upto December, 2006.

9
4.2 The Ministry, in its reply, has stated thus:
“...The Government in the National Common Minimum Programme stipulates that all
reservation quotas, including those relating to promotions, will be fulfilled in a time bound
manner. Accordingly, a Special Recruitment Drive was launched in August, 2004 to fill up
all backlog vacancies of SCs and STs. During the Drive, as per the information received
upto 20/03/2007, a total of 74,370 backlog vacancies were identified. 26,586 backlog
vacancies were identified in direct recruitment quota, of which 19,893 vacancies have been
filled up. Total number of backlog vacancies identified in promotion quota was 47,784.
There are 13,202 vacancies in promotion quota for which candidates for promotion are not
available for quota which could be filled. Out of these, 32,759 vacancies have already been
filled. Thus out of 61,168 backlog vacancies (DR quota + Promotion quota) which could
be filled up, 52,652 vacancies have been filled up. Thus, about 86% of vacancies which
could be filled have already been filled up.
The figures shown do not include the number of backlog vacancies of Other
Backward Classes. These figures relate to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes only.
Reservation in direct recruitment is available to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes in all groups of services including the IAS/IPS etc.
The OBC candidates get selected on merit as well as by availing concessions or
relaxations in the eligibility or the selection criteria. If an OBC candidate has been selected
by availing concessions or relaxations in the eligibility or the selection criteria, he is treated
as selected on the basis of reservation. Further, if an OBC candidate is selected without
availing any relaxation or concession available to them, he is treated as having qualifying at
general standards.
The candidates of reserved category qualifying at general merit are allotted the service
against the general category seats. However, they are allotted the service against the
reserved category seats, if, by this process, they get the service of their higher preference.
Thus it is possible that an OBC candidate selected at general standards is adjusted against
reserved seat because this enables him to get a serve of his higher preference”.
4.3 The Committee has taken note of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.
However, it is of the considered view that much needs to be done to fulfill the
Constitutional obligation. It recommends that earnest, aggressive efforts should be made to
ensure zero vacancy within six months’ time.
4.4 The Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation in
Posts and Services) Bill, 2004 was examined by this Committee and its 8th Report on the
Bill was presented/laid in both Houses of Parliament on 29th June, 2005. The Committee
notes that a Group of Ministers is examining the Report. The Committee is surprised and
worried as to the delay in passing the Bill which is aimed at the benefit of the downtrodden
as is one of the promises of this Government in the National Common Minimum
Programme. The Committee recommends that the Bill should be brought in the Parliament
at least in the Monsoon Session of 2007.
Mandatory mid-career training for IAS Officers
5.0 According to the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has since been decided to introduce a
new system of mandatory mid-career training for IAS officers. The programme is being conducted
in three phases. This would be a mandatory requirement for further promotions at certain stages
in an officer’s career and would henceforth be a necessary, though not a sufficient condition for
promotion at those stages.

10
5.1 The Committee appreciates the various training programmes envisaged by the
Ministry and hopes that they will aid in widening the knowledge base and honing the skills
of the participants and thereby aid in maintaining high quality public services.
5.2 The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants, observed as follows:
“...The second area is mid-career training of IAS officers. I find a bias in favour of
American institutions and academies. Why should these people be subjected to training
courses only by people belonging to American institutes? Why not have a wider outlook in
this and have people, particularly from Commonwealth countries, which have the same
system of civil servants as we have to involve in this exercise? There are good universities
and good business schools...’’.
5.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should consider this issue and take into
account the concern expressed by the Committee. It should ensure that they are trained in
“Quick Delivery System’’ of services rather than “Colonial Administrative System”.
IAS induction training syllabus review Committee
6.0 In the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has been stated that the Department of Personnel
and Training had constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. R.V . V aidyanatha Ayyar,
IAS ( Retd.) to review the syllabus of Induction Training for IAS officers. The Committee has held
a series of consultations with subject experts and a variety of stakeholders and elicited their
suggestions and views. The exercise yielded a large number of responses. The extended tenure of
the Committee expires on 27.03.2007. The report of the Committee is being finalised.
6.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should consider the recommendations
made by the Committee and implement the same in totality.
UNDP Pr oiect on Capacity Building for Access to Information
7.0 According to the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Training division is executing a UNDP-
funded project on Capacity Building for Access to Information to the tune of Rs.6.86 crores to
be completed over the next three years. The project, among other activities, also envisages capacity
building by preparing training modules/training of trainers (ToT) at National, State and District
levels, research documentation and dissemination etc. on Right to Information. The scope of this
project has been enhanced and the same will be implemented in all the States (two districts in each
State) in collaboration with their respective Administrative Training Institutes.
7.1 The Committee expects that such schemes would ensure greater awareness regarding
the Right to Information among the public and would improve their access to information.
Centre for Disaster Management
8.0 The Committee voiced concern over the lack of preparedness on the part of the
administrative machinery to meet unprecedented calamities/disasters, as follows:
“...Is there a scheme for training the officers to cope up with the situation arising out of
calamities, or communal violence, or terrorist activities like bomb blasts? In such situations,
our bureaucracy has not been able to rise to the occasion and public is put to a lot of
hardships...”.
8.1 In its written reply, the Ministry has stated thus:
“The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India has set up Centre for Disaster
Management in Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie for

11
acting as a nodal institution for imparting training on various aspects of disaster
management with a special focus on Incident Command System. The Centre has been
conducting a number of training programs and has also been formulating the National
strategy for adaptation of the global best practices to suit Indian conditions...It has also
taken up the task of setting up and initiating training at regional training centres in the
country. The Centre is involved in training IAS officers at induction as well as in service
in the field of disaster management, including in the use of Information and Communication
Technology, HAM radio, action research projects, documentation of best practices,
development of films, conducting seminars, case studies, teaching materials etc. The
LBSNAA has already started the process of training of Core Group and resource persons
from different States...In the current financial year, the LBSNAA is also undertaking
training programmes on Certified Incident Manager Programme for the scientists of
Department of Science and Technology...The Department of Personnel and Training also
arranges training programmes on disaster management as a part of the IAS in-service
training programmes”.
8.2 The Committee acknowledges the positive steps taken in the matter of providing
training on Disaster Management and appreciates the move made by the Department in
providing training on Disaster Management as a part of In-Service Training Programme.
The Committee hopes that this will create a better and quick responsive mechanism as far
as disaster management is concerned and prepare the officers to immediately rise to the
occasion in case of any uneventful happening. It recommends that Officers should also be
given training in world class institutes such as the Asian Disaster Management Institute,
Bangkok.
State of Governance Report
9.0 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, this entails assessment, through scoring, of the
States in the country on pre-determined dimensions of governance. The outputs of the initiative
would be the rolling out of the State of Governance for States on an agreed working concept of
governance and its indicators with specific reference to poverty reduction.
9.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry to improve the various
aspects of governance in the country and recommends that it should be implemented in a
meaningful, effective and responsive manner.
Governance Knowledge Centre
10.0 The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that endeavour under this activity would be
to upgrade the GKC portal (indiagovernance.org) from a digital repository to a knowledge centre
available for reference on issues pertaining to Governance.
10.1 The Committee hopes that such initiatives would make the portal user friendly and
aid in ensuring better public administration.
Civil Service Day
11.0 According to the Annual Report of the Ministry, Government of India has decided to
observe 21st April of every year as Civil Service Day as an occasion for the civil servants to
rededicate themselves to the cause of citizens and renew their commitment to public service and
excellence in work. The first and the second Civil Service days were solemnised on 21st April, in
2006 and 2007, which was attended by officers of the All-India Services and those belonging to
Central Civil Services.

12
11.1 The Committee is optimistic that such initiatives would motivate civil servants to
pursue excellence in developing and maintaining high quality public service.
The Right to Information Act, 2005
12.0 The Right to Information Act, 2005 is applicable to Government at all levels—Union, State
and Local and also to the bodies owned, controlled or substantially financed directly by funds
provided by the Government. It covers both the Houses of Parliament, State Legislatures, the
Supreme Court, High Courts, subordinate Courts including their administrative offices,
Constitutional Authorities like Election Commission, Comptroller & Auditor General, Union Public
Service Commission etc.
12.1 The Act applies two pronged strategy for dissemination of information. It casts an
obligation on public authorities for suo motu  disclosure/publication of information. It also requires
the public authorities to supply information called for by the citizens and to permit him to inspect
the Government documents and collect samples of various works.
12.2 The Act creates an elaborate machinery to ensure supply of information which consists of
Public Information Officer, Assistant Public Information Officer, independent Central Information
Commission and the State Information Commissions etc.
12.3 Certain types of information pertaining to security of the country, scientific or economic
interest of the country and information on trade secrets etc. are exempted from disclosure. Certain
security or intelligence organizations have been exempted from disclosing any information except
those pertaining to corruption or violation of human rights.
12.4 In the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has been stated that it is proposed that a
comprehensive review of one year implementation of the Act would be undertaken with the help
of an external consultant. Subsequently, the consultant would provide assistance for implementing
the changes in keeping with the suggestions of the review.
12.5 In the A TR, it was stated thus:
“The Department has taken steps to see that the Right to Information Act, 2005 is
implemented in letter and spirit. It has requested all the Central Ministries/Departments and
the State Governments to ensure that the Act is implemented in its true spirit. They have
also been advised to see that the Public Authorities under their administrative control
implement the provisions of the Act”.
12.6 As per the written reply furnished by the Ministry, all the States, except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir to which Right to Information Act, 2005 does not extend, have constituted the State
Information Commissions.
12.7 The Ministry, in its reply, has inter alia, stated that the Directorate of Audio Visual Publicity
(DAVP) carried out the Right to Information Act campaign for 10 days on Doordarshan/All India
Radio and various private Television Channels from 14.5.2006. It has also been stated that the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has been requested to give publicity to the Act from the
budget of that Ministry. Also, the Training Division of the Department of Personnel and Training has
been continuously conducting training programmes for the Central Public Information Officers etc.
12.8 The Committee appreciates the fact that the Ministry proposes to undertake a
comprehensive review of one year implementation of the Act. It hopes that such a step
would ensure that public authorities function in a transparent and accountable manner. The
Committee would like to urge upon the Government to take initiative to implement the RTI
Act in Jammu and Kashmir also.

13
12.9 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to give wide publicity
to the Right to Information Act. It recommends that the publicity campaign should be
carried out periodically and that the Ministry should pursue the initiatives in right earnest
so that the desired objectives are achieved. Moreover, it recommends that the training
programmes for the Central Public Information Officers should be tuned to the ever-
changing circumstances/situations. The Committee also desires that State Governments
should be advised to implement the Right to Information Act in full earnestness.
RTI Request/Appeal Management Information System
12.10 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, this is a web-enabled system based on the
RTI Act, 2005 developed and implemented by NIC, in association with DoPT and CIC with an
objective of providing timely information to the citizens and effective monitoring of requests and
appeals by the concerned Public Authorities.
12.11 The Committee appreciates this initiative and expects that this system would provide
the public faster and better access to information. The Committee notes that many of the
Departments are yet to update the information in the website. It recommends that steps
should be taken to ensure that necessary information is updated regularly.
Central Information Commission
12.12 The Committee expressed concern over the prevailing vacancies in the Central Information
Commission, which was voiced by the Chairman, as under:
“...In this Commission, we may include various categories—journalists, social workers,
academicians, former judges, lawyers and other categories of people because it should have
different type of people so that we can get better performance from the Commission. But,
what we get from media reports is that except one or two places, other places are occupied
by only bureaucrats...”
12.13 The Committee is deeply concerned about the vacancies in the Commission. It takes
serious note of such attitude. It feels that the Right to Information Act cannot be
implemented in its true letter and spirit if such circumstances prevail. It strongly
recommends that the vacancies should be filled without further delay.
12.14 The Committee voiced concern over the mode of appointment in State/Union Territory
Information Commissions. A Member highlighted an instance in the Union Territory of Puducherry as:
“...Chairman, Sir, the gentleman, an acting Chief Secretary... He appoints himself as the
Chief Information Commissioner. He retires and then he becomes the Chief Information
Commissioner...”.
12.15 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should evolve a foolproof mechanism
to ensure that such misuse of position/power does not arise in future and that only bonafide
persons are appointed.
12.16 The Committee also notes that even though the Act provides for inclusion of persons
of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science etc. for
appointment as Chief Information Commissioners and Information Commissioners, the same
is not followed in true spirit in practice. It accordingly stresses the imminent need to do so.
12.17 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should evolve a mechanism so
that the public is kept informed about its decisions and findings, by way of publication in
the Gazette of India or in its website by updating regularly and by laying the same in the
form of an annual statement in both the Houses of Parliament.

14
Performance Appraisal Report
13.0 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, with a view to improve the system of assessment
of an officer’s performance and capabilities and to determine capacity building needs and suitability
for particular areas of responsibility/assignments, the present system of writing of Annual
Confidential Reports (ACRs) is being replaced with the system of Performance Appraisal Report
(PAR) for officers belonging to All India Services. It is to be used as a tool for career planning
and training. Accordingly, the All India Services (Performance Appraisal Report) Rules, 2007 have
been notified on 14th March, 2007.
13.1 The Ministry, in its presentation before the Committee, highlighted the salient features of
PAR as full disclosure, Annual medical health check-up for all officers above the age of 40,
preparation of a work plan in advance, numerical grading, financial, moral and intellectual integrity
and Constitution of Referral Board to decide representations of the officers.
13.2 The Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training apprised the Committee that
the Performance Appraisal Report will be made effective from the end of the year i.e., from
1st April, 2007.
13.3 The Committee appreciates the innovative system of appraisal envisaged by the
Ministry. It is pleased to note that this scheme provides for full disclosure of information
to the apprised. It is optimistic that this would ensure better trust and comradeship among
the employees which would result in healthy working environment.
13.4 The Committee also feels that the Department could go a step further and take a
cue from international bodies where appraisal by subordinates, peers and link officers is
also taken into account.
Cadre Restructuring of Central Secretariat Services
14.0 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, in October, 2003 Government decided on Cadre
Restructuring of CSS. Accordingly, CS Division was entrusted with additional work to implement
various decisions. Most of the decisions of Government have since been implemented. These have
gone a long way in addressing the expectations of the members of the service. But, to a contrary
of it, the Committee has been receiving numerous representations from different Employees Service
Associations reflecting their dissatisfaction over the Cadre-Restructuring. Some of them have been
forwarded to the Government for comments so that Committee could take a view in the matter.
The Committee will also very soon be considering the action taken replies on the recommendations
contained in 83rd Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs on the Personnel Policies of CSS officers. During the course of consideration, the
Committee will also consider the grievance of other wings of Central Secretariat Services.
14.1 In that backdrop, the Committee desires the Government to give a relook to the
Cadre-restructuring of all the Staff/Departments of Central Secretariat Service. The
Committee further desires the Government to submit an updated action taken reply on
the recommendations contained in 83rd Report of Committee on Home Affairs within a
month’s time so that the Committee could consider the subject and present its Report to
the Parliament.
Cadre Training Plan
15.0 In the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has been stated that action to implement the various
recommendations contained in the Report of the Committee of Senior Officers set up to finalise
the Cadre Training Plan for the CSS Officers is being taken.

15
15.1 The Committee is pleased to note that efforts are being made to improve the service
conditions of officers of CSS. It recommends that the recommendations should be
implemented in a time bound manner. The Committee would like to have the details of
recommendations of Committee of Senior Officers and its implementation so that the same
may be considered with the action taken reply on 83rd Report ibid.
Public Service Law
16.0 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances has prepared a draft Public Service Bill in order to put in place a comprehensive
law covering all aspects of Public Services. The draft Bill provides for the following:—
(i) Values of Public Service and their periodical review
(ii) Drawing up of a Public Service Code of Ethics and punishment for violation thereof
(iii) Drawing up of a Public Service Management Code for promoting government policies
and good governance and consequences for its non-compliance
(iv) Appointment to public services in a transparent manner
(v) Establishment to a Performance Management System with detailed mechanism for
setting benchmarks and review of the performance indicators
(vi) Bringing out an Annual Performance Report by each Department and publishing the
same for information of general public.
(vii) E stablishment of an independent Central Public Service Authority for good governance
which will advise the Government on the above items. The authority would draw up
the Code of Ethics and give guidelines for management of various public services. In
addition, the authority will recommend to the Central Government policies on
classification of service, tenure of public servants etc.
16.1 It has also been stated that consultations are presently being held on the draft Bill with the
State Governments, service associations and other stakeholders.
16.2 The Committee hopes that the consultations with the concerned stakeholders will
emerge fruitful. It is optimistic that such a legislation would ensure implementation of
better policies of governance.
Training Policy and Programmes
17.0 In the ATR, the Ministry has stated thus:
“The infrastructure facilities at ISTM have already been made for the programme.
The revised training modules for direct recruit Assistants is under finalization.
The ISTM is developing training modules for the officers at level A to F.
Refresher courses for officers at various levels continue to be organised with inputs on new
areas that have emerged because of  change in government policies.
For making the training mandatory before the CSS officers are considered for promotion
amendment of recruitment rules is required. The proposal for amendment of  recruitment
rules is under process.
Anticipating commencement of Cadre Training Plan of CSS officers from 2007-08,
sufficient budget provisions would be made at appropriate time”.

16
17.1 As per the reply furnished by the Ministry, the process of  amending the recruitment rules
for incorporating training as an essential requirement for promotion of  Central Secretariat Services
Officers, has already started.
17.2 The Committee recommends that necessary amendments should be made in the
recruitment rules for the purpose without further delay and that the Ministry should
accelerate its efforts in this regard.
18.0 The Ministry has replied that the 1st Post Graduate Diploma Programme in Public Policy
and Management (PGDPPM) has commenced at the Management Development Institute (MDI),
Gurgaon on 4th September, 2006. They have also replied that the 1st Post Graduate Programme
in Public Management and Policy (PGP-PMP) is scheduled to commence from 1st April, 2007 in
terms of  the MoU signed by the Training Division, Department of  Personnel and Training with IIM,
Ahmedabad.
18.1 The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry and hopes that it would
ensure that modern management techniques are infused into the process of governance.
Ban on recruitment
19.0 The Chairman of the Committee expressed concern over the decision of the Government
to ban direct recruitment of Lower Division Clerks and Upper Division Clerks, as follows:
...in which way you are filling up the work which is done by the LDCs and UDCs?...
There is fear even among senior IAS officers that within 10-year period, the entire
bureaucracy will be stuck without having a back file on the table. Who is going to create
that? Have you contemplated a via media to work out all these things?...
19.1 The Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, while deposing before the Committee,
stated that there is a Government decision to ban direct recruitment of LDC.
19.2 The Ministry, in its written reply, has stated as under:
“The Government had constituted a Committee of Senior Officers in February, 2001 for
cadre-restructuring of Central Secretariat Service. The Committee submitted its report in
February, 2002. Various recommendations made by the Committee were examined in
consultation with the concerned Ministries and decisions on cadre-restructuring, including
discontinuance of Direct Recruitment and abolition of posts in the grade of Lower Division
Clerk of Central Secretariat Clerical Service, were taken by the Government. While making
recommendations, the Committee had observed that in the modern days, the concepts of e-
governance, paperless office and multi-skilling are becoming increasingly important for a
responsive administration and in this context, maintaining a large cadre of UDCs and LDCs
to carry out routine office jobs manually would be regressive. Further, the Expenditure
Reforms Commission too had commented on the need to review and reduce the number of
supporting staff. The Committee had further observed that in order to cater to the future
needs and address emerging requirements more efficiently, it has now become the need of
the hour that instead of recruiting matriculate, uni-skilled individuals, direct recruitment of
better qualified and skilled personnel be made solely at the level of Assistants who are
Graduates with computer proficiency. The Fifth Pay Commission had also favoured such
multi-skilling. While implementing these decisions due care has been taken to provide
promotion prospects to UDCs, LDCs and Group ‘D’ employees...”.
19.3 The Committee recommends that the Government should take into account its
genuine concern over this issue and that necessary action should be taken to ensure that

17
in such a situation, better promotion prospects should be provided to LDCs and UDCs so
that their legitimate career aspirations are fulfilled.
19.4 The Committee further recommends that training should be given to the Assistants
so that they are enabled to perform the assigned functions of LDCs and UDCs. Moreover,
it recommends that a software may be developed which will incorporate all the backup files
so that the Assistants can get easy access to the same.
19.5 In spite of the facts mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs, the Committee does not
concur with the views of the Government on abolition of posts of clerical staff and desires
that there is a need to review its decision in this regard and if need be, a small core group
be constituted within the Department of Personnel and Training to analyse the facts/
decisions available on the subject. If that Committee sees any reason for continuation of
this cadre, then the posts may be revived immediately.
Cadre Review
20.0 The Chairman of the Committee observed as under:
“...the periodical review of the structure of the regularly constituted services cadre is an
important cadre management function. Have you done anything in the matter of LDC, UDC
and other cadres? Secretarial Service Association has made a representation regarding this
aspect...”.
20.1 The Committee endorses the widely accepted view that there is acute stagnation in
the LDC, UDC and other cadres. It recommends that cadre review in respect of these
cadres should be taken up periodically. Otherwise, this will result in frustration and
discontentment among the employees which in turn would adversely affect their job
efficiency and productivity. For this purpose, the Committee recommends that the team of
officers constituted to review the problem relating to stagnation in the grades of LDCs and
UDCs should be impressed upon to take imminent remedial measures to address the
aspirations of both the cadres.
Welfare of Pensioners
21.0 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Pensioners’ Portal was designed and finalized
in collaboration with NIC. It was launched on 30.03.07.
21.1 The Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and
Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare deposed before the Committee as follows:
“...The Portal was launched by the Hon. Minister of State for Personnel and Pensions on
30th March, 2007. Sir, the process of sanction and disbursement of pension is
decentralized, so is the mechanism of redressal of grievances. It was felt that there was
a need for a single window mechanism to cater to the pensioners’ grievances and problems.
The Department of Pensions took an initiative to put in place an I.T. enabled single window
mechanism through a specially designed website called the Pensioners’ Portal. This Portal
has been developed in consultation with the stakeholders that is the pensioners’ associations
and the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, with technical support from the
NIC. It is user friendly; it would help the redressal of pensioners’ grievances and would
play a nodal role in monitoring the efficient running of the system, thereby ensuring timely
delivery of outputs. The portal would also provide information and guidance concerning
pension and retirement benefits. It would facilitate us in streamlining the pension sanctioning
process in the Central Government Ministries and Departments and also provide

18
transparency, accountability and promptness in timely disposal of pensions and retirement
related matters. This portal has two components: a non-interactive component and an
interactive component. The non-interactive component would contain updated information
on pension rules and various instructions issued from time to time. The interactive part
would involve registration of grievances of pensioners and their redressal. The portal would
operate at three levels: pensioners’ associations level, at State headquarters, initially to
begin with, at Central Ministries/Departments’ level and the Central level, which is the
nodal Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare. All the three levels would be
interlinked...”
21.2 As per the written reply furnished by the Ministry, the Department of  Pension and
Pensioners’ Welfare would make available funds to Pensioners’ Association towards procurement of
software and hardware, internet connectivity etc. and grants for  meeting expenditure on
maintenance, day-to-day expenditure etc. The Central Ministries/Departments would meet
expenditure on  hardware/software from  their own  resources.
21.3 The Committee wishes to place on record its appreciation of such a laudable initiative
of the Ministry. It is optimistic that this support system will ensure timely sanction of
pensionary benefits to employees and their families. It recommends that the efficiency of the
Portal should be closely monitored and that steps should be taken to rectify drawbacks, if any.
Administrative Reforms Commission
22.0 The Committee, while considering the Demands for  Grants of the Ministry, made the
following observation:
“My question is about the report of the Administrative Reforms Commission...When the
Administrative Reforms Commission has presented this idea in the form of a report, and
these are major reform areas which have already been discussed in Committees, and on
which Government itself has given positive replies in the Parliament or  through Resolutions,
I wonder what follow-up action is going to be taken by your Department...’’.
22.1 The Committee is of the opinion that the Administrative Reforms Commission should
take up subjects which have not yet been deliberated upon by other Committees/
Commissions. It  is of the view that considering subjects which have already been examined
by Committees/Commissions in the past, would result in duplication of recommendations
and wastage of precious time and public resources.
22.2 The Committee would further like to request the Government to initiate action on
the recommendations contained in the Report of the Administrative Reforms Commission
without any further delay.
Information and Facilitation Counters
23.0 According to the Annual Report of the Ministry, computerized Information and Facilitation
Counters (IFCs) have been set up to provide information and assistance to the citizens regarding
the schemes and programmes and also the rules and procedures of the organizations concerned as
well as furnishing of acknowledgements and status reports of individual applications and
representations.
23.1 As per the reply furnished by the Ministry, 109 IFCs have been set up by Ministries and
Departments of Government of India, with the involvement of the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances. On the spot verifications of IFCs are carried out by the officers
of the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances annually and recommendations

19
are made for effective functioning of IFCs to ensure assistance and useful services to citizens.
During the current year, the following eight IFCs have been inspected by the officers of the
Department:—
1. Department of Pensions and Pensioner’s Welfare
2. Ministry of Railways
3. Directorate of Estates, Ministry of Urban Development
4. Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
5. Ministry of Power
6. Department of Rural Development
7. Department of Personnel and Training
8. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
23.2 In response to a written query, the Ministry has replied that the Indian Institute of Public
Administration has been engaged to study functioning of IFCs and to recommend measures to
make them more effective for the citizens and that the agency is expected to function also as a
‘special audit team’ to analyze the working of IFCs.
23.3 The Ministry, in its ATR, has stated as under :
“The recommendations to improve functioning of Information and Facilitation Counters to
make them more effective as contained in the internal evaluation and study reports of the
Department for the years from 2000 to 2005 were conveyed to the Ministries/Departments/
Organisations concerned. Confirmation reports on various actions suggested and also on the
improvements made are being obtained and on the spot verification is being carried out after
regular intervals”.
23.4 The Committee is of the opinion that citizens are immensely benefited by IFCs. It
hopes that the suggestions of IIPA would make them more user friendly and recommends
that its findings should be considered and implemented without delay.
Citizen’s Charters
24.0 As per the written. reply furnished by the Ministry, 33 Ministries/Departments of GOI have
formulated 118 citizen’s charters. Most of the Ministries/Departments of GOI having large public
interface have already formulated their charters.
24.1 The Ministry has also replied that as recommended by this Committee in its 14th Report,
letters were issued to Prasar Bharti to publicize citizen’s charter of Government of India through
electronic media.
24.2 In the ATR, the Ministry has stated thus:
“Communications have been issued to the remammg Ministries/Departments/Organisations
and continuous efforts in this regard will be taken till the final objective of implementation
of Citizen’s Charters in all Ministries/Departments/Organisations is achieved.”
24.3 The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry in this regard.
However, it recommends that the Ministry should make proactive efforts to persuade/
motivate the Departments/Ministries/Organisations which have not formulated their
Citizen’s Charters till date.

20
Sevottam
25.0 As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances has developed a model for Benchmarking Excellence in Public Service Delivery
(Sevottam) that synthesizes ground realities in India with International Best Practices. The model
has created an assessment improvement framework suited for government organizations in India.
The model was developed after extensive field study and after detailed discussions with civil
society representatives and also with officials of Government of India and some State Government
Departments. The model was further discussed in several workshops with Government of India
Departments and State Government Organizations, NGOs, Citizen Groups, academicians, Bureau of
Indian Standard (BIS), Quality Council of India (QCI) and other Institutions engaged in service
delivery improvement. The model was further fine tuned on the basis of discussions in the
conferences and also after discussions with senior officers of Government of India. It has also
been stated that the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) in consultation with Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and other Expert Groups has developed Indian
Standard IS: 15700:2005 to accord quality standard to service delivery organizations of the
Government fulfilling the requirements of the standard.
25.1 In its reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated that as directed by the
PMO, Sevottam is under implementation in ten Ministries/Departments of GOI and that the
‘Dedicated Team’ set up in the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, has
been providing necessary handholding support and guidance to these Departments for achieving
excellence in service delivery and also to get certification under Sevottam. The Ministries and
Departments implementing Sevottam are expected to get certification of excellence during 2007-08.
The certifying body is required to keep these departments under surveillance to ensure that
the standard does not fall at any point of time. The Department has finalized issues to involve
Quality Council of India to assist the Departments to prepare documents of evidence for the
certification and to complete the activities as required under the IS 15700 : 2005. It has also
replied that the Department has prepared detailed guidelines for the Ministries to achieve service
excellence as per action plan received from the PMO and that it has published a Brochure that
provides details on Sevottam and also includes status of implementation of Sevottam in the ten
Departments.
25.2 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry in this regard. It
recommends that Ministry should take further proactive steps to ensure that Sevottam is
implemented in all Departments in a phased manner.
Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism
26.0 As per the presentation made by the representatives of the Ministry, the main features of
the Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring System are online lodging of grievance from any
geographical location, prompt acknowledgement through issue of automated Registration Number,
enabling citizens to view status of lodged grievances and electronic tracking of request by Public
Grievance Officers for taking prompt action.
26.1 According to the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Public Grievances Redress and
Monitoring System (PGRAMS) has been made installed in various Ministries/Departments/
Organizations having large public interface and some of them have been using the System.
However, all Ministries have not installed PGRAMS.
26.2 In the ATR, the Ministry has replied thus:
“The Department has issued guidelines to all Central Ministries/Departments/Organisations to
appoint and duly notify at the office reception, by way of a display board, the name,

21
address, telephone and room number of Public Grievance Redress Officer for each Office,
and to indicate the days and hours during which he/she could be contacted by the public.
The Department has also suggested all Ministries/Departments of Government of India to
install PGRAMS and also to send their officers to DAR&PG to get training/workstation
knowledge of handling public grievances through PGRAMS”.
26.3 The Committee is of the opinion that such citizen friendly systems should be
installed in all Ministries/Departments/Organizations for effective and quick redressal of
citizens’ grievances which in turn would generate confidence among citizens on the
grievances redressal mechanism of the Government. The Committee recommends that the
Department may pursue the matter with those Ministries who have not yet installed
PGRAMS to take expeditious steps to install the same without further delay.
26.4 In response to a written query, the Ministry has stated that the study of existing PGRAMS
has been assigned to the Indian Institute of Public Administration and that its detailed study report
is yet to be received.
26.5 The Committee desires that the Ministry may take up the matter with IIPA for
speedy furnishing of the detailed Study Report and thereafter, ensure that the findings of
IIPA are duly considered and implemented.
26.6 In its reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has replied as follows:
“...The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances has been striving for
efficient management of grievances for prompt redressal and for proactive actions by
Ministries to ensure that causes of grievances do not arise. Several policy guidelines have
been issued in this direction. However, the response from the Departments are not very
encouraging and the requests for redress of grievances remain pending...’’.
26.7 In view of the above, the Committee recommends that the Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism should be envisaged in a statutory form on the line of the Right to
Information Act, 2005 which would make it mandatory on all Departments/Ministries/
Organisations to pursue the grievances till their logical end.
27.0 The Committee notes that after 1st February, 2007 the Department of Personnel and
Training is headed by one Secretary and that the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances and Department of Pensions and Pensioners Welfare are headed by another Secretary.
27.1 The Committee expressed concern over the delay in processing matters in the Department
of Personnel and training, as under:
“...there is a complaint...ever since independence that things get stuck up in the Personnel
Department, whether it is promotion, whether it is enlistment in the senior posts; they get
stuck up at various levels...’’.
27.2 The Committee is optimistic that creation of two separate posts of Secretary in the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and  Pensions would reduce the workload of the two
separate Departments of (i) Department of Personnel and Training and (ii) Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and Department of Pensions and Pensioners’
Welfare, which in turn would ensure expeditious disposal of work.
28.0 The Committee expressed anguish over the fact that the bureaucrats do not respond to
queries of Members of Parliament which are of great public importance/relevance, as follows:
“...Your administration has not brought about an effective delivery mechanism for the
people...Some of your officers do not even respond to the Members of Parliament...’’.

22
28.1 The Committee takes strong view of such instances and recommends that necessary
instructions should be issued to all Ministries/Departments/Organisations in this regard at
regular intervals so that they are kept reminded of their duties towards public
representatives. The bureaucrats should be given sufficient training on Public Relations so
that they are able to handle the queries of the general public and in particular, the
Members of Parliament, with utmost respect and decorum.
Cadre Strength of IAS
29.0 The Chairman of the Committee, while deliberating upon the Demands for Grants of the
Ministry, observed as under:
“...If you take your Annual Report, on page 5, it is about Cadre Management. You have
given that column to show the Authorised Cadre Strength - number of officers in position.
If you see that, from 2001 onwards, the authorized cadre strength and the number of
officers in position are very very different. This figure goes on increasing. In 2001, the
authorized strength is 5159, but the number of officers in position is only 5118. Then, the
gap gradually increases to 108, 288, 368, 473, 647 and 693. So many large gaps are there.
Why has it happened? Are you not recruiting or are you avoiding the recruitment? When
we want to say that more people should be accommodated in the position, the gap is
increasing...’’.
29.1 In its written reply, the Ministry has stated as follows:
“The gap has been increasing because the number of superannuating officers in a year has
been more than the officers being recruited through Direct Recruitment. Another reason for
the gap is that the numbers of vacancies have increased due to periodic review of the cadre
for various States”.
29.2 The Committee expresses grave concern over the vacancies prevailing in this cadre.
It feels that since civil servants form the permanent structure and backbone of
administration and since it is the personnel who belong to this cadre who moot innovative
ideas and projects, vacancies in this cadre will hamper administrative efficiency. It strongly
recommends that all out efforts should be made by the Ministry to ensure that the
vacancies in this cadre is nil.
29.3 It further reiterates its earlier recommendation that in this era of globalization,
modern management methods should be adopted. The Ministry should ensure that the
anticipated vacancies are taken into account at least one year in advance and steps are
taken to recruit new personnel to fill up the vacancies expeditiously in order to ensure that
as soon as a incumbent vacates the position, the vacancy would be filled.
Backlog of vacancies
30.0 The Committee could gather that there are huge number of vacancies in various Ministries/
Departments of the Central Government in all Grades/Class.
30.1 The Committee takes serious view of the backlog and is of the opinion that this
would adversely affect the efficiency of the Government. The Committee is disturbed by the
fact that in this era of modernization, there is undue delay in filling up vacancies. The
Committee strongly recommends that earnest steps should be taken by the Ministry to fill
up the vacancies. The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish the action taken
in this regard within six months.

23
CHAPTER–III
RECRUITMENT AGENCIES
31.0 The Union Public Service Commission and the Staff Selection Commission are the two
designated recruitment agencies of the Central Government. The UPSC makes recruitment for
Group ‘A’ services/posts and Group ‘B’ gazetted posts in Ministries/Departments etc. SSC makes
recruitment for non-gazetted posts in Ministries/Departments and their attached and subordinate
offices, carrying the pay scale of Rs. 6500-10,500 and non-technical Group ‘C’ posts. While thc
UPSC is a Constitutional body set up under Article 315 of the Constitution, the SSC has been set
up by a Resolution of the Government and has the status of an attached office of the Department
of Personnel and Training.
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
31.1 The UPSC comprises of a Chairman and ten Members. As on 12.2.2007, the Chairman and
ten members are in position. The functions of the Commission are as specified in Article 320 of
the Constitution. So far as the working of the Commission is concerned, Article 323 of the
Constitution provides for submission of Annual Report on the working by the Commission and its
laying before the Parliament. A separate report on the working of the Commission is accordingly
laid before the Parliament.
31.2 While deliberating upon the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry, the Chairman
of the Committee observed as follows:
“When we asked if there is any discrepancy or difference of opinion between the UPSC
and the Government, and you told that we compromised it by new mechanism and you are
answering it. Therefore, we are satisfied with it. If they could not put their own points
before us, then, to whom they are going to answer for it? They have given the reply to
the President of India. The President is sending the report to the Parliament. Parliament is
now considering the matter. When we are considering the matter, are we not entitled to get
the clarification from them? Now, there is a thing that they have said that Right to
Information Act will not be applicable to them to show the marks list. How can a citizen
be allowed like that? To whom can we ask these things? We can ask you, but you will just
transmit the matter and we cannot get the answer from  you”.
31.3 Further, a Member of the Committee observed as under:
“...Regarding the Union Public Service Commission, we asked for some information. Now,
they have taken a stand that they are a Constitutional body appointed under Article 315 and
it is beyond their status to come here before this Committee. They are not prepared to
come before this Committee. Of course, Constitution is there, but they get their funds from
the Consolidated Fund of India. So, the Parliament should know how this premier institution
is working. We should have an idea on what is taking place inside the UPSC. The Secretary,
UPSC finds it difficult to come here because according to him, it is not feasible. In such
a situation, what can we discuss here? You are giving us an overview. What question can
we ask you? We do not want UPSC Members to come here. But, we want people who are
implementing the work. There is no bar in the Constitution that a Secretary cannot appear
before this Parliamentary Committee and give evidence. But, they have taken a stand that
23

24
they will not appear before this Committee because it is not reasonable. This is a wrong
step and the government should take it seriously and inform the UPSC and such a stand
will not be acceptable to this Committee...’’.
31.4 The Committee reiterates its view in the 14th Report that the representatives of
UPSC Secretariat could have made a presentation before the Committee in respect of its
Demands for Grants and responded to the queries if any, of the Committee in respect of
their activities as mentioned in their Annual Report. The Committee is, therefore, unable
to examine the Demands for Grants of UPSC due to the willful avoidance of the Secretariat
of UPSC, which avoidance ipso facto is against public probity and contravenes Constitutional
norms.
31.5 The Committee strongly comments that under the garb of being a Constitutional
body, UPSC cannot absolve itself from appearing before the Committee. It observes that
representatives of constitutional bodies such as the Election Commission of India and even
the Apex Court of the Nation appear before the Committee to place their views on Demands
for Grants of their organizations. It finds no cogent reason as to why UPSC may be
accorded any exception. The Committee is of the considered opinion that UPSC, under the
pretext of Constitutional status is trying to hide its inefficient working due to which many
Governmental organisations are headless for years together because UPSC has not bothered
to recommend the right candidates. Many institutes of Department of Culture are the
examples of apathy of UPSC. There are even instances when UPSC recommended some
names for appointment, but when the process of appointment started, it withdrew its
recommendation. National Archives of India and even the premier  investigating agency CBI
are suffering shortage of staff due to apathy of UPSC.
31.6 UPSC, being a Constitutional body should uphold high standards of transparency and
accountability. But strangely, UPSC is projecting itself as above the law of the land. It does
not want to give information under the RTI Act. It does not want to tell how it is spending
the public money given to it and it is accountable to none, although it is a creature of the
Constitution. This attitude of UPSC is certainly antithetic to the principles of Parliamentary
democracy like ours. Although the action of UPSC is reprehensible and falls within the
purview of the breach of privilege of Parliament, since this Committee itself acts as
Parliament, it takes a lenient view and before resorting to the inherent powers of breach
of privilege, it recommends that the Government should deliberate upon the situation at the
highest level and take necessary action to ensure that such a grave lapse and subversion
of democratic norms set forth by the Constitution does not occur in future.
32.0 The representatives of the Ministry, during their presentation, apprised the Committee of the
new IT-based initiatives such as electronic digitization of records, UPSC Intranet work and
computerised advisor database taken up by UPSC.
32.1 The Committee appreciates such initiatives and hopes that the on-line application
system which is proposed to be introduced may be taken up expeditiously. The Committee
hopes that the said system would prove to be user friendly and would be beneficial in the
larger interest of the candidates.
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION
33.0 The main responsibility of the Staff Selection Commission is to make recruitment to Group
C (non-technical) and Group B (non-gazetted—both technical and non-technical) posts in
Departments of Government of India, its attached and subordinate offices except those for which
recruitment is made by the Railway Recruitment Boards and Industrial Establishments. The

25
Government of India by an amendment to the Resolution on 13.11.2003 and 29.09.2005 has also
given the responsibility of making recruitment to the posts of Section Officer (Commercial/Audit)
and all non-gazetted posts which carry pay scale of Rs.6,500-10,500.
33.1 The Staff Selection Commission has nine Regional/Sub-Regional Offices in different parts
of the country. These Regional/Sub-Regional Offices are responsible for receipt and processing of
applications for various examinations, issue of admit cards to the candidates, conducting the
interviews/PETs (wherever required) either at the Regional headquarters or other major cities within
the regions.
34.0 The Committee notes that as per the Annual Report of SSC, in the Group B and Group C
category, the vacancies reported are very few or nil in almost all regions other than in the Northern
Region. Moreover, the Committee notes that the major portion of the recruitment process is
outsourced by SSC.
34.1 The Committee could gather that the Government has virtually stopped the
recruitment to the posts of LDCs/UDCs (a major portion of Grade C posts) and that
Gazetted posts of Group B are recruited by the UPSC while the Departments concerned are
themselves recruiting the personnel for the posts of Group D. The Committee sees no harm
in handing over the work pertaining to recruitment to the posts of Grade C (which
constitute a meager number) to the Departments concerned. When UPSC is handling the
Gazetted posts of Group B, there will not be any problem for them for the. recruitment of
Group B posts.
34.2 Therefore, the Committee wishes to reiterate its earlier recommendation that SSC
be wound up to save the public money and the recruitment process in respect of Group C
posts should be delegated to the respective Departments wherein vacancies arise and that
the recruitment for posts of superior grades should be done by UPSC which has sufficient
infrastructure and expertise for the same.

26
CHAPTER–IV
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
35.0 The CBI came into existence in the year 1941 with a rather limited role and responsibility
to investigate offences of bribery and corruption connected with transactions relating to War and
Supply Department, Government of India. Over the last 64 years, the organisation has evolved
from an anti-corruption agency to a multi-faceted, multi-disciplinary central police-law enforcement
agency with capability, credibility and legal mandate to investigate and prosecute offences anywhere
in India. At present, CBI has the following Divisions:
(1) Anti Corruption Division;
(2) Economic Offences Division;
(3) Special Crimes Division;
(4) Directorate of Prosecution;
(5) Administration Division;
(6) Policy and Coordination Division;
(7) Training Division;
(8) Interpol Division; and
(9) Central Forensic Science Laboratory.
35.1 The CBI derives the power to investigate from thc Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,
1946 (DSPE). As per section 2 of the Act, DSPE has jurisdiction to investigate offences in the
Union Territories only. However, the jurisdiction can be extended by the Central Government to
other areas including Railway areas and States under section 5(1) of the Act, provided the State
Governments have accorded consent under section 6 of the Act. The superintendence of Delhi
Special Police Establishment vests with the Central Government save investigations of offences
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 in which the superintendence vests with the Central
Vigilance Commission.
35.2 Director, CBI as Inspector General of Police, Delhi Special Police Establishment, is
responsible for the administration of the organization. Director, CBI has been provided security of
tenure in CBI by the CVC Act, 2003 and he can continue to hold office for a period not less than
two years from the date on which he assumes office, notwithstanding anything contrary in the
conditions of service. The CVC Act also provides mechanism for selection of Director, CBI and
other officers of the rank of SP and above in CBI.
36. During the discussion on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions, the Director, CBI made a brief presentation before the Committee.
He narrated the mission and functions of CBI and the problems existing in the organisation.
37. The Director, CBI deposed as follows:
“...Sir, we started last year with very specific challenges before us. The most important
was to reduce the time taken for each and every investigation. We resolved ourselves after
26

27
consulting, reviewing the human resource and in generality the various aspects of
investigation and offences that involve terrorist activities. We believe that more than 85
cases can be disposed of in one years’ time. The second challenge we had before us was
to improve the conviction rate percentage of each and every case that after successful
investigation we put up before the court. Besides improving the conviction percentage or
conviction rate we also took it up as challenge to reduce the pendency of cases under trial
before the trial court. The third most important challenge that we took upon ourselves to
resolve and address was to improve the vacancy position. We have progressed quite a bit,
but not satisfactorily. Last but not the least and the most important aspect as to how to
ensure the credibility of the organization, I would submit that credibility of CBI remains
constant and transparent before the Constitutional Courts, Parliament and, most importantly,
efore the citizens...”
38.0 As per the Annual Report of CBI, the total sanctioned strength of CBI as on 31.12.2006
was 5959. However, the actual manpower available was 4652 and as many as 1307 posts were
lying vacant at the end of the year. The vacancies in the executive cadres were mainly in the ranks
of Joint Director- 6, Deputy Inspector General of Police-5, Sr. Supdt. of Police-I, Supdt. of Police-
24, Addl. Supdt. of Police-I 5, Dy. Supdt. of Police-II8, Inspector-I 68, Sub. Inspector-95, Asstt.
Sub Inspector-24, Head Constables-42, Constables-I 34+95. Besides there were vacancies of 75
Law Officers at various levels. 94 Technical posts were also vacant.
38.1 The Committee? in its 14th Report, had expressed concern over the vacancies prevailing in
CBI.
Over all vacancy position in CBI as on 31.12.2006
Sanctioned Actual Strength Vacancy
Strength
Executive Officer 4078 3261 817
Law Officer 230 155 75
Technical Officer 154 60 94
Ministerial Level 1284 998 286
Group ‘D’ Level 213 178 35
G
RAND T OTAL: 5959 4652 1170+137@
@ A total number of 137+ 167 in group ‘B’ (non-gazetted), Group ‘C’ and  Group ‘D’ have been
recommended for abolition by the Screening Committee.
38.2 In this regard, the Ministry has replied that the proposals submitted by CBI for making
suitable amendments in the relevant Recruitment Rules with a view to fill up vacancies early
are under consideration in this Department in accordance with the laid down procedure in this
regard.
38.3 The Committee expresses deep anguish over the prevailing vacancies in CBI. It
is of the opinion that the vacancies result in severe strain on the manpower who are
hard pressed to deliver positive results and that it is one of the major problems faced in
human resources management. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
should augment its efforts to make suitable amendments in the relevant Recruitment Rules
and that steps should be taken on a war footing basis to fill up the vacancies by

28
31st December, 2007. The Government should also take necessary action for need-based
augmentation in staff strength in the CHI so that it can rise up to the people’s expectation.
The Committee is further of the view that in case there is delay in finalization of
Recruitment Rules due to reasons whatsoever, then pending finalization of the Recruitment
Rules, the vacancies may be filled up on an interim basis.
38.4 The CBI, in its written reply, has highlighted the following circumstances as reasons for
vacancies:
(i) As per the existing austerity measures of the Government, prior approval of the
Screening Committee constituted by Government is required to be taken before filling up
Direct Recruitment vacancies. CBI has been raising the issue of exemption from the
purview of Screening Committee.
(ii) Prior approval/clearance of the Surplus Cell is also required to be taken before filling
up the vacancies under direct recruitment quota. In the absence of clearance of the Surplus
Cell, recruitment can’t be done.
(iii) Ministry of Finance vide its O.M. No. 7(7)-E(Coord)/93 dated 03.05.1993 has issued
instructions that if a post remains vacant for more than one year, that will be treated as
“deemed abolished” and before filling up the same, approval of the Department of
Expenditure will be required for its revival. This is a very lengthy process.
(iv) The induction of officers in the ranks of Dy. SP and Addl. SP is done through UPSC,
which is a very lengthy process and huge number of vacancies are existing against these
posts.
38.5 In this regard, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations in its 5th
Report that the requirement of prior approval of the Screening Committee for filling of
direct recruitment vacancies should be waived for CBI and that reduction of staff strength
at any level on ground of austerity measure should not be resorted to in this premier
investigating agency of the country.
38.6 Further, the Committee recommends that more powers should be delegated to the
CBI for the selection process of its officials in tunc with the requirement of the
organization. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Director, CBI, being
the head of the organization should be made a full-fledged member of the CBI Selection
Committee as he is the fittest person to assess the requirements of the organization and
the suitability of an officer for the CBI.
38.7 Further, the Committee recommends that the concerns raised by CBI which are
enumerated in para 38.4. should be addressed by the Ministry urgently and that proactive
steps should be taken in this regard.
38.8 The CBI, in its written reply, has stated thus:
“In order to ensure better age profile, smooth career progression and for substantial
advantage to the organization in terms of better quality induction, CBI has recommended to
recruit officers at the level of Inspector instead of Sub-Inspector level. This was also
required keeping in view that under Prevention of Corruption Act, no officers below the
rank of  Inspector can investigate a case under thc Act, and hence the strength of  SI in CBI
largely remains unutilized/under utilized so far as investigation is concerned”.
38.9 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should examine this proposal and
adopt necessary measures to implement the proposal.

29
38.10 The Committee notes that police personnel coming on deputation to CBI are required
to vacate their accommodation in their respective States even if they are posted at the same
place. It feels that this is a disincentive for persons who opt for deputation to CBI, but who
want to retain their accommodation for their families in their respective State. Therefore,
the Committee recommends that personnel coming from other Forces should be permitted
to retain their accommodation allotted to them by the parent organisation if they are posted
at the same place or outside the State for the benefit of their families.
38.11 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in the 14th Report that in the
event of vacancies not being filled in the deputationist cadre, steps should be taken to fill
up those vacancies by seeking recruitment from the permanent cadre of CBI.
39.0 The representatives of  CBI deposed before the Committee that at present, the prosecution
and technical staff are not entitled to Special Incentive Allowance.
39.1 The Committee notes that though the fees for Special Counsels and Retainer
Counsels have been increased as stated in the Annual Report of CBI, the fee structure of
CBI counsels is not satisfactory. It recommends that Special Incentive Allowance should be
granted to the prosecution and technical staff so as to attract best talent. This would ensure
speedy investigation/prosecution. It also recommends that Training Allowance should be
granted to all ranks of CBI Academy.
40.0 The representatives of CBI deposed before the Committee that in case of Departmental
Promotion Committees, delay occurs on the part of UPSC.
40.1 The Committee recommends that an effective mechanism should be chalked out in
order to ensure that DPCs of CBI personnel are not delayed in UPSC. This is needed to
ensure quick career progression in CBI. The Government may consider to amend the
recruitment rules of CBI so as to delink the consultations in respect of DPCs with the
UPSC for speedy filling up of the vacancies.
41.0 In the Annual Report of CVC, it has been stated that the Director of CBI enjoys very little
financial and administrative autonomy even when compared to the heads of other Central Police
Organisations.
41.1 In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Director, CBI should be granted
more administrative powers such as the power to decide the appointment and removal of
officers of the rank of DySP and above. Moreover, more financial powers should be vested
with the Director, CBI so that expenditure incurred on activites such as training, purchase
of computers etc. do not suffer, owing to lack of funds.
42.0 In the ATR, the Ministry has stated that the consolidated Plan document for modernization
of CBI is under preparation.
42.1 The Committee hopes that the consolidated plan document for modernization of CBI,
which is awaited, would be prepared and implemented at the earliest. The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendation that much more needs to be done regarding
modernization in terms of investigation, interrogation and training.
43.0 The Committee had, in its 5th and 14th Reports, recommended that a separate Act has to
be promulgated for CBI in tune with the requirements of the time to ensure credibility and
impartiality.
43.1 The Committee regrets to note that no proactive steps have been taken in this
regard. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry should

30
consider bringing forward a separate enactment for CBI rather than deriving powers from
the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 in order to ensure its smooth functioning.
44.0 The Committee had also recommended in its previous Reports that CBI should be
empowered by a suitable legislation to investigate all the offences under the Central laws like
Prevention of Corruption Act, the Income Tax Act, the Central Customs &Excise Act etc. in any
part of the country after obtaining the concurrence of the Central Government, but things have not
moved in this direction.
44.1 The Committee, therefore, once again reiterates its earlier recommendation that CBI
should be empowered by a suitable legislation to investigate all the offences under the central
laws in any part of the country after obtaining concurrence of the Central Government.
45.0 The Committee, in its 5th and 14th Reports, had suggested that an Internal Financial
Advisor may be appointed to render advice on financial matters in CBI since similar system is
already functioning in Central Police Organisations.
45.1 The Ministry had replied that the proposal to appoint an Internal Financial Advisor was
being examined.
45.2 The Committee recommends that the proposal must be implemented without further
delay since it is imperative to ensure the functional independence of CBI.
46.0 The representatives of CBI deposed before the Committee that the conviction rate of CBI
has improved from 65.6% in 200S to 72.9% in 2006.
46.1 The Committee is pleased to note the positive output, but is of the opinion that
efforts should be made to improve the infrastructure, incentives and facilities available to
the investigation  officers and prosecutors which would improve the functioning of CBI and
result in higher rate of conviction.
47.0 The Committee notes that the satisfaction level in respect of housing all over the CBI is
27% only. As per the reply furnished by the Ministry, CBI Head Office has asked various branches
to submit proposals for purchase of ready built flats to meet the requirement of residential
accommodation and to raise the minimum satisfaction level upto 60%.
47.1 The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the minimum satisfaction
level should be 60%. It recommends that the Ministry should augment its efforts to
improve the accommodation facilities extended to CBI personnel inorder to attract best
talent to its fold.
48.0 The Committee, in its 5th and 14th Reports, had recommended that the Ministry should
ensure that the construction of CBI Head Quarters Building takes place within the stipulated period.
48.1 The Committee has been informed that the work pertaining to the construction has been
handed over to the National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC).
48.2 The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation that the Ministry
should ensure that construction of CBI Head Quarters Building takes place within the
stipulated period.
48.3 In its presentation before the Committee, CBI had cited delay in prosecution sanction as a
reason for delay in conclusion of investigating processes.
48.4 In its written reply, the CBI has stated thus:
“Each case is required to be examined separately by the respective Ministry/Department for
decision on merits. The reasons for the delay in obtaining prosecution sanction is generally

31
attributed to incomplete Superintendent of Police report, which may not be adequately
supported by convincing documentary evidences. Sometimes there are delays in taking
decision by the concerned competent authority who may choose to enter into
correspondence with other authorities including the CVC and by considering representations
of the accused officer.
The Central Vigilance Commission have issued guidelines for checking delay in accord of
sanction for prosecution on 12.5.05. In order to check delay in grant of sanction for
prosecution, this Department has also issued detailed guidelines recently on 6.11.06
prescribing time limit at each stage and also fixing responsibilities on deliberate delays. The
Secretary of the concerned Ministry/Department is required to furnish written explanation
to the Cabinet Secretary in all cases of delay beyond the stipulated time of three months.
Delayed cases are also required to be placed before a Committee chaired by Secretary
(Personnel) and comprising the Secretary of the Administrative Ministry/Department, Law
Secretary and Director, CBI for scrutiny and recommendation”.
48.5 The Committee vehemently feels that once the investigating agency comes to the
conclusion that prosecution is necessary, there should not be any delay for any reason other
than the merits of prosecution itself. The Committee, accordingly, desires that the Ministry
should make all concerted efforts to ensure that the concerned Departments, Ministries of
the Central Government or State Government accord necessary sanction for prosecution as
and when required.

32
CHAPTER–V
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
49.0 The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) was established in 1964, as an apex body for
exercising general superintendence and control over vigilance administration, through the
Government of India Resolution of 11.2.1964. The main mandate of the Commission was based
on the report of the Committee on Prevention of Corruption, popularly known as the Santhanam
Committee. The establishment of the Commission was considered essential for evolving and
applying common standards in deciding cases involving lack of probity and integrity in
administration.
49.1 The Resolution empowered the CVC to undertake inquiry into any transaction in which a
public servant is suspected or alleged to have acted for an improper purpose or in a corrupt
manner irrespective of his or her status. Through subsequent ordinances and legislations, the
Government has added to the functions and powers of the Commission. Subsequent to the
directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the judgement in the Writ Petition filed in public interest,
by Shri Vineet Narain and others in Jain Hawala Case, the Government promulgated an Ordinance
in 1998. The Ordinance of 1998 conferred statutory status to the CVC and the powers to exercise
superintendence over functioning of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, and also to review the
progress of the investigations perta ining to alleged offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 conducted by them.
49.2 In 1998, the Government introduced the CVC Bill in the Lok Sabha in order to replace the
Ordinance, though it was not successful. The Bill was re-introduced in 1999 and remained with
the Parliament till September 2003, when it became an Act after being duly passed in both the
Houses of Parliament and with the President’s assent. The provisions of the Act include inquiries
into offences alleged to have been committed by certain categories of public servants of the Central
Government; corporations established by or under any Central Act; Government Companies;
Societies; and local authorities owned or controlled by the Central Government; and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto. To give effect to the provisions of the Act of 2003, the
Commission exercises all powers and functions entrusted to it under the Government of India
Resolution No.24/7/64-AVD dated 11.2.1964, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of the
Act. To effectively implement the provisions of the CVC Act, the Commission continues to
discharge its functions under the CVC Resolution 1964.
49.3 Many years have passed since the enactment of CVC Act of 2003, and prevention of
corruption continues to be the prime concern of the country. In response to a Public Interest
Litigation which was filed in the Supreme Court on account of the murder of Satyendra Dubey,
the Supreme Court directed the Government to designate a suitable machinery to act on complaints
from “whistle blowers” till such time as a suitable legislation was enacted to that effect. The
Central Government while implementing the directive of the Supreme Court, has reposed its faith
on the CVC. Through a Resolution dated 21 st April, 2004 the Government has designated the
Central Vigilance Commission as the agency to act on complaints from “whistleb lowers” till such
time as the Parliament passes a law on the subject. According to the Government Resolution on
“Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informer”, 2004 the Commission has been entrusted
with the additional responsibility of keeping the identity of the complainant secret and the power
32

33
to take action against complainants making motivated or vexatious complaints. There is no
restriction on jurisdiction of the Commission in the said Resolution.
49.4 The Central Vigilance Commission is assisted by a Secretary, two Additional Secretaries and
other staff which include nine officers, an Officer on Special Duty and four Under Secretaries. In
addition, there are fourteen Commissioners for Departmental Inquiries who are nominated to
conduct departmental inquiries relating to major penalty proceedings on behalf of the disciplinary
authorities in serious and important disciplinary cases.
49.5 In principle, the jurisdiction of the Commission extends to all organizations to which the
executive power of the Union extends. Section 8(1)(d) of CVC Act restricts its jurisdiction with
respect to level of employees for inquiry into complaints to Group A level officers and such level
of officers as may be notified by the Central Government. The Commission however retains its
residuary powers to call for any individual case in respect of employees other than those who are
within its normal advisory jurisdiction. In addition, cases of difference of opinion between the CBI
and the concerned administrative authorities, in respect of employees who are not within the normal
jurisdiction of the Commission, are also resolved by the Commission.
49.6 The advisory role of the Commission extends to all matters on vigilance administration
referred to it by the organizations/departments. However, it is mandatory on the part of the
Departments to seek its advice on reports called for by the Commission. The investigation reports
furnished by the CVO or by the CBI are examined in the Commission and, depending upon the
circumstances and facts of each case, the Commission advises (a) initiation of criminal and/or
departmental proceedings against the concerned public servant(s); (b) or issuance of administrative
warning to him/her; (c) or the closure of the case. The Commission’s advice at this stage is termed
as first stage advice. The departmental proceedings could be for imposition of a major or a minor
penalty. In those cases where major penalty proceedings were advised, on conclusion of the inquiry
proceedings, the Commission’s second stage advice is required to be sought along with the inquiry
report and other inquiry record. The Commission has to be consulted where inquiry proceedings
could not be conducted due to special circumstances. While no second stage advice is required to
be obtained in minor penalty cases, where the administrative authorities propose exoneration on
consideration of defence statement, the Commission is required to be consulted.
49.7 Each Department/organization, to which the advisory jurisdiction of the Commission
extends, has a vigilance unit headed by a Chief Vigilance Officer(CVO). The CVOs act as the
extended arms of the Commission and for all practical purposes represent the Commission in
respect of vigilance matters, particularly with reference to junior officers, who fall outside the
jurisdiction of the Commission. They are required to provide experts’ assistance in advising the
head of the concerned organization in all vigilance matters concerning it. The CVOs serve as the
vital link between the Departments/organizations and the CVC and it is their function to advise the
organizations to establish effective systems and procedures and periodically monitor their
compliance to minimize factors, which provide opportunities for malpractices. On the punitive side,
the CVOs are required to ensure speedy processing of vigilance and disciplinary cases.
49.8 According to the Annual Report of the CVC, as the Designated Authority, the Commission
has laid down a procedure for lodging complaints under the above Resolution. This has been given
wide publicity and has also been put on the Commission’s website. Only such complainants
submitting the complaints as per this procedure would be entitled to protection.
50.0 Some areas of concern highlighted in the Annual Report of CVC
(i) The Central Vigilance Commission, even after its statutory status, continues to be a purely
advisory body. The superintendence of vigilance administration by CVC is severely curtailed by the

34
proviso to Section 8(1)(h) of the CVC Act whereby such superintendence is sought to be
constrained by the directions related to vigilance matters issued by the Government and by
adherence to policy matters decided by the Government. The Commission’s experience over the
years is that if the credibility of vigilance administration has to rise, such administration has to be
independent of Government. Similarly, in many areas, it is the policy and loopholes therein which
give rise to corruption, and if the Commission cannot take the initiative and be proactive, vigilance
administration will have to be less than optimally effective.
(ii) Apart from this, the Commission has also realized the need to undertake some inquires
directly, where there is apprehension on the part of the complainant that entrusting it to the
organizational vigilance may not yield proper and quick result. The Commission has, on the basis
of a scientific study of work in the organization, proposed strengthening of the resources of the
Commission. This has to be addressed most urgently.
(iii) The Commission’s role is advisory when it comes to recommending disciplinary action
against the officers coming within the purview of the Commission under Section 8(2) of the CVC
Act. Again, such recommendations are purely advisory, when it comes to punishment at the
conclusion of the Departmental disciplinary proceedings. The service rules excepting in the case of
banks, do not provide even for consultation with the Commission at both stages. These are
currently governed by executive instructions and convention. It is necessary that the first stage
advice, namely advice of the Commission on the basis of the facts brought out before it on the
nature of proceedings to be initiated against the delinquent public servant, has to be made
mandatory and binding on the disciplinary authority. This will also eliminate the inordinate delay
noticed in initiating action against the public servants on the basis of complaints and investigation
thereon. At the second stage, on conclusion of inquiry proceedings in the case of certain categories
of Government servants coming under the purview of UPSC, the Commission has also pointed to
the desirability of eliminating dual consultation. This issue has not yet been resolved by the
Government. The Commission would reiterate its suggestion that such consultation can be
dispensed with, excepting perhaps where the CVC’s recommendations is for stiff major penalty,
namely, compulsory retirement, removal from service or dismissal. This will eliminate delays and
enable the Commission to discharge its obligations under the Act more effectively and meet the
expectations of the complainants.
(iv) A detailed procedure has been laid down within the Commission for processing the
complaints. The Commission’s experience has been that  the bulk of complaints related to
grievances. The Commission had, in its earlier report, also observed that creation of an
Ombudsman, atlcast in major Government Departments having significant public dealing, could
address this important area of public concern, so that institutions like the Central Vigilance
Commission are not approached by the common citizens for redressal of their grievances.
(v) The Commission has no investigation wing of its own. Therefore, it depends entirely on the
Chief Vigilance Officers of respective organizations for the investigation into complaints and fixing
responsibilities on the errant public servants and to follow up appropriate departmental action
against them. As emphasized by the Commission time and again, the vigilance administration in
Government rests on the CVOs in the various departments/organizations.
(vi) The Commission has strongly spelt out the need for a full time CVO in major departments,
particularly, those having a number of important PSUs under their administrative control. In other
departments, there could be a system of one full time CVO for a group of departments as is the
case with Financial Advisors.
(vii) In Departments like Railways, Telecom, CPWD, Post and Telegraph, CBDT and CBEC, the
Commission has strongly recommended for an “outsider” to be posted as the CVO.

35
(viii) To ensure the independence and neutrality of the CVO, the Commission has recommended
that the CVOs’ tenure could be approved for five years subject to the Commission certifying the
satisfactory performance/functioning of the CVO after three years, so that there is an automatic
extension in such cases for a further period of two years without leaving any discretion to the
CEOs of the organizations or the Ministry concerned.
(ix) It is immensely important that the post of CVO is not allowed to remain vacant.
50.1 The Secretary, CVC deposed before the Committee as follows:
“...Sir, there is no doubt that our Commission is an advisory Commission and our first stage
advice and our second stage advice are all advisory and not mandatory. And, it is happening
in quite a few cases, as a result of which, our annual report is becoming thicker and
thicker every year. When we give our advice, it is upon the disciplinary authority to accept
it or not to accept it. Increasingly, it is seeming as if they are not accepting the CVC’s
advice. It only enters into the Annual Report as a paragraph and is placed on the Table of
the House. That is what happens. So, the question is, can we make the Commission to have
a little more teeth?...”.
50.2 The CVC, in its written reply to the Committee, has stated as follows:
“The Commission has also observed that many a time the Disciplinary Authority does not
adhere to the Commission’s first stage advice in vigilance cases and decides in deviation to
the Commission’s first stage advice. It has also been noted that there is a tendency to dilute
the disciplinary proceedings by poorly drafted charge sheet or lack of focus on the
allegation leading to poor success rate in the major penalty proceedings resulting in minor
penalty or even exoneration. The Commission has been making efforts and asking
organizations to send draft charge sheet, details of evidence etc. even at the time of sending
papers to the Commission for seeking Commission’s first stage advice. But the compliance
is very poor.
Therefore, the Commission would like its First Stage advice in vigilance cases to be made
mandatory to be implemented by all Government of India organizations, Public Sector
Undertakings and Banks”.
50.3 In the reply furnished by CVC, it has been stated thus:—
“After the establishment of CVC, which is the apex body for consultation in matters relating
to disciplinary action against the officers of All India Services and Group ‘A’ Officers, the
provision regarding consultation with UPSC also, not only leads to duality of authority but
also is a cause for inordinate delays in finalizing the disciplinary proceedings leading many
a times to the superannuation of the charge sheeted official before a penalty can be
imposed. Some times there is a conflict of views between CVC and UPSC about the penalty
to be imposed due to difference in perception between the two agencies. The Commission
being an expert agency on vigilance cases and having been made paramount in matters
pertaining to vigilance administration, it is only appropriate that it should have the final word
on disciplinary matters. Such overlapping of authority creates unnecessary delay and
hindrances in the finalization of cases, besides undermining the Commission’s authority and
which would be counter productive”.
50.4 The Committee, in its 14th Report, had recommended that the recommendations of the CVC
regarding better vigilance mechanism should be implemented without further delay.
50.5 In the ATR furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated:

36
“The proposal of CVC to appoint full time and outsiders CVOs in Ministries/Departments
of Government of India is under examination. The comments of important Ministries/
Departments have been received and a note for consideration of the Committee of
Secretaries is being submitted”.
50.6 The Committee strongly recommends that the concerns raised by CVC should be
addressed immediately to ensure independence, impartiality and credibility of the Apex anti-
corruption body. An instruction may be issued to all offices of Government of India that
before issuing charge sheet, at least in major penalty cases, the consultation with CVC
should be mandatory. It is of the considered view that the issue of overlapping of authority
with the UPSC and appointment of full time CVOs require urgent consideration and action.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that amendment in the corresponding provisions
pertaining to the UPSC may be made so that UPSC may deal with the recruitment matters
only and CVC with vigilance matters.
51.0 In the Annual Report of CVC, it has been stated that the average time taken by the
Commission in tendering its advice is about four weeks; more than 77 per cent of its advices are
tendered within three weeks of receipt of the cases.
51.1 The Committee is pleased to note that in majority of the cases, the CVC tenders
advice promptly.
52.0 As per the Annual Report of CVC, it has adopted Bureau of Indian Standards 15400 in its
complaints handling process.
52.1 The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Commission and hopes that this will
ensure proper and expeditious processing of complaints.
53.0 According to the Annual Report of CVC, it interacted with NGOs such as the Centre for
Media Studies, Citizens’ Forum Against Corruption and Transparency International Limited to gain
useful inputs about the public perception of corruption and the possible countermeasures needed.
53.1 The Committee applauds this proactive initiative of CVC.

37
MINUTES

39
RELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUST1CE
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. to 1.40 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the
10th April, 2007, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
9. Dr. C. Krishnan
10. Shri Harin Pathak
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Prof. M. Ramadass
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
14. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
15. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
1. Shri S.N. Mishra, Secretary;
2. Shri R.S. Sirohi, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor;

40
3. Shri Rahul Sarin, Additional Secretary;
4. Shri P.K. Mishra, Additional Secretary;
5. Shri Ajay Sawhney, Joint Secretary;
6. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary;
7. Shri P.K. Tripathi, Joint Secretary;
8. Shri C.B. Paliwal, Joint Secretary;
9. Shri Ranjit Datta, Secretary, Public Sector Enterprises Board;
10. Shri R.K. Saini, Director, Institute of Secretariat Training and Management;
11. Shrimati Nisha Singh, Joint Secretary, Central Information Commission;
12. Shri R.P. Nath, Director & Chief Welfare Officer;
13. Shri C.A. Subramanian, Director;
14. Shri Suresh Pal, Director;
15. Shri K.G. Verma, Director;
16. Shri Chaitanya Prasad, Director;
17. Shri N.K. Pushpakaran, Deputy Secretary;
18. Shri Vineet Pandey, Director;
19. Shri K.S. Saha, Director;
20. Shri Budh Prakash, Director;
21. Shri Aswani Kumar, Director;
22. Shri K.M. Brahme, Deputy Secretary;
23. Shri Prem Sagar, Deputy Financial Advisor;
24. Shri R.K. Ojha, Deputy Secretary; and
25. Shri M.C. Luther, Deputy Secretary.
II. Representatives of the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
and Department of Pensions and Pensioners' Welfare, Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
1. Shrimati Rajni Razdan, Secretary;
2. Shri Shasi Kant Sharma, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri A.B. Prasad, Joint Secretary;
4. Shrimati Geeta Ram, Director;
5. Shrimati Lekha Kumar, Director;
6. Shrimati Shyamlima Bannerjee, Director;
7. Shrimati Meenakshi Sharma, Director;
8. Shri Alok Ranjan, Deputy Secretary;
9. Shri Satish Kumar, Deputy Secretary;
10. Shri K. Narsimhan, Deputy Secretary;
11. Shri K.S. Chibb, Deputy Secretary; and
12. Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Deputy Secretary.

41
III. Representatives of Central Bureau of Investigation
1. Shri Vijay Shanker, Director;
2. Shri K. Saleem Ali, Joint Director;
3. Shri N.R. Wasan, Joint Director;
4. Shri S.K. Sharma, Director of Prosecution;
5. Dr. R.K. Mishra, Deputy Director;
6. Shri Anurag Garg, Assistant Inspector General;
7. Shri Anurag, Superintendent of Police;
8. Shri M.L. Sharma; and
9. Shri Parmveer Singh, Assistant Director.
IV. Representatives of Staff Selection Commission
1. Shri K.K. Lamba, Secretary; and
2. Shri C. Subramanium, Director.
V. Representative of Central Vigilance Commission
Shri Sujeet Banerjee, Secretary.
VI. Representatives of Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration,
Mussoorie
1. Shri Padamvir Singh, Joint Director; and
2. Prof. A.S. Khullar, Professor of Economics.
2. The Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training appraised the Committee that the
Department of Personnel and Training; Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances and Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare were headed by a one Secretary
before 1st February, 2007. He stated that from 1st February, 2007 he was in-charge of the
Department of Personnel and Training and that another Secretary was in-charge of the Department
of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and Department of Pensions and Pensioners’
Welfare. He deposed that the Performance Appraisal Report which replaced the Annual Confidential
Report was made effective from 1st April, 2007 and that it provided for full disclosure of
information to the apprised.
3. While responding to the apprehension raised by Members regarding bias in favour of
American institutes for imparting training to All India Services Officers, he stated that they were
selected through an international competitive bidding and that they got inputs from the Indian
Institute of Management, Bangalore; the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad and the Delhi
School of Management. He further deposed that there was a Government decision to ban direct
recruitment of Lower Division Clerks.
4. The Members voiced concern over the lack of preparedness on the part of Government to
respond to disasters, vacancies existing in the Central Information Commission, vacancies in the
Indian Administrative Service Cadre and lack of proper response of Government officials to the
queries of Members of Parliament on matters of public importance. The witnesses responded to
the queries raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).

42
5. The Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and
Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare apprised that the Pensioners’ Portal, which was
a single window mechanism to cater to the pensioners' needs and grievances was launched on
30th March, 2007. She deposed that the portal would facilitate in streamlining the pensions
sanctioning process in the Central Government/Ministries and Departments and in timely disposal
of pensions and retirement related matters. A power point presentation was made on the Portal. The
witnesses replied to the points raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
6. The Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) while tendering oral evidence before the
Committee, stated that the major challenges faced by the organisation during the last year were
reducing time taken for investigation, improving the conviction rate and filling up vacancies. A
power point presentation was also made.
7. The Members raised concern over delay in investigation, erosion of credibility and huge
number of vacancies in CBI. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
8. The Secretary, Staff Selection Commission (SSC) deposed before the Committee that
efforts were being made to reduce the time-frame for recruitment in case of three tier
examinations. He replied to the points raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
9. The Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) while tendering oral evidence before the
Committee suggested that the first stage advice of CVC, in case of disciplinary proceedings, might
be made mandatory. He deposed that the advice of CVC was not accepted in 15-20% cases. He
highlighted the issue of overlapping of functions with Union Public Service Commission and stated
that it resulted in delay in disposing cases. He responded to the queries raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
10. The representative of the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration,
Mussoorie apprised the Committee of the curriculum imparted to Indian Administrative Service
officers in the institution and stated that the syllabus was revised every five years. He replied to
the points put forward by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee adjourned at 5.12 
P.M.

43
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 8th May, 2007 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Prof. M. Ramadass
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
14. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
15. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Reports on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension; and Law and Justice.
3. * * *
4. * * *
43
*** Relates to other matters.

44
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 5.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.