Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO.
80
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2016)10th March,
Synergy between Tribal Justice System and
Regular Justice System of the Country
EIGHTIETH REPORT
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LA W AND JUSTICE
EIGHTIETH REPORT
Synergy between Tribal Justice System and
Regular Justice System of the Country
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th March, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 157


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv )
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-11
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS – A T A G LANCE ............................................................ 12-14
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 15-24

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Adv. Sharad Bansode
15. Shri P . P. Chaudhary        
16. Shri A. H. Khan Choudhary 
17. Adv. Joice George
18. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
19. Shri Santosh Kumar
20. Shri Bhagwant Mann
21. Shri Anoop Mishra
22. Shri B. V . Nayak
23. Shri Vincent H. Pala
24. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri  M. Udhayakumar
29. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
30. Dr. Anshul Verma
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok  K.  Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee, present Eightieth Report on Synergy
between Tribal Justice System and Regular Justice System of the Country. The objective of the Report is to
bring synergy between the tribal justice systems in the North-Eastern India with the regular justice system
of the country.
2. The Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice and Secretary, Ministry of Tribal
Affairs made a detailed presentation on the subject on 28 th October, 2014 and 30 th June 2015, respectively,
on the subject. The Committee also heard non-official witnesses on the subject on 30 th June, 2015. The
Committee during its study-visit to Guwahati and Shillong held discussions with the State Government of
Assam and Meghalaya, Tribal Councils/leaders and other stakeholders on the subject.
3. While considering the subject, the Committee has relied on following documents/information: —
(i) Background Note on the subject furnished by the Department of Justice;
(ii) T wenty-sixth Report of this Committee on Demands for Grants (2008-09), Ministry of
Law and Justice, presented to Parliament on 29
th April, 2008;
(iii) Report of the High Level Committee on Socio-Economic, Health and Educational Status of
Tribal Communities of India (2014) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs;
(iv) National Commission for Scheduled Tribes: Special Report Good Governance for Tribal
Development and Administration (2012);
(v) Customary Laws in North-East India: Impact on Women by National Commission for Women
(2007);
(vi) Third Report of the Standing Committee on Inter-Sectoral Issues Relating to Tribal
Development on Standards of Administration on Governance in the Scheduled Areas (2009)
of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs;
(vii) A Consultation Paper on Empowering and Strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions/
Autonomous District Councils/Traditional Tribal Governing Institutions in North-East India
(2001), Report of the National Commission to review the working of the Constitution.
 (viii) Lecture on Customary Laws and Good Governance, Lecture Series on Tribal and Customary
Laws  delivered by Justice Lokur, Justice Madan B. Lokur (2013) at Central University of
Jharkhand, Ranchi;
(ix) Y ojna (January, 2014);
(x) The Constitution of India; and
(xi) Views/suggestions contained in Memoranda received from stakeholders is at ANNEXURE-I.
(iii)

(iv)
4. The Committee wishes to extend sincere thanks to State Governments, Autonomous District Councils,
tribal leaders, experts and other stakeholders (Annexure-II) who appeared before the Committee during
the examination of the subject.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
6. The Committee adopted the Report on 8 th March, 2016.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
8th March , 2016 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha.

1
REPORT
India is the home to large number of tribal Communities. The tribal population of the
country, as per 2011 census, is 104281034, constituting 8.61 percent of the total population
(1210569573) which inhabit in 15 percent of the geographical area of the country. The total
recognised tribes in the country listed in the First Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribe)
Order, 1950 is 698. Out of 698 recognised tribes in the country, as many as 31 tribes have more
than five lakh population
1. Broadly, the tribal communities inhabit in two distinct geographical areas
of the country- the Central India and the North-Eastern Region 2. However, except Assam, the ratio
of State-wise population of Scheduled Tribes to total population of States is highest in the North-
Eastern States. The percentage of Scheduled Tribes population to total population of the State on
North Eastern Region is 94.4 % in Mizoram, 86.5% in Nagaland, 86.1% in Meghalaya, 68.8% in
Arunachal Pradesh, 35.1% in Manipur, 33.8% in Sikkim, 31.8% in Tripura and 12.4% in Assam.
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS FOR SCHEDULED TRIBES IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION
2. Constitution of India provides protection to indigenous tribal communities and their customs
through Articles 244, 244-A and 371A (Nagaland) and 371G (Mizoram). Article 366 (25) defines
Scheduled Tribes as "such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribes or
tribal communities as are deemed under Article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this
Constitution". Article 342 provides for specification of tribes or tribal communities or parts of or
groups within tribes or tribal communities which are deemed to be for the purposes of the
Constitution the Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union Territory. In pursuance of these
provisions, the list of Scheduled Tribes are notified for each State or Union Territory and are valid
only within the jurisdiction of that State or Union Territory and not outside. The areas where tribal
populations are preponderance are called Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas in the country.
3. The Fifth Schedule of Constitution applies to tribal communities of Central India, while the
Sixth Schedule applies to certain tribal communities of North-Eastern Region. The  Sixth  Schedule
of the Constitution operates  in  parts  of  Assam,  Mizoram  and  Tripura  and  throughout  the
State  of Meghalaya, except Shillong. The Schedule provides for administration of certain tribal
areas as autonomous entities, wherein the administration of autonomous district and region is to be
vested in District and Regional Councils in these areas which have a long tradition of self
management and governance systems. The Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996
(PESA) has been made applicable to Fifth Schedule areas. The Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 is also
made applicable to Fifth Schedule areas. Traditional Gram Sabhas inter-alia  have been given the
power to adjudicate in accordance with prevalent tradition and customs under PESA, 1996.  Both
PESA, 1996 and Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 are yet to be extended to North-Eastern States.
1
1 Bhil, Gond, Santhal, Mina, Naikada, Oraon, Sugalis, Munda, Naga, Kond, Boro, Koli Mahadev, Khasi, Kol, Varli, Kokna, Kawar,
Ho, Gujjar, Korku, Bhumij, Garo, Koya, Mizo (Lushai) Tribes, Halba, Dharua, Dubla, Mishing, Tripuri, Rathawa, Saharia.
2 Statistical Profile of Scheduled Tribes in India, 2013 . Statistical Division, Ministry of Tribal Affairs (P.3)

2
DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEM IN SCHEDULE/TRIBAL AREAS OF NORTH-EASTERN
REGION
4. Para 4 of the Sixth Schedule to Constitution envisages Customary Village Council/Court in
respect of law enacted under paras 3 and 4 of the Schedule where both the parties are Scheduled
Tribe of such area. Para 5 of the Sixth Schedule confers powers to District Councils to try suits
and cases under Civil Procedure Court and Criminal Procedure Court. The Customary Village
Councils/Courts are generally manned by chieftain of the tribe/clan and are assisted by Village
Council comprising village elders. It adjudicates disputes of petty nature relating to property,
matrimonial disputes, house trespass, theft, etc. the punishment is in terms of fine (mithun or
cash). There is no system of imprisonment/jail in the customary judicial system. The hearings are
publicly conducted in the presence of parties and village elders and punishments are swiftly
awarded. They follow their uncodified customary laws and are locally known as Goan Buras  in
Arunachal Pradesh, Cheirap (civil) and Garot (military court) amongst some tribes of Manipur and
Dobhasis  in Nagaland, etc.
5. The regular justice system following Civil Procedure Code and Code of Criminal Procedure
Code also simultaneously exists in North-Eastern Region which are manned by members of judicial
services. The customary Village Council/Court as well as regular court system is under the
superintendence of High Court of concerned State under Article 235 of Constitution. The parties to
the disputes have option for going to higher courts for appeal.
6. Tribal justice system and regular justice system are different in their structure and
approach. The modern legal system is largely based on the English Common Law and is
characterised by uniform territorial rules, based on universal principles of natural justice and is
administered by a hierarchy of courts. This system has regular and affirmed methods of revisiting
and revising its rules and procedures. Whereas, the traditional systems of justice are largely un-
codified, comprise of overlapping jurisdictions enjoying autonomy in administration of justice. Due
to the diversity among the tribal groups, each tribe in India has its unique socio-cultural milieu and
dispute resolution practices and which have remained unchanged over generations
3.
7. In Scheduled and Tribal Areas, the preference of people to the tribal justice system is quite
high as compared to the formal justice system of Courts. Due to expensive and dilatory procedures
of courts, they fail to become the endpoints for justice for the marginalised. Therefore, traditional
or customary institutions for resolution of disputes have been recognised through legislative
instruments in several States
4.
8. Article 13(3) of the Constitution of India has clearly recognized custom as a source of law.
Customs are recognised as a measure of laws if that is immemorial in origin, reasonable in nature
and continuous in use and in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution. In U Fairly Syiem
Vs. Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council ( Writ Petition No. 5866 of 2006 (PS) Guwahati High
Court) to the election of Syiem or administrative head of the Nongstoin, the custom as codified by
the Khasi Hills Autonomous District (Nomination and Election of the Syiem, Deputy Syiem and
Electors of Nongstoin Syiemship) Act, 2003 and Nongstoin Syiemship Rules, 2003 was relied upon
3 Background Note on the subject supplied by Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice.
4 Ibid

3
to uphold the election of Syiem. In Ruiweinao Kahaosan Tangkhul Vs. Rueiweinao Simirei (AIR
1961 Manipur 1) the court held that the custom of offering one day free labour in a year to the
village head contained elements of compulsion which is void under Article 23 of the Constitution of
India
5.
9. National Commission for Women in its Report on Customary Laws in North-East India:
Impact on Women (2007) submitted that:
"…In the North-east many tribes continue to regulate themselves according to their own
customary laws while most laws of the Middle India tribes fell by the wayside because of
the onslaught of the pan-Indian laws. Among many hill tribes of this region the village
chief regulates the use of land and water and has administrative and judicial power. …The
tribes combine kinship based political organisation with well-defined laws and procedures
for punishment of offenders through traditional courts. ….
6"
10. Justice Madan B. Lokur of Supreme Court of India in his Lecture Series on Tribal and
Customary Laws (2013) opined that:
"....The system of enforcement of tribal customs is very strong in the North-East and is
constitutionally protected. Conventional courts, as we understand them, are very often out
of reach for tribals in the North-East and that is another reason why the method of
dispensing justice in accordance with customary law is so popular among the tribals.... it is
necessary for all of us to try and strengthen customary courts and enforcement of customary
laws amongst the tribal communities since that system of administration of justice has been
accepted and practised by them for centuries without any dissatisfaction with their justice
delivery system
7.
CODIFICATION OF CUSTOMARY LAW OF THE TRIBES
11. The first prerequisite for an effective synergy between the tribal justice system and the
regular justice system is the dedicated effort at codification of customary law of tribal communities
in the region. At present a large body of tribal laws in the North-Eastern region is oral in nature
which is committed to the memory of a few key individuals in the village. A few attempts are being
made by academic and a research institutions to codify the law. One among them is Law Research
Institute, Guwahati. In Jharkhand, the customary laws on tenurial rights over land have been
documented for Munda tribe, in the Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908. Similarly, in Meghalaya  and
Nagaland, customary village courts have been documented in Administration of Justice Rules, 1953
of Meghalaya and the Nagaland Village and Area Councils Act, 1978.
12. The Committee in its Twenty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of
Law and Justice has observed that:
"….Though, there were no written rules for administration of tribal villages, but the
customs and traditions were almost compatible with the modern concepts of jurisprudence.
5 As cited In Lokur, Justice Madan B. 2013. Customary Laws And Good Governance, Lecture Series on Tribal And Customary Laws.
Ranchi, Central University of Jharkhand (P . 16-17).
6 Fernandes, Walter, Melville Pereira And Vizalenu Khatso, 2007. Customary Laws In North-East India: Impact on Women . New
Delhi: National Commission for Women.  (P.24). http://ncw.nic.in/pdfreports/Customary%20law.pdf
7 Lokur, Justice Madan B, 2013. Customary Laws and Good Governance , Lecture Series on Tribal and Customary Laws, Ranchi.
Central University of Jharkhand (P .36).

4
The tribal councils in North-East State were functioning on the lines of the system evolved
for parliamentary democracy, which is in vogue now a days. The council derived their
authority from the expression of the will and power of the people. They had the support of
both social and supernatural. Thus the concept of parliamentary democracy is not new to
the tribal society
8.
DEPOSITION OF SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
13. The Secretary, Department of Justice in her deposition submitted that the Subject 'Synergy
between Tribal Justice System and Regular Justice System of the Country' is actually not part of
their mandate.  The Department of Justice stated that the practices under the tribal justice system
are un-codified, customary and varies from tribe to tribe. Certain provisions in the Constitution of
India and some special laws, however, recognise the tribal customary practices and also the
existence and role of community participation in disputes resolution. The Fifth and Sixth Schedules
of the Constitution provide for administration of tribal areas in notified States. Special Constitutional
provisions under Article 371 have been provided for North-Eastern States.  Dispute adjudication as
per traditions and customs has been provided for in the Panchayat (Extension to Scheduled Areas)
Act, 1996 and Scheduled Tribe and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006. The customary institutions are preferred places for the dispute resolution and
institutions of Gaon Buras  are recognized in certain North-Eastern States. The Rules for the
Administration of Justice and Police in Nagaland framed under Scheduled District Act, 1874, as
amended in 1984 has brought about synergy between the tribal and regular justice system where
the customary courts try cases between parties belonging to Scheduled Tribes.
DEPOSITION OF SECRETARY, MINISTRY TRIBAL AFFAIRS
14. The Secretary submitted that the Ministry has nothing to do with tribal justice system.  He
averred that Ministry of Tribal Affairs is essentially concerned with governance issues in tribal area
under Fifth Schedule of the Constitution. He added that as per allocation of Business Rules, 1961
administration of justice, access to justice and justice delivery system are allocated to Department
of Justice.  There is neither a division nor any record of past experience with the Ministry for
dealing with the subject.
15. Ministry of Tribal Affairs further submitted that Village Panchayat/Council of Tribal
communities residing in Fifth Schedule areas do not exercise judicial power while those residing in
Sixth Schedule areas have judicial powers. Since customary tribal laws are a sort of oral tradition,
codification thereof is a tough challenge for the State. There have been allegations that village heads
have reportedly used those customary laws prejudicially in favour of their relatives and
acquaintances. He submitted that customary tribal law should be in conformity with principle of
natural justice and need to be synchronised with regular justice system to check its misuse.
SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED FROM STATE GOVERNMENTS OF NORTH-EASTERN STATES
16. The Committee then sent a questionnaire to the Secretary, Department of Justice with a
view to obtain written views of the Law Secretaries of the tribal dominated States of the Country.
8 Twenty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Law and Justice presented to Parliament on 29th April,
2008 (P . 76).

5
Accordingly, replies/comments of the North-Eastern States of Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura,
Nagaland, Manipur, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh have been received.
17. The State Government of Meghalaya submitted that the State falls under the Sixth Schedule
of the Constitution. Village Courts are in existence in all the villages headed by headman in East
Khasi Hills, Doloi's in Jainitia Hills and Nokmas/Sordars/Laskar in Garo Hills under Rules 2(k), 5
and 6 of the Administration of Justice Rules, 1953. An appeal from these courts lies with the
Syiem's/District Council Courts and High Court. On the issue of codification of customary laws, the
State Government submitted that only those customary laws that are practised generally have been
codified by the respective District Councils. The Customary laws which are localised and varies
from village to village are in the process of codification.
18. The State Government of Mizoram submitted that there is no conflict between tribal justice
system and regular justice system in the State. The Justice System existing in the Sixth Schedule
Areas (rural Mizoram) does not violate the Indian Constitution and the laws made thereunder.
19. The State Government of Tripura submitted that majority of tribal people in the State are
guided by community based customary laws and as a result tribal peoples' participation in the
regular justice system of the State judiciary for settlement of disputes is very low. Tribal
communities such as Jamatias have hierarchal dispute resolution mechanisms which may or may
not involve the mainstream courts. Only heinous cases come to the regular courts through police
stations.  In the tradition bound tribal society the law of the statute book does not command the
respect which the dictum of the village elders does. The State Government has requested to do
away with the customary laws which are repugnant to the concept of natural justice and
fundamental rights and at the same time adopting customary laws which are reasonable and
beneficial to the interests of larger society.
20. The State Government of Nagaland submitted that under Article 371A of the Constitution
safeguard is provided for administration of both civil and criminal justice according to Naga
customary laws. The Rules of Administration of Justice and Police in Nagaland, 1937 provide for
administration of justice according to customary laws and procedures. The criminal justice
continues to be administered by the Village Courts at the village level, at the Dubashi's  Court on
appeals and thereafter the Assistant to Deputy Commissioner and the High Courts. Under the 1937
rules there are no specific provisions for recording of proceedings during trials which are
conducted through viva voce , which pose a problem for higher courts during the appeal stage.
Accordingly, the Customary Courts are being sensitised to record proceedings and judgements. The
separation of judiciary from executive has been commenced in Dimapur district which are being
extended to other districts. In Dimapur due to mixed population of various Naga tribes, customary
laws differ from tribe to tribe so litigants prefer to approach statutory courts under regular
mainstream statutes.
21. The State Government of Sikkim submitted that no area in the State of Sikkim has been
included or declared as Scheduled Area as per the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution. The concept
of tribal justice system does not exist and the judicial system in the State involving the
administration of justice covers and applies uniformly to all individuals, tribals and non-tribals.
However, the State Government made an attempt for ascertaining and codification of customary

6
laws of the different ethnic communities in the State and accordingly, the Law Commission of
Sikkim under the Chairmanship of Justice D. M. Sen submitted report on Sikkim Customary Laws.
However, due to divergent views on different subjects  and lack of uniformity it was not found
feasible for codification.
22. The State Government of Manipur submitted that no area of the State is a Scheduled Area
under the Constitution of India. The customary laws are not in use and statutory laws are followed
in all areas of the State and also there is no specific Acts, Rules etc. which incorporate tribal laws.
However, for legislating laws relating to inheritance of property, marriage and divorce, the same has
to be done in consultation with the Hill Areas Committee of the Manipur Legislative Assembly in
terms of the Presidential order of 1972 promulgated under the Article 371C of the Constitution of
India.
23. The State Government of Arunachal Pradesh submitted that tribes in the State have distinct
customary laws and traditional institutions for administrating justice. These administrations
administer both civil and criminal justice. At higher level, there is separation of powers between
judiciary and executive, however, due to inadequacy of regular courts the traditional justice system
of the tribes fill the gap at lower levels. The indigenous institutions are more democratic,
participatory, simple, cost effective and expeditious and have prevented the accumulation of
pendency of cases. The State Government has further submitted that there is an urgent need to
make special provisions akin to Articles 371A and 371G , respectively, meant for Nagaland and
Mizoram.
24.   In response to Committee's query viz., whether any efforts have been made by the respective
State Government's to synergise the tribal system with the regular judicial system, the State
Governments of Meghalaya and Nagaland submitted that efforts in this direction have been made by
the State Government, whereas State Government of Mizoram submitted that no effort in this
direction has been made. Further, the customary laws are not followed for the purpose of dispute
resolution in the States of Sikkim and Manipur.
25. The State Government of Meghalaya submitted that the effort in this regard has been made
through the Administration of Justice Rules. The State Government of Nagaland submitted that
Tribal Court tries cases according to the customary laws and procedures and appeals against their
decisions are made to the Deputy Commissioner under the Rules for Administration of Justice and
Police in Nagaland, 1937. The land disputes in Dimapur District are allotted/mutated according to
the Assam Land and Revenue Regulation Act, 1886 and are dealt by Statutory Courts.
26. The State Government of Mizoram submitted that no effort in this direction has been made
as the justice system existing in the tribal areas does not violate/abridge the Constitutional
provisions and they are regarded as cost effective and more acceptable among the tribes. The State
Government added that the biggest challenge in this regard would the effort to change the mindset
of the tribal people.
SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED FROM STAKEHOLDERS
27. Suggestions received from Tribal leaders, Autonomous District Councils and other
Stakeholders during the study-visit of the Committee to Shillong and Guwahati from 31st October

7
to 6th November, 2015:-
(a) The State Government of Assam submitted that the State Government have enacted
two Acts (i) The Assam Administration of Justice in Karbi Anglong District Act,
2009, and (ii) The Assam Administration of Justice in North Cachar Hills District
Act, 2009 to administer both civil and criminal justice in the above mentioned tribal
areas by setting up courts.
(b) Shri Melvil Pereira of North-Eastern Social Research Centre, Guwahati submitted
that Tribal customary law is an important part of tribal societies. They are not just
a matter of jurisprudence but a part of their culture. It is a visible expression of
values, ideals and principles a particular culture upholds. It is followed because it is
convenient, conducive and helpful to society as it reflects societal norms and values.
Most tribes in the region live according to their customary law. In North-East India,
many tribes have documented and compiled their customary laws ( e.g. Angamis in
Nagaland). Customary Laws need to be made gender sensitive in case of
participation, property and maintenance keeping in view of the Fundamental Rights
contained in the Part III of the Constitution. The appointment of young Gaon Bura
and Dobashis  who are not well versed in the tribal customary law has resulted in
public losing its faith in the customary law. In 2005, Government of Nagaland
announced its plan for a single customary law for the entire State.
(c) Representatives of Karbi Anglong Autonomous District Council submitted that Karbis
have their own traditional self-governing institutions. The Traditional system of
governance is monarchical in nature, whereby the king or Lindokpo  is at the apex
and followed by these traditional Habai (Head of region) and Sarthe (Head of the
village). The King has to attend all the social matters and settle disputes referred by
the Habais and  Lindokpos . The Karbis also have a traditional bachelors' dormitory
locally known as Riso Ateriang  and Jirkedam, which acts as a training centre for
social activities under the leadership of chiefs.
(d) Representatives of Singpo Tribe submitted that the Singpo society maintains its
customary law in its day to day activities and only in exceptional cases it is referred
to the Police State/Magistrate. According to the Singpos, the process of delivering
justice through customary law is more accurate and amicable. Singpo community is
based on the chieftainship system and the Chief, who is called Mung Du , rules the
clan. Below him there are various other leaders hierarchically arranged. Disputes are
of the community are first tried by Mare Agi  or the village Headman and thereafter,
it moves up in the hierarchy if it is not resolved at lower level. The final decision on
a dispute is decided by the Mung Du  with the help of his council members.
(e) Representatives of Rabha Hasong Autonomous Council submitted that the customary
laws of Rabhas are institution which enforces faithful observance of the rules of
conduct approved by the society. These laws are meant for the maintenance of
social order and harmony and are found on the matters like matrimonial customs,
divorce, birth and death customs, religious customs, adoption, village council and so

8
on. Council of elders is the most powerful body in village councils and they have
both executive and judicial powers. All inter village disputes, social and customary
issues are dealt by council of elders.
(f) Representatives of Tiwa society submitted that the Tiwa (also known as lalung)
have their own judiciary system which owes its origin to their kings/chiefs. The
customary law is prevalent in both religious and social sphere. There are three tier
system of justice, i.e., Khel  (lowest level), Village level and Baro Khelia Bichar
system, which is most powerful system of justice delivery. If all three levels fail to
settle dispute, the matter is brought before the king whose decision is final. There is
also provision of Jury system, wherein Tiwa judiciary system consists of three
members to decide a dispute. Some of the important features of the customary law
are, viz., no corporal punishment and no death penalty and different types of penalty
imposed in accordance with the gravity of the offence.
(g) Representatives of Hima (Khasi) Tribes of Meghalaya submitted that Syiemships/
Lyngdohship/Sirdarships are in existence since time immortal and are headed by
Chiefs (Syiems/Lyngdohs/Sirdars)  are also recognised and protected by the Sixth
Schedule of the Constitution and they exercise all powers and functions through the
Durbar . The Hima had its origin in the tribal organisation of the Khasis
encompassing civil, judicial and administrative matters. The Hima requested the
Committee that certain provisions in Sixth Schedule may be included to preserve its
control of land, forest and resources of the community. They further requested that
Constitutional recognition be given to Village Durbars/Village Councils and Traditional
Institutions, which are the grass-root governance system with administrative and
judicial powers.
(h) Dr. O. D Valentina Ladia, Advocate, High Court of Meghalaya submitted that in the
pre-colonial times the Khasi Syiems  had both civil and criminal powers. It also had
both original and appellate jurisdiction. The decision of the chief was final. Under
the British Rule, the tribal customary laws and practices were preserved till the year
1858 and thereafter, some changes were brought by orders/notifications by the
British Government in India. The Jainitias (Pnars) like the Khasis had similar system
of administration. However, the system differed from that of Kahsis due to
difference in the organisation of Jainitia State. The Durbar exercised executive,
legislative and judicial functions in the Jainitia State. Among the Garos, people
belonging to the clan lived in a village known as Akhing Land . Each Village had a
chief and people owed allegiance to Chief called Nokma , who exercised
administrative, executive and judicial functions. After independence, Khasi Syiemship
Administration of Justice Order, 1950 was passed which vested the administration of
justice with the Deputy Commissioner. Hierarchy of Courts was established under
the Administration of Justice Rule, 1950 (Village Courts, Subordinate, Additional
Subordinate and District Courts). There is no limit of the pecuniary jurisdiction of
the Courts, but limitation on power with respect to criminal courts. Against the
judgments of the District Courts, appeals lie with the High Courts.

9
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The committee observes that due to their familiarity with customary laws, most of
the tribal communities in the Sixth Schedule areas prefer tribal justice system based on
customary practices  over the regular justice system. Furthermore, the tribal justice system
involves minimal procedure and is cost effective and ensure timely delivery of justice. Those
customary Village Council/Courts in North Eastern Region are headed by tribal chief and
assisted by village elders and highly respected. But the presence of multiplicity of tribal
groups in each North-Eastern State, the customary practices of dispute resolution vary from
one tribal group to another even in the same State. The judicial process and
pronouncements followed by tribes in the region are oral in tradition, which provide wide
room for discretion to the tribal chief during the justice delivery system, sometimes leading
to award of different punishment for crime of similar nature.
29. The Committee could come to the conclusion after discussing elaborately that Tribal
Justice system needs to be brought by separate legislation in the Parliament with liberty to
States to amend, add or modify according to the need of the particular State. Such law
should give institutional support in the name of 'Tribal Justice Court' system with flexibility
of appointing presiding officer and staff from existing personnel without insisting on tenure,
age, education, and other matters. But the salary and facilities should be equal to First class
Magistrate-cum-Civil Judge/District Munsif as recognised by the Criminal Code of
Procedure or Civil Procedure Code as entry level Judicial officers. This would enable them
to be financially benefited and help them to organise themselves for codifying and writing
judgments and orders, following penal laws and precedents. This aspect of training can be
done by making provision of special funding to State Judicial Academy and Village Mobile
courts to encourage the States and High Courts to implement with enthusiasm. The
recognition can be in the line of Lok Adalat Court system recognised by Parliament
enactment to be manned by retired Judge, laymen other members of the court with powers
under Chapter VI and VI (A) of National Legal Services Authorities Act 1987. Moreso
mediation, conciliation and arbitration are the tools for success in that system with no
appeals to higher courts. Till tribal law is matured enough to be codified these tools will be
at the disposal of the Customary tribal courts. Criminal code, and Civil code can be
amended by concerned State Governments. When this committee recommended to establish
separate High Courts for North Eastern States in Twenty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Law and Justice presented to Parliament on 29th April,
2008, the then Government was hesitant since tribal judicial system may not allow to have
enough cases for the High Court. But Meghalaya High Court has recently suggested to the
to Committee to increase the number of Judges of that Court from 2 to 3 as huge pendency
of cases are to be cleared. Hence the tribal justice system has to be allowed to be
synchronised with regular Justice system at the root level so that judge-made law will give
energy to bring statutory law.
30. The Committee notes that the main reasons for the avoidance of regular judicial
system by the tribal people in certain pockets of the country is due to expensive, lengthy
and confusing procedural laws and lengthy procedures of the regular Courts. The Committee

10
feels that non exposure of large number of tribal people to regular justice system has
forced large number of them to remain out of the ambit of mainstream justice delivery
system prevailing in the country. The Committee while recognising the contribution of
customary practices of tribes in dispensation of justice, feels that benefits of regular justice
system should not be denied to tribal people.
31.  The Committee strongly feels that the respective State Governments have to initiate
the process of synergising the two. Firstly, they have to allay the apprehension from the
minds of the people that they would lose the benefits of tribal justice system and  instil the
faith that it would rather strengthen it.  Secondly, they should also make available the
necessary infrastructure, competent and trained judicial officers through its judicial
academies, and also by introducing modern record management practices.  The services of
State Legal Services Authorities at States and Districts level may be utilised in the region to
remove the skepticism and reservations among the tribal people in the region about the
regular justice system. The Committee is not at all for replacement of customary justice
delivery mechanism with the regular system but is of the view that these two systems
instead of being compartmentalised should converge in a symbiotic manner to enhance
access to justice to those indigenous inhabitants.
32. The Committee observes that in contrast to the general perception of egalitarian
nature of tribal societies, women in many tribal societies are not permitted to participate in
public offices and their property rights are also restricted. The Committee feels that
representation of women in the tribal bodies and district councils may be encouraged by
consultation and legislative process to bring gender equality in the local administration as
provided under the Part IX of the Constitution in the Panchayat Raj Institutions.
33. The Committee observes that at present there are large bodies of tribal laws which
are oral in tradition and transmitted from generation to generation. A few attempts have
been made in Nagaland among Ao and Zelang Tribes  and in Assam among Bodos to document
and codify their customary laws. The Committee also recognises the efforts of Law
Research Institute, Guwahati in documenting customary law in the North-East region.  The
Committee feels that such efforts need to be encouraged in the region for documentation
and finally codification of diverse customary laws prevalent among various tribes in the
region. The Committee is of the view that a careful examination of the similarities/
dissimilarities between the regular and tribal justice system of the country is the need of
the hour so that the tribal laws can be documented and codified and a synergy can be
brought with the regular justice system as oral traditions sometimes leads to arbitrary
dispensation of justice and violates the principle of natural justice and rights provided under
the Constitutional of India.  This can be undertaken in the project Access to Justice for
North-East and Jammu and Kashmir which is currently being implemented by Department
of Justice.
34. The Committee feels that efforts can also be made to provide training and building
capacities of traditional/customary judicial officials, Gaon Buras , Cheirups , Dobashish  etc. on
the principles of natural justice in the State Judicial Training Academies. The Committee
feels that training and infrastructure should be provided to State Judicial Academies to train

11
tribal leaders, chief of Gaon Buras  etc.  so as to apprise them of the benefits of regular
justice system and integrate them to regular justice system of the Country, ultimately,
bringing about a synergy between both these systems for the development and good
governance of Tribal Areas in the country. The financial implications of these training
programmes and empowerment activities need to be worked out by the respective
authorities.
35. As per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, administration
of justice, access to justice, justice delivery system  and legal aid to poor falls under the
purview of Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice and Tribal Welfare,
Development of Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Areas falls under the purviews of the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The Committee during its deliberations with the Departments and
Ministries of the Government of India on the subject observed that the issue of tribal
justice system in the country has not been taken seriously by the Department of Justice or
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the reason that the issue does not specifically fall within their
domain as per (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. The Committee feels that at apex level
it is the Department of Justice endowed with the responsibility of administration of justice
and accordingly expect that department to initiate the process of synergising both the
justice delivery systems and coordinate with the concerned State Governments, Tribal
Councils and other stakeholders.
36. The Committee in its Twenty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Law and Justice, presented to Parliament on 29th April, 2008 had recommended
for establishing separate High Courts for North Eastern States which will in turn play the
role of evolving codification of the tribal laws. It had felt that such a step would ensure that
the judgements of the High Courts will be treated as precedents, which with passage of
time, can evolve into written law. The interpretations given to the existing uncodified rules/
laws by the High Courts, can in future, be consolidated and this will result in codified laws
and uniformity of judgements. This Committee now reiterates that all the North Eastern
States should have separate High Courts and independent Judicial Academy should be
established in every State to fulfil the real goal of synchronisation of Tribal Justice system
with the National mainstream of unitary Judicial system which is the architecture of Indian
Constitution.

12
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A GLANCE
1. The Committee observes that due to their familiarity with customary laws, most of
the tribal communities in the Sixth Schedule areas prefer tribal justice system based on
customary practices  over the regular justice system. Furthermore, the tribal justice system
involves minimal procedure and is cost effective and ensure timely delivery of justice. Those
customary Village Council/Courts in North Eastern Region are headed by tribal chief and
assisted by village elders and highly respected. But the presence of multiplicity of tribal
groups in each North-Eastern State, the customary practices of dispute resolution vary from
one tribal group to another even in the same State. The judicial process and
pronouncements followed by tribes in the region are oral in tradition, which provide wide
room for discretion to the tribal chief during the justice delivery system, sometimes leading
to award of different punishment for crime of similar nature. (Para 28)
2. The Committee could come to the conclusion after discussing elaborately that Tribal
Justice system needs to be brought by separate legislation in the Parliament with liberty to
States to amend, add or modify according to the need of the particular State. Such law
should give institutional support in the name of 'Tribal Justice Court' system with flexibility
of appointing presiding officer and staff from existing personnel without insisting on tenure,
age, education, and other matters. But the salary and facilities should be equal to First class
Magistrate-cum-Civil Judge/District Munsif as recognised by the Criminal Code of
Procedure or Civil Procedure Code as entry level Judicial officers. This would enable them
to be financially benefited and help them to organise themselves for codifying and writing
judgments and orders, following penal laws and precedents. This aspect of training can be
done by making provision of special funding to State Judicial Academy and Village Mobile
courts to encourage the States and High Courts to implement with enthusiasm. The
recognition can be in the line of Lok Adalat Court system recognised by Parliament
enactment to be manned by retired Judge, laymen other members of the court with powers
under Chapter VI and VI (A) of National Legal Services Authorities Act 1987. Moreso
mediation, conciliation and arbitration are the tools for success in that system with no
appeals to higher courts. Till tribal law is matured enough to be codified these tools will be
at the disposal of the Customary tribal courts. Criminal code, and Civil code can be
amended by concerned State Governments. When this committee recommended to establish
separate High Courts for North Eastern States in Twenty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Law and Justice presented to Parliament on 29th April,
2008, the then Government was hesitant since tribal judicial system may not allow to have
enough cases for the High Court. But Meghalaya High Court has recently suggested to the
to Committee to increase the number of Judges of that Court from 2 to 3 as huge pendency
of cases are to be cleared. Hence the tribal justice system has to be allowed to be
synchronised with regular Justice system at the root level so that judge-made law will give
energy to bring statutory law.      (Para 29)
12

13
3. The Committee notes that the main reasons for the avoidance of regular judicial
system by the tribal people in certain pockets of the country is due to expensive, lengthy
and confusing procedural laws and lengthy procedures of the regular Courts. The
Committee feels that non exposure of large number of tribal people to regular justice
system has forced large number of them to remain out of the ambit of mainstream justice
delivery system prevailing in the country. The Committee while recognising the contribution
of customary practices of tribes in dispensation of justice, feels that benefits of regular
justice system should not be denied to tribal people. (Para 30)
4. The Committee strongly feels that the respective State Governments have to initiate
the process of synergising the two. Firstly, they have to allay the apprehension from the
minds of the people that they would lose the benefits of tribal justice system and  instil the
faith that it would rather strengthen it. Secondly, they should also make available the
necessary infrastructure, competent and trained judicial officers through its judicial
academies, and also by introducing modern record management practices. The services of
State Legal Services Authorities at States and Districts level may be utilised in the region to
remove the skepticism and reservations among the tribal people in the region about the
regular justice system. The Committee is not at all for replacement of customary justice
delivery mechanism with the regular system but is of the view that these two systems
instead of being compartmentalised should converge in a symbiotic manner to enhance
access to justice to those indigenous inhabitants. (Para 31)
5. The Committee observes that in contrast to the general perception of egalitarian
nature of tribal societies, women in many tribal societies are not permitted to participate in
public offices and their property rights are also restricted. The Committee feels that
representation of women in the tribal bodies and district councils may be encouraged by
consultation and legislative process to bring gender equality in the local administration as
provided under the Part IX of the Constitution in the Panchayat Raj Inst itutions. (Para 32)
6. The Committee observes that at present there are large bodies of tribal laws which
are oral in tradition and transmitted from generation to generation. A few attempts have
been made in Nagaland among Ao and Zelang Tribes  and in Assam among Bodos to document
and codify their customary laws. The Committee also recognises the efforts of Law
Research Institute, Guwahati in documenting customary law in the North-East region. The
Committee feels that such efforts need to be encouraged in the region for documentation
and finally codification of diverse customary laws prevalent among various tribes in the
region. The Committee is of the view that a careful examination of the similarities/
dissimilarities between the regular and tribal justice system of the country is the need of
the hour so that the tribal laws can be documented and codified and a synergy can be
brought with the regular justice system as oral traditions sometimes leads to arbitrary
dispensation of justice and violates the principle of natural justice and rights provided under
the Constitutional of India.  This can be undertaken in the project Access to Justice for
North-East and Jammu and Kashmir which is currently being implemented by Department
of Justice. (Para 33)
7. The Committee feels that efforts can also be made to provide training and building

14
capacities of traditional/customary judicial officials, Gaon Buras , Cheirups , Dobashish  etc. on
the principles of natural justice in the State Judicial Training Academies. The Committee
feels that training and infrastructure should be provided to State Judicial Academies to train
tribal leaders, chief of Gaon Buras  etc.  so as to apprise them of the benefits of regular
justice system and integrate them to regular justice system of the Country, ultimately,
bringing about a synergy between both these systems for the development and good
governance of Tribal Areas in the country. The financial implications of these training
programmes and empowerment activities need to be worked  out by the respective
authorities.  (Para 34)
8. As per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, administration
of justice, access to justice, justice delivery system  and legal aid to poor falls under the
purview of Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice and Tribal Welfare,
Development of Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Areas falls under the purviews of the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The Committee during its deliberations with the Departments and
Ministries of the Government of India on the subject observed that the issue of tribal
justice system in the country has not been taken seriously by the Department of Justice or
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the reason that the issue does not specifically fall within their
domain as per (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. The Committee feels that at apex level
it is the Department of Justice endowed with the responsibility of administration of justice
and accordingly expect that department to initiate the process of synergising both the
justice delivery systems and coordinate with the concerned State Governments, Tribal
Councils and other stakeholders. (Para 35)
9. The Committee in its Twenty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Law and Justice, presented to Parliament on 29th April, 2008 had recommended
for establishing separate High Courts for North Eastern States which will in turn play the
role of evolving codification of the tribal laws. It had felt that such a step would ensure that
the judgements of the High Courts will be treated as precedents, which with passage of
time, can evolve into written law. The interpretations given to the existing uncodified rules/
laws by the High Courts, can in future, be consolidated and this will result in codified laws
and uniformity of judgements. This Committee now reiterates that all the North Eastern
States should have separate High Courts and independent Judicial Academy should be
established in every State to fulfil the real goal of synchronisation of Tribal Justice system
with the National mainstream of unitary Judicial system which is the architecture of Indian
Constitution. (Para 36)

15
MINUTES

RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 28th October, 2014 in Committee Room 'B',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Rajani Patil
3. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
6. Shri Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
7. Dr. A. Sampath
8. Shri Bharat Singh
9. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
10. Dr. Anshul Verma
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Justice
1. Ms. Kusumjit Sidhu, Secretary
2. Shri Praveen Garg, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Anil Kumar Gulari, Joint Secretary
5. Shri V .K. Tripathi, Director
17

18
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting. * * *.
3. The Chairman apprised that the Committee has invited Secretary, Department of Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice to make a presentation on the subject 'Synergy between Tribal Justice
System and Regular Justice System of the Country'.  He further apprised the Members that the
Committee has also invited suggestions from experts who are working on tribal issues and that the
Committee will further explore experts in academia, judiciary and administration with a view to
have an in-depth understanding of the subject. The Committee will hear Law Secretaries of
Meghalaya and Assam and select Tribal Chiefs on the subject during its study-visit to have a first-
hand experience of the working of the tribal justice system and how it can be synergised with the
regular justice system. He also suggested to have a joint sitting with the Department of Justice and
Ministry of Tribal Affairs to explore the subject further.
4. The Chairman thereafter welcomed the Secretary, Department of Justice and other senior
officers of the Ministry of Law and Justice . Initiating her presentation, the Secretary submitted that
the subject 'Synergy between Tribal Justice System and Regular Justice System of the Country' is
actually not part of their mandate. However, she stated that the Department of Justice has
attempted to make a presentation on the subject since it involves justice. Joint Secretary of the
Department of Justice stated that the practices under the tribal justice system are un-codified,
customary and varies from tribe to tribe. Certain provisions in the Constitution of India and some
special laws, however, recognize the tribal customary practices and also the existence and role of
community participation in disputes resolution. The Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Constitution
provide for administration of tribal areas in notified States. Special Constitutional provisions under
Article 371 have been provided for North-Eastern States. Dispute adjudication as per traditions and
customs have been provided for in the Panchayat (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 and
Scheduled Tribe and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.
5. She further informed the Committee that customary institutions are preferred places for the
dispute resolution and institutions of Gaon Buras  are recognized in certain North-Eastern States.
The Rules for the Administration of Justice and Police in Nagaland framed under Scheduled District
Act 1874, as amended in 1984 has brought about synergy between the tribal and regular justice
system where the customary courts try cases between parties belonging to Scheduled Tribes.
6. Clarifying the queries of the Members, the Secretary reiterated that tribal justice system is
basically un-codified and it differs from area to area and there are different provisions for different
areas, which the Department will furnish in writing. With respect to some tribal areas, the
Governor decides whether certain Acts of Parliament will be effective in that State or in a particular
area of a State and the decision of the Governor in this regard is final, but subject to ratification by
the President. The Chairman then pointed out that under Part X, Schedule V of the Constitution,
special status has been given to the tribal areas and it is more or less controlled by the Union
Government.  Further clarifying the queries of the Chairman on the "Rules for the Administration of
Justice and Police in Nagaland framed under the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874", the Secretary
stated that the Act was there in 1874 and the 1984 amendment is confined to the State of Nagaland
*** relates to other matter.

19
only. The Chairman further directed the Department of Justice to make a research on the aforesaid
Act and its status in other North-Eastern States.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 4.31 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 11th
November, 2014.

20
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 30th June, 2015 in Committee Room 'D',
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Parimal Nathwani
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Adv. Sharad Bansode
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
8. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Shri B.V. Naik
10. Shri Vincent H. Pala
11. Dr. A. Sampath
12. Shri Udhayakumar M.
13. Shri Tariq Anwar
14. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Ministry of Tribal Affairs
1. Shri Arun Jha, Secretary; and
2. Shri Rajeev Prakash, Director.
20

21
NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Prof. Nandini Sundar, Department of Sociology, University of Delhi;
2. Shri John F. Kharshiing, Co chairman, Meghalaya State Planning Board; and
3. Shri H.S.Thangkhiew, Senior Advocate, High Court of Meghalaya.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. He then apprised the
Committee that the Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs and some non-official witnesses have been
invited to depose on the subject 'Synergy between Tribal Justice System and Regular Justice
System of the Country'.
(After the arrival of the Secretary)
3. Chairman in his opening remarks observed that Ministry of Tribal Affairs is concerned with
tribal issues in general and their input on the subject could be extremely beneficial for the
Committee. Disputes may arise while conferring tenurial land rights to tribals under the Forest
Rights Act, 2006, and disputes resolution mechanism under the said Act has been provided.
Referring to Committee's visit to North-Eastern States, Chairman mentioned that village head need
financial assistance for discharging their duty as an adjudicator between tribals.  The Committee
felt that setting up of judicial academies, exclusive High Courts in all the North Eastern States
would help to recognize customary tribal laws in these States.  Thereafter, Secretary, Tribal Affairs
made a presentation supplemented by his Joint Secretary.
4. The Secretary submitted that the Forest Rights Act basically relates to customary land rights
of tribals and has nothing to do with tribal justice system. He averred that Ministry of Tribal Affairs
is essentially concerned with governance issues in tribal area under Fifth Schedule of the
Constitution. He added that as per Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 administration of justice,
access to justice and justice delivery system are allocated to Department of Justice. The subject
matter of synergy between tribal justice system and regular justice system in the country is
subsumed under that mandate. There is neither a division nor any record of past experience with
the Ministry for dealing with the subject. Therefore, he opposed transfer of this subject to his
Ministry from Department of Justice.
5. The Joint Secretary in Ministry of Tribal Affairs added that Village Panchayat/Council of
Tribal communities residing in Fifth Schedule areas do not exercise judicial power while those
residing in Sixth Schedule areas have judicial powers. Since customary tribal laws are a sort of oral
tradition, codification thereof is a tough challenge for the State. There have been allegations that
village heads have reportedly used those customary laws prejudiciously in favour of their relatives
and acquaintances. He submitted that customary tribal law should be in conformity with principle
of natural justice and need to be synchronized with regular justice system to check its misuse.
6. Members pointed out that inspite of Forest Rights Act having overriding effect over other
existing laws, the Forest Department are coming in the way of implementation Forest Rights of
tribals.  The Tribal Village Panchayat have not been involved in the process. Tribal people cannot
mortgage their land resources to get bank loan for their economic development. The problem of
rehabilitation of displaced tribal population due to mining operation need to be looked into.
(After the arrival of the non-official witnesses)

22
7. The Chairman welcomed Shri H.S. Thangkhiew, Senior Advocate, High Court of Meghalaya,
Shri John F. Kharshing, Co-Chariman, Meghalaya State Planning Board and Prof. Nandini Sundar,
University of Delhi to the meeting. He requested the non-official witnesses to present their views
on the subject 'Synergy between Tribal Justice System and Regular Justice System of the Country'.
8. Shri H.S. Thangkhiew, Advocate, submitted that three prominent tribes ( Khasi, Jaintias  and
Garos) inhabitating in the hills of Meghalaya have their age old system of dispute resolution where
the decisions are taken up by consensus from village level to the chief of the tribe.  Rules for the
Administration of Justice framed in 1937 had recognized the role of village councils/courts and
village headman in the dispensation of justice amongst tribes. The Constitution under Sixth Schedule
has given power to Autonomous District Councils for constituting village courts/councils for trial of
suits amongst tribes, appointment/succession village headman, tribal customs etc., for disposal of
cases between them. The Administration of Justice Rules enacted in 1953 also recognized village
courts, District Councils but those are not functioning properly due to lack of finance and
infrastructure.  He, therefore, suggested that financial resources may be granted to the District
Council by the State Government for making it vibrant. The Transfer of Property Act, Specific
Reliefs Act should be made applicable in the scheduled areas. Village headman should be given
training in judicial processes by the State to resolve disputes in judicious manner.
9. Shri John F. Kharshiing referred to the Instrument of Acession entered into between some
of the Khasi Chiefs and Government of India, but that has not been mentioned in the Constitution
of India. However, none of the Chiefs are part of legislature and they are dependent for legislation
on the District Council which is a party-based body whereas the Chiefs are partyless institutions.
He submitted that ninety percent people in Meghalaya register their land with the Chiefs and not in
accordance with the Indian Registration Act, 1908. About eighty percent of cases in Meghalaya
goes to District Council for redressal of their grievances but those lack financial resource and
infrastructure to deal with the burden of cases. On the issue of codification of customary laws, he
opined that sometimes there is a conflict between the customary laws and the regular justice
system and felt that there is a need for synergy between them.
10. Prof. Nandini Sundar submitted that situation in Sixth Schedule areas are much better than
the Fifth Scheduled areas as far as the preservation of traditional justice systems is concerned. The
Y ule Rules, Santhal Police Rules and Pargana Majhi Rules in tribal areas of Central India allow the
tribals some degree of autonomy to preserve customary laws. But implementation of Panchayats
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act 1996 (PESA) had eroded such system. She added that the
customary practices needed to be recognized and revived. She apprised the Committee of the denial
of rights to tribal women in the traditional and customary laws. She also added that the complicated
procedures of formal legal system pushes the Adivasis towards to legal system delivered by Maoist,
where the justice delivery is quick and effective.
11. Members sought clarification on certain issues arising out of the presentations. The
witnesses responded to some of the queries and the Chairman directed them to give written
clarifications on issues not responded to during the interaction.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
12. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
13. The meeting adjourned at 5.06 
P.M.

23
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 8th March, 2016 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Bhagwant Mann
8. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Shri B.V. Nayak
11. Shri Vincent H. Pala
12. Shri M. Udhayakumar
13. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
14. Dr. Anshul Verma
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. He apprised the Members that the
Committee would first take up consideration and adoption of the draft Eightieth Report on the
subject "Synergy between Tribal Justice System and Regular Justice System of the Country" and
*  *  *".
3. Hon'ble Members deliberated on the draft Eightieth Report on the subject "Synergy between
Tribal Justice System and Regular Justice System of the Country". Members raised queries on the
issues related to exclusion of tribals of Manipur from Sixth Schedule and also suggested that
23
*** relates to other matter.

24
examination of customary practices of tribals in Fifth and Sixth Schedule Areas needs to be
undertaken by the Law Commission of India. The Chairman apprised the Members that since the
Committee has a limited mandate; it would be desirable not to encroach upon the mandate of other
Committees. The present Report focus on the justice delivery mechanism of tribes and how it
could be synergized with the regular system of justice prevailing in the country by recognizing
tribal customary laws, training them in their local customary laws and accommodating them in
judicial system of the country. Some minor corrections were suggested in the Report. Thereafter,
the Report was adopted.
(After the arrival of the witnesses)
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 4.49 
P.M.
*** relates to other matter.