PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken on 84th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2016-17)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2017/Magha, 1938 (Saka)
88
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken on 84th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2016-17)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2017/Magha, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-28
(i) Chapter I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Ministry ............................................................................................ 1-10
(ii) Chapter II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry ............................. 1 1-16
(iii) Chapter III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Committee has not
accepted replies of the Ministry ......................................................... 17-21
(iv) Chapter IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been accepted........................................................ 22-28
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE .................................................... 29-31
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 33-36

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Prabhat Jha
4. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva
10. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Idris Ali
13. Shri Sharad Bansode
14. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary
15. Adv. Joice George
16. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
17. Shri Santosh Kumar
18. Shri Bhagwant Mann
19. Shri B.V . Nayak
20. Shri Vincent H. Pala
21. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
22. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
23. Dr. A. Sampath
24. Shri M. Udhayakumar
25. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
26. Dr. Anshul Verma

(ii)
@27. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
@28. Shri Pralhad V . Joshi
@29. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
@ Nominated w.e.f. 29th November, 2016

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Eighty-eighth Report on Action Taken on 84th Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2016-17) pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice.
2. The Eighty-fourth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2016.
3. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department, Department of Legal Affairs, Department
of Justice) furnished the Action Taken Replies on Eighty-fourth Report of the Committee on 8th September,
5th October and 7th November, 2016, respectively. The Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same at its meeting held on 24th January, 2017.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report.
  N EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
January 24th, 2017 Chairman,
Magha 4, 1938 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
A2J : Access to Justice
A2J-NEJK : Access to Justice–NE and J&K
ADR : Alternate Dispute Resolution
AIJS : All India Judicial Service
A TR : Action Taken Report
BCI : Bar Council of India
BEL : Bharat Electronics Limited
COS : Committee of Secretaries
CPC : Central Project Coordinators
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
CSR : Computer Server Room
CSS : Centrally Sponsored Scheme
ECI : Election Commission of India
ECIL : Electronics Corporation of India Limited
EPIC : Electoral Photo Identity Cards
EVMs : Electronic V oting Machines
FACT : Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited
FLC : First Level Checking
HLMC : High Level Monitoring Committee
HRD : Ministry of Human Resource Development.
ICADR : International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution
ICPS : Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies
ICT : Information and Communication Technology
IIIDEM : India International Institute of Democracy and Election
Management
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
ILDR : Institute of Legislative and Drafting Research
(iv)

(v)
ILI : Indian Law Institute
ITAT : Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
JSC : Judicial Service Centre
LAN : Local Area Network
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MNREGA : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
NALSA : National Legal Services Authority
NHPC : National Hydroelectric Power Corporation
NIC : National Informatics Centre
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
NJA : National Judicial Academy
OLW : Official Language Wing
SLP : State Litigation Policy
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
SVEEP : Systemic V oters' Education and Electoral Participation
TFC : Thirteenth Finance Commission
UNDP : United Nations Development Programme
UC : Utilization Certificates
VVP A T : V oter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail
W AN : Wide Area Network
WCD : Ministry of Women and Child Development

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Law
and Justice on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its Eighty-fourth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on the 26th April, 2016.
2. The Action Taken Replies of Legislative Department, Department of Legal Affairs, Department of
Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned
Report were received on 8th September, 5th October and 7th November, 2016, respectively. Replies of
the Departments have been categorised as follows:
CHAPTER-I: The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry i.e.,
in respect of paras 3.8, 3.11, 3.15, 3.19, 3.20, 3.21, 4.5, 4.10, 4.27, 4.30, 6.13,
6.15, 6.36, 6.45 and 6.53 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the
Ministry has accepted its recommendations.
CHAPTER-II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies given by the Ministry i.e., in respect of paras 5.7, 5.10, 4.18,
4.19, 6.14, 6.50, 6.63 and 6.64 of the Report. The Committee has accepted the
explanations furnished by the Ministry and does not wish to pursue them further
as of now.
CHAPTER-III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted
replies given by the Ministry i.e., with regard to paras 6.10, 6.59, 6.60, 6.65, 6.66
and 4.34 of the Report. The Committee expresses its concern for not accepting the
recommendations of the Committee dealt with in Chapter - III of this Report and
reiterates its recommendations.
CHAPTER-IV: The recommendations/observations on which final replies of the Ministry of Law
and Justice have not been received. The Committee desires that Ministry should
furnish action taken report in respect of recommendations mentioned in Chapter -
IV without any further delay.
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its Eighty-fourth Report, the ATRs furnished
by the Ministry and the Committee's further recommendations/observations have been dealt with in the
succeeding Chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative Department
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
Recommendation/observation
1.0. The Committee appreciates the earlier phase of SVEEP programme undertaken by the Commission
and hopes that this new SVEEP Phase-III programme will help in wider coverage of voters in
the country. (Para 3.8)
1.1. The Committee appreciates the work of IIIDEM in training election officials, both domestic and
international. The Committee feels that the amount allocated to IIIDEM may be reviewed at RE
stage, so that a permanent campus/building for the Institute may get constructed quickly for
effective performance of its activities. (Para 3.11)
1.2. The Committee appreciates the Commission's initiative for phasing out old EVMs and plan to
procure new EVMs and VVP ATs from BEL and ECIL for the upcoming General Elections to the
Lok Sabha in 2019. The Committee is of the view that with the every general election more and
more voters' turn out is expected, as recently noticed in the assembly elections in the States of
Assam and West Bengal. Since periodic elections are the epitome of democracy, the Committee
feels that fund allocated may be revised for the procurement of EVMs and VVP ATs during the RE
stage so that the work of Commission does not suffer. (Para 3.15)
Action Taken
1.3. The Commission is grateful to the Parliamentary Standing Committee for their appreciation of the
activities under SVEEP, IIIDEM and phasing out of old EVMs and plan to procure new EVMs and
VVPATs for upcoming General Elections to the Lok Sabha in 2019. In this connection, it is stated that
the demand for additional funds, if required under the relevant sub-heads for the purpose, will be sent
to the Ministry of Finance at the time of submission of Revised Budget Estimates of the Commission
for the current financial year, 2016-17.
Further Observation
1.4. The Committee notes the reply.
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
Recommendations/Observations
2.0. The Committee appreciates the work of Election Commission of India in checking bogus voting
by electoral roll purification by linking it with Aadhar card. The Committee feels that a common
electoral roll will reduce cost, time and check electoral malpractices in the country. The Committee,
2

3
therefore, recommends that a common electoral roll be prepared in the country which can be used
from panchayat level to Parliamentary elections with the State Election Commissions, to weed out
multiple electoral rolls to check corrupt practices during elections. The Committee also recommends
the ECI to ensure that no persons voting rights are hampered by wrongfully categorizing them as
Doubtful voters as it will go against the very principle of electoral democracy. (Para 3.19)
Action Taken
2.1. The Commission is grateful to the Parliamentary Standing Committee for their appreciation. The
Commission, with the objective of making electoral rolls error free and authenticated to the extent
possible, had launched a comprehensive programme which includes feeding and seeding of Aadhar
number in electoral database under the banner "National Electoral Rolls Purification and Authentication
Programme (NERP AP), 2015" with effect from 03.03.2015.
2.2. When the activities of the programme were at its climax and some of the activities of the
programme were towards its culmination, all further activities relating to collection/feeding/seeding of
Aadhar number under NERPAP, 2015 were kept in abeyance w.e.f.13.08.2015 in pursuance of the interim
order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 11.08.2015 in WP © 494 of 2012 relating to Aadhar.
2.3. So far as common electoral roll is concerned, it is stated that the Commission prepares electoral
rolls for elections to the Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies. The State Election Commissions
prepare electoral rolls for local bodies' elections. The electoral rolls for the Territorial Assembly and
Parliamentary Constituencies are prepared under the provisions of Sections 13D and 15 of the Representation
of the People Act, 1950 and enabling rules contained in the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960. The
responsibility of preparation of electoral rolls of panchayats/local bodies' elections rests with the State
Election Commission of the State concerned under Articles 243 K and 243 ZA of the Constitution of
India.
2.4. The Election Commission of India has been receiving requests from several State Election
Commissions from time to time to evolve a software for preparing common electoral rolls for local body
election and Assembly/Parliamentary elections.
2.5. Preparation of common electoral rolls involves the following issues:
(i) There is no uniform system for preparation of rolls by SEC in all States.
(ii) Present database control tables pertaining to the ECI have the particulars of administrative
units of rural and urban area, extent of assembly/parliamentary constituency, elector's details
as well as EPIC details. Fields, table name and description of tables are already fixed. These
control tables are populated and updated before any change in the existing database of the
rolls.
(iii) Sections details within polling stations under a constituency needs to be prepared as per
extent of the ward area of Panchayat and Municipal Council Elections.

4
(iv) Delimitation of Panchayat and Municipal Council wards is done frequently at the time of
elections or after every census. Whereas, change in the extent of assembly constituency
take place after 25-30 years.
(v) Even, collection of information about the ward No. and name from the existing electors
would not serve the purpose as in many cases electors themselves may not be able to
indicate such details for want of knowledge, since number and name of ward keeps on
changing very frequently.
(vi) W ard numbers are not available in some rural and urban areas in many States and different
states uses different system of nomenclature and numbering.
(vii) The additional columns in the elector's database can be created, however it will not be
possible for the ECI to collect the data of panchayat, municipal body and ward number and
feed it in the database. It is difficult for the Commission to undertake such massive exercise
for all the 78 crore electors in the country.
2.6. The Election Commission of India has issued instructions to the Chief Electoral Officers of all the
States/UTs vide Commission's letter No. 23/SEC/2008/ERS, dated 10th December, 2008 to share the
computerized electoral database with the State Election Commissions so that they could generate electoral
rolls according to the extent of their panchayat / local body wards from the same database. The terms
and conditions for sharing of electoral roll database have also been specified.
2.7. Further, The Commission vide its letter No. 23/SEC/2011-ERS, dated 3rd January, 2012, had also
provided for sharing of the ECI database with additional columns of details of ward level. However, it
is to be provided on 'as is where is' basis and additional blank columns for Panchayat, Municipal bodies
are added by the CEO, on request of SEC. However, collection and subsequent addition/modification/
updating of the data is required to be done by the concerned State Election Commissions.
2.8. The Commission in 1999 has sent a proposal to the Government regarding use of common
electoral rolls at elections conducted by the ECI and the State Election Commission (SEC). The local
bodies elections are conducted by SEC according to their own state laws. In those laws, there is no
uniform law or procedure for preparing the electoral rolls for local bodies' elections. Some States adopt
the rolls prepared by the ECI while a few States prepare the rolls separately. This not only creates
confusion among the electors because their names may be present in one roll but absent in the other,
or vice versa, but also results in duplication of efforts and expenditure. The Commission proposed that
local laws of the States should be amended to provide that electoral rolls prepared by the Commission
will be used for local bodies elections with necessary modifications/re-arrangement. This will simplify
the process of preparation of rolls and also avoid unnecessary expenditure. This was also reiterated in
2004.
2.9. The Law Commission in its Two Hundred and Fifty-fifth Report on Electoral Reforms under
chapter XVII has also endorsed the Commission's proposal. It has suggested that introducing common
electoral rolls will require an amendment in the State laws pertaining to the conduct of local body
elections, the Central Government should write to the various States in this regard.

5
Further Observation
2.10 The Committe note the reply.
2.10. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations
3.0. The Committee recommends to the ECI to consolidate all the guidelines into a simplified 'code'
and publish the same for the knowledge of all the stakeholders. It has been observed that 'Citizens'
and their family members are often harassed by stopping their vehicle and their privacy is also
eroded in the name of implementation of the electoral code of conduct despite there being no
evidence of any illegal activity. This calls for abundant precaution on the part of implementing
agencies. (Para 3.20)
Action taken/proposed to be taken
3.1. The Commission compiles all the guidelines/instructions/advisories issued on Code of Conduct
from time to time. In continuation to this task, the Commission has already compiled the guidelines/
instructions/advisories issued till August, 2015 and published the same under the heading "Compendium
of Instructions on Model Code of Conduct". For wide dissemination of these guidelines/instructions/
advisories, the said Compendium of Instructions is also available on Commission's website under the
hyperlink-http://eci.nic.in/eci_main/ElectoralLaws/compendium/MCC_Compendium 040_92015.pdf
3.2. Regarding question of citizens and their family members often being harassed by stopping their
vehicles and their privacy being eroded, it is stated that the Commission vide its letter No. 76/Instructions/
EEPS/2015/V ol.II, dated 29th May, 2015 issued Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for seizure and
release of cash and other items during election process and also held that no inconvenience to common
public and genuine person should be caused during checking and Flying Squads and State Surveillance
Teams shall be polite, decent and courteous, while checking the baggage or vehicle. For transparency
and accountability, each instance of interception and seizure is properly videographed. The Commission
has also asked the election authorities to spread the message (Appeal) to public regarding Section 171
(B) [Bribery as Offence] and 171 (C) [Offence regarding threatening to candidate or elector] of IPC
during election period.
Further Observation
3.3. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations
4.0. As regards the resolution of disputes during elections, the Committee suggests that cases registered
during the period should be handled by Special Prosecutors and Magistrates on a time bound
manner . (Para 3.21)
Action taken
4.1. In this connection, it is stated that in 1999 the then CEC had written a DO letter to the then
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs and proposed to Appoint Additional Judges in the High
Courts to try elections petitions for speedy disposal. The Law Commission in its 255th Report on
Electoral Reforms under chapter X has also endorsed the Commission's proposal. It has suggested

6
certain amendments in the RP Act, 1951. Recommendation of the Committee may be endorsed and it
may be added that all cases of electoral offences should be vigorously pursued and taken to their logical
conclusion and should not be withdrawn midway.
Further Observation
4.2. The Committee notes the reply.
Department of Legal Affairs
Recommendation/observation
5.0. The Committee is of the view that vacancies in the Departments need to be filled-up urgently in
consultation with DoPT and UPSC for the smooth functioning of the Department. Accordingly,
the Committee reiterates its recommendation contained in Seventy-fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2015-16) and suggests that all the agencies like concerned Department, UPSC and DoPT
sit together to find out the ways to address this issue. (Para 4.5)
Action Taken
5.1. Department of Legal Affairs is making continuous efforts to fill up its vacant posts in consultation
with the recruiting agencies i.e. Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Staff Selection Commission
(SSC). In this regard, it is submitted that on recommendation of the UPSC, 13 new Assistant Legal
Advisers have joined in the Department of Legal Affairs during the year 2015-16 while 01 new Assistant
Legal Adviser joined during the current financial year 2016-17. SSC has nominated 06 candidates for
appointment to the post of Assistant (Legal). Out of these 6, 3 candidates have joined and remaining 3
candidates are yet to join. Advertisement for recruitment of 04 Assistant (Legal) has been published by
the SSC in August, 2016.
Further Observation
5.2. The committee notes the replies.
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL FOR FOREIGN EXCHANGE (ATFE)
Recommendations/Observations
6.0. The Committee notes with concern that the disposal and institution rate of cases in the ATFE is
almost same. The Committee feels that to reduce pendency, the disposal rate should be progressively
more than the institution rate and accordingly recommends ATFE to ensure that their disposal rate
becomes more than the institution rate so that the pendency gets reduced. (Para 4.10)
Action Taken
6.1. A TFE reported that during the year 2015, 76 fresh appeals were instituted and 77 appeals were
disposed of by the Tribunal, the Tribunal has also passed 165 interim orders. ATFE has assured that
every possible endeavor will be made by the Tribunal for increasing the disposal further so that the
pendency is reduced.

7
Further Observation
6.2. The committee notes the reply.
Bar Council of India (BCI)
Recommendations/Observations
7.0. The committee appreciates the initiatives of BCI to establish legal education academies for lawyers
in different States and hopes that these academies will help in providing a training ground for
young lawyers on international law, domestic law, procedures and ethics. Since no allocation to
BCI has been made from financial year 2013-14, the Committee would like to know the reasons
for this during the action taken replies from the Department. (Para 4.27)
Action Taken
7.1. Ministry of Law & Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, had been releasing a sum of Rs. 6.00
lakh, as annual recurring grant-in-aid to BCI, for promotion of legal education and related activities.
During the financial year 2010-11 a sum of ` 6.00 lakh as annual recurring grant-in-aid was released to
BCI for promotion of legal education and related activities. BCI had not spent the said amount of ` 6.00
lakh during the financial year 2010-11, however, the same was utilized by them during the financial year
2011-12. Allocation of ` 6.00 lakh, as annual recurring grant-in-aid to BCI was made for the financial
years 2012-13 and 2013-14. However, Department of Legal Affairs had not received any request for
releasing the said amount of recurring grant-in-aid from the BCI during the financial years 2012-13 and
2013-14. Keeping in view of these developments, allocation of ` 6.00 lakh as annual grant-in-aid could
not be made from the financial year 2014-15.
Further Observation
7.2. The committee notes the reply.
Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies (ICPS)
Recommendations/Observations
8.0. The Committee takes note that the problems being faced by the Institute of Constitutional and
Parliamentary Studies (ICPS) and urges the Department to sort-out the problem so that the
potential of such an Institute does not remain under-utilized. The Committee also recommends that
ICPS should be a school of excellence. (Para 4.30)
Action Taken
8.1. The ICPS was set up on 10th December, 1965, under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, with
the aim to promote and provide for Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies with special reference to
the evolution and working of the Indian Constitution in all aspects. Rule 22 of the Memorandum of
Association and Rules of ICPS, inter-alia states that the Executive Council shall have the power to
prepare and execute detailed plans and programmes for the furtherance of the objects of the institute.
It may be mentioned that on the basis of demands of the Institute, the Government provides financial

8
assistance to ICPS by way of grant-in-aid to meet its aims and objectives. During the current financial
year 2016-17, a sum of ` 1.72 crore as grant-in-aid has been allocated to ICPS. However, recently, ICPS
informed this Department that financial year 2016-17 onwards, the Institute shall not avail funding in the
form of grants-in-aid from the Ministry of Law & Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, as the same will
be provided by the Lok Sabha Secretariat. ICPS requested this Department to surrender the said amount
of grant-in-aid of ` 1.72 core to Ministry of Finance to enable Lok Sabha Secretariat to release fund to
ICPS. The matter is under examination.
Further Observation
8.2. The Committee notes the reply.
Department of Justice
NATIONAL JUDICIAL ACADEMY (NJA)
Recommendations/Observations
9.0. The Committee is happy to note that funds have been allocated for construction of residential
quarters for staffs. The Committee feels that vacant posts in NJA also need to be filled-up to
augment its human resource potential and more and more seminars and training programmes on
International Law needs to be organised for the judiciary so as to equip them of the emerging legal
scenario at global level. (Para 6.13)
Action Taken
9.1. The Committee's observations have been forwarded to the National Judicial Academy, Bhopal for
compliance.
Further Observation
9.2. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations
10.0. The Committee reiterates earlier recommendation contained in its Eightieth Report on "Synergy
between Tribal Justice System and Regular Justice System of the Country" to have State Judicial
Academies in every State especially in North Eastern States. (Para 6.15)
Action Taken
10.1. The recommendation is being noted down for consideration. Incidentally, the 80th Report has
already been examined and ATR (Action Taken Report) of all the recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee have been sent to Rajya Sabha Secretariat.
Further Observation
10.2. The Committee notes the Reply.

9
Recommendations/Observations
11.0. The Committee is happy to note that as against allocation of for ` 562.99 crore in BE (2015-
16) the same has been released to various States by the Department. The Committee also takes
note of the justifications for lower allocation of ` 600 crore BE (2016-17) as against projections
of 1500 crore that due to enhanced devolution of funds to the States under the Fourteenth Finance
Commission, the States are expected to enhance their investment in the justice delivery. The
Committee expects that States will contribute more for justice delivery system. The Committee now
hopes that States would now be in position to allocate more resources on justice delivery system.
(Para 6.36)
Action Taken
11.1. Observations of the Committee have been noted.
Further Observation
11.2. The Committee notes the Reply.
E-COURT MISSION MODE PROJECT
Recommendations/Observations
12.0. The Committee hopes that new Phase-II of the e-Court Mission Mode Project will utilize its
learning experiences from Phase -I of the project to overcome the lacunae. The Committee hopes
that the e-Court Mission Mode-II's objective of enhanced ICT enablement of courts through
universal computerisation, use of cloud computing, digitization of case records and enhanced
availability of e-services through e-filing, etc. will make the Digital India Programme of the
Government a success as it emphasises on Citizen centric services with a focus on Digital
Infrastructure as a core utility to every citizen. (Para 6.45)
Action Taken
12.1. In so far as e-Courts is concerned, Department of Justice has released ` 202.23 crore in
2015-16, ` 61.26 crore in 2016-17 and further ` 100 crore has been approved to release in November
and December 2016 this regard for LAN and computers to be procured for Courts. In respect of use
of cloud computing DoJ has released of Rs.18.26 crore in 2016-17 for this purpose to NIC. For
digitisation of case records it has been approved that the activity will be taken up by respective State
Govt. through Fourteenth Finance Commission. Regarding enhanced availability of e-services through e-
filing, this activity is yet to be implemented as strategic direction is awaited from the e-Committee of
the Supreme Court of India.
Further Observation
12.2. The Committee notes the Reply.
FOURTEENTH FINANCE COMMISSION
Recommendations/Observations
13.0. The Committee takes note that the Fourteenth Finance Commission has recommended allocation

10
as projected by the Department. The Committee hopes that the Department will optimally utilize
the funds earmarked under various heads and also monitor the physical targets set-up so as to
reduce pendency and augment physical and human resources of the judiciary. (Para 6.53)
Action Taken
13.1. Observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. Utilization of funds to be made
available under the Fourteenth Finance Commission was discussed in Chief Ministers and Chief Justices
Conference held on 24.04.2016 and an institutional mechanism has been created to review and monitor
the progress. The Minister, Law and Justice had addressed to all Chief Ministers and Chief Justices in
September 2016 requesting to provide a fortnightly report in this regard.
Further Observation
13.2. The Committee notes the Reply.

11
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative Department
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE WING AND VIDHI SAHITYA PRAKASHAN
Recommendation/observation
1.0. The Committee express its concern over non utilisation of meager sums of ` 10.20 and ` 6.28 crore
funds year after year by Official Language Wing and Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan. The Committee
feels that the Department should proactively engage itself in these areas or it should realistically
project its requirements of funds. (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
1.1. Of ficial Languages Wing was allocated ` 8,92,00,000/- in R.E. 2015-16. Out of this,
` 8,82,05,000/- was utilized during the year 2015-16 and ` 9,94,144/- was left during the aforesaid
financial year. The unutilized amount of ` 9,94,144/- was in the salary head. Official Languages Wing
has been allocated an amount of ` 10.20 crore in BE-2016-17. Out of which ` 2.65 crore (26%) has
been utilized as on 31st July, 2016. The remaining amount will be utilized during the financial year
2016-17. This Wing has projected the budget for the financial year 2016-17 as per genuine requirement.
Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan has been allocated an amount of ` 6.28 crore in BE 2016-17 out of which
` 1.6 crore (25%) has been utilized as on 31st July, 2016 in the first quarter. During the year
2016-17 proposals are in consideration to fill up the vacant posts. Measures have been taken to purchase
required items/goods for office. Initiative has already been taken to pay the pending bills with the
Government Press for printing the Uchcha Nayayalaya Patrikas/Uchchatama Nayayalaya Patrikas. Proposal
of domestic travel under propagation of Hindi is under consideration.
Further Observation
1.2. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may, however, be informed as to what
extent Official Languages Wing and Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan were able to utilize the amounts
sanctioned to them in BE (2016-17).
INSTITUTE OF LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING AND RESEARCH (ILDR)
Recommendation/observation
2.0. The Committee is happy to note that new posts have been sanctioned for ILDR and feels that after
the recruitment of drafting personnel at various levels, the institute's drafting skills will progressively
improve. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that the recruitment of these personnel may be
initiated at the earliest along the concerned recruiting agencies and Departments. (Para 5.10)
11

12
Action Taken
2.1. New posts have been created for legislative drafting personnel in the Department. The recruitment
process has been initiated and is at different stages with the recruiting agencies. It is the endeavor of
the Department to fill these posts on priority basis.
Further Observation
2.2. The Committee notes that recruitment process for newly created posts for ILDR is at
different stages and hopes that the Department shall pursue with recruiting agencies to complete
the process at the earliest.
Department of Legal Affairs
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT)
Recommendations/Observations
3.0. The Committee expresses its serious concerns over the declining rate of disposal of cases year after
year which has crossed more than one lakhs in 2014-15. The Institution of cases in ITAT has
progressively risen as compared to disposal from 2010-11. The Committee recommends ITAT to
take serious note of the rising pendency of cases and devise mechanism to reduce its pendency.
(Para 4.18)
Action Taken
3.1. The ITAT has taken the matter of rising pendency seriously, and adequate measures have been
taken to reduce the pendency. Consequently, during the financial year 2015-16, ITAT has disposed of
51010 appeals compared to 30494 appeals disposed of during the financial year 2014-15. This reveals
that ITAT has increased the disposal rate by 67.5 per cent over the previous financial year 2014-15.
Consequently, the total pendency has been reduced from 103238 to 91971, which is almost reduction
in total pendency by 11 per cent.
3.2. It may be mentioned that Section 255(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, has been amended by the
Finance Act, 2016, which authorizes the President or any Member of the Appellate Tribunal, sitting
singly, to dispose of any case which has been allotted to the Bench of which he is a member and which
pertains to an assessee whose total income as computed by Assessing Officer in the case does not
exceed Rs. 50 lakhs. Prior to said amendment, the ceiling of Single Member Bench was of Rs. 15 lakhs.
The enhancement of ceiling of Single Member Bench from ` 15 lakhs to ` 50 lakhs will help the tribunal
to reduce its pendency.
Further Observation
3.3. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that ITAT will ensure that pendency is brought
down significantly in the shortest possible time.
Recommendations/Observations
4.0. The Committee is also of the view that vacancies in the various Benches of the ITAT needs to
be filed up as non filling-up of this vacancies has direct bearing upon its disposal rate.
(Para 4.19)

13
Action Taken
4.1. The view of the Hon'ble committee that vacancies in the various Benches of ITAT has direct
bearing upon its disposal rate is correct. Continuous efforts are being made to fill up the post of Members
(Judicial/Accountant) of the ITAT. In this regard, it is submitted that during the financial year 2014-15,
ITAT had 68 Members against the sanctioned strength of 126. Since July, 2015, 42 new Members
(Judicial/Accountant) have been appointed in the ITAT. Out of these 42 Members, 2 Members have
resigned from the post. Appointment of these new members has paved the way for tribunal to dispose
of 51,010 Appeals during the financial year 2015-16 as compared to 30494 Appeals disposed of by the
Tribunal during the financial year 2014-15. This reveals that ITAT has increased the disposal rate by 67.5
per cent over the previous financial year 2014-15.
Further Observation
4.2. The Committee notes from the reply that more than 15 vacancies are yet to be filled and
there is still scope for increasing its disposal rate. The Committee feels that increase in the
monetary limit for disposal of cases by single member and filling of all vacancies shall help in
bringing down pendency and therefore department should make all out efforts to fill all vacancies
at the earliest.
Department of Justice
NATIONAL JUDICIAL ACADEMY (NJA)
Recommendations/Observations
5.0. NJA is an autonomous statutory institution being handled by Highest Judicial officers and sitting
Judges . The Committee desires that National Judicial Academy needs to establish regional academies
in East, South, West and Northern parts of the country to strengthen the training requirements of
judiciary at suitable locations, which may be other than State capitals. The Committee also feels
that NJA need to conduct seminar/conferences at national level and international level, especially
Asia-Pacific, Africa etc. so as to acquaint judges in the Country of the dynamics and innovations
in the international legal system. The Committee also recommends the Government to encourage
the meeting of judges through reciprocal programmes by bi-lateral and multilateral arrangements
with all the countries and Regional Groupings. (Para 6.14)
Action Taken
5.1. The Committee's observations have been forwarded to the National Judicial Academy, Bhopal for
compliance.
Further Observation
5.2. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee requests the Department to submit the
comments/decisions of the NJA on the issue while furnishing Action Taken Report on
recommendations of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2017-18).

14
GRAM NYAYALAYAS
Recommendations/Observations
6.0. The Committee expresses its concern at the slow pace of establishment of Gram Nyayalayas even
7 years after the enactment of the Act. Till date only 10 States have notified Gram Nyayalayas,
where highly populated States like Uttar Pradesh has only established 12 Gram Nyayalayas till
date. The Committee also feels that non-applicability of Gram Nyayalayas Act in Tribal Areas of
certain States is one of the reasons for its non-popularity. The Committee, accordingly, feels that
Gram Nyalayas be also extended to Tribal Areas so that these Gram Nyalayas become a link
between the regular justice system and Tribal justice system. (Para 6.50)
Action Taken
6.1. The Gram Nyayalaya Act, 2008 extends to the whole of India except to the States of Jammu and
Kashmir, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim and to the tribal areas specified in Parts I, II, IIA and
III of the Constitution of India within the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. In terms
of Section 3 (1) of the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008, it is for the State Governments to establish Gram
Nyayalayas in consultation with the respective High Courts. Majority of States have now set up regular
courts at Taluka level.
6.2. The issues relating to implementation of Gram Nyayalayas Scheme in the States were discussed
in the Conference of Chief Ministers of States and Chief Justices of High Courts on 7th April, 2013
wherein it was decided that the State Governments and High Courts should be left to decide the question
of establishment of Gram Nyayalayas, wherever feasible, taking into account their local problems. The
focus is, therefore, on setting up Gram Nyayalayas where regular courts have not been set up.
Further Observation
6.3. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is further of the view that based on
experience so far gained the Department of Justice may examine the utility of Gram Nyalayas
in ensuring quick and cheap justice and easy access to justice and apprise the Committee of the
results thereof so that matter is considered further by the Committee.
USE OF REGIONAL LANGUAGES IN HIGH COURTS
Recommendations/Observations
7.0. The Committee reiterates its recommendations contained in Seventy-fifth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2015-16) wherein it observed that Article 348 provides for the use of Scheduled
languages, other than English, with the consent of the Governor of the State. The diversity of
languages spoken and enumerated in the Constitution of India clearly brings out the importance
of different languages of the country. The Committee, accordingly, feels that, scheduled languages
other than English may be permitted to be used in the High Courts, provided it is demanded by
the concerned State Government. The Committee is further of the view that the consultation

15
process with judiciary is not required as the Constitutional provisions are amply clear on the use
of Scheduled Languages in the High Courts and accordingly, the use of Scheduled Languages
should be decided as per mandate of Article 348. (Para 6.63)
Action Taken
7.1. The matters regarding implementation of the provisions of the Constitution relating to Official
language and the provisions of the Official Languages Act, 1963 (19 of 1963) except to the extent such
implementation has been assigned to any other Department and prior approval of the President for
authorising the limited use of a language other than English in the proceedings in the High Court of a
State have been assigned to the Department of Official Languages as per the Allocation of Business Rules,
1961.
7.2. The Secretary (Justice), vide DO letter dated 05.10.2015, had requested Secretary, Department of
Official Languages that the circumstances under which the 1965 decision of the Cabinet Committee were
taken and the circumstances obtaining today, alongwith the facility available for translation, etc., need
to be re-examined afresh. Hon'ble MLJ had also addressed Hon'ble Home Minister on 11.06.2015 to
consider review of the decision of the Cabinet (it might also be desirable to adopt a convention whereby
the Chief Justice of the India would be consulted on the proposals relating to use of Hindi and other
official languages of the States in the proceedings of the High Courts) taken 50 years ago.
7.3. The Department of Official Languages, in July, 2016, had forwarded a draft Cabinet Note suggesting
the following options before the Cabinet for decision: Either, the Cabinet convention adopted on 21.5.1965
is reconsidered and it is decided that the consultation of Chief Justice of India is not necessary before
the President gives his consent for use of Hindi/other Regional Languages in the proceedings of various
High Courts or the Cabinet convention adopted on 21.5.1965 regarding consultation with the Chief
Justice of India prior to President's consent is to be continued.
7.4. Department of Official Languages has mentioned that proposals for use of Bengali, Tamil, Gujarati,
Hindi and Kannada in the High Courts of Calcutta, Madras, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh and Karnataka, respectively,
under Article 348(2) of the Constitution, brought out by the respective State Governments, are pending
with them for conveying the prior consent of the President. However, all these proposals have been
disapproved by the Full Bench of the Supreme Court. It is also pertinent to mention that the issue of
use of Hindi/regional language(s) in the High Courts has often been raised by Hon'ble MPs within and
outside the Parliament.
Further Observation
7.5. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, would like an early decision of
the cabinet on the options suggested by the Department of Official Languages and would like
to be informed of the decision taken by the Government in the matter.
Recommendations/Observations
8.0. As regards the Bombay, Madras & Calcutta High Courts, the Committee is of the view that the
names of these High Courts may be respectively changed to the new names, viz. 'High Court of

16
Maharashtra, Mumbai and Benches at Nagpur and Aurangabad; Tamil Nadu High Court at
Chennai and Bench at Madurai; and High Court of Kolkata, Bench at Andaman, Port Blair. This
will require a constitutional amendment. The Committee recommends the Department to move a
Bill in this regard so that names of these High Courts are accordingly changed. (Para 6.64)
Action Taken
8.1. The High Courts (Alteration of Names) Bill, 2016 enabling the changing the names of the High
Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras into the High Courts of Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai, respectively
has been introduced in the Lok Sabha on 19.07.2016. However, it is proposed to withdraw the Bill, as
the State Government of Tamil Nadu has requested to change the name of the 'High Court of Madras'
as the 'High Court of Tamil Nadu'.
Further Observation
8.2. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee hopes that its recommendations would be
given due consideration by the Department in the new Bill that may be drafted on withdrawal
of the pending Bill.

17
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE
HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Recommendations/Observations
1.0. Committee is unable to understand the reasons for discontinuation of Non-Plan grants to the
Family Courts when only 438 Family Courts have been established so far in the country and most of
these courts are still functioning in the conventional courts complexes. The Committee instead feels that
Family Courts not only needs to be strengthened but separate complexes be set-up which should not be
too far from the regular courts. (Para 6.10)
Action Taken
1.1. The Non-Plan grant for Family Court Scheme was discontinued with the approval of Hon'ble
Minister of Law and Justice as the grant for the separate court complex was granted under Centrally
Sponsored Scheme.
Further Observation
1.2. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. It may be clarified as to whether grants for
establishing family courts would also be available under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for the
separate court complex and if so the extent of grants given under the scheme for establishment
of family courts exclusively.
VACANCIES IN HIGHER JUDICIARY
Recommendations/Observations
2.0. The Committee is concerned with the large pendency of cases in Supreme Court and High Courts.
Approximately 45 per cent posts are vacant in High Courts as the Collegium system have failed to fill-
up vacancies in time. The Committee feels that without filling-up these vacancies, it will not be possible
for the High Courts to reduce its pendency as both are closely related. (Para 6.59)
Action Taken
2.1. As on 20.10.2016, out of an approved strength of 1079 in the High Courts, there is a working
strength of 620 Judges, leaving vacancies of 459 Judges. Vacancies have increased due to the following
reasons:
(a) No fresh appointments made during NJAC case from 13.04.2015 to 16.12.2015.
(b) Increase in strength of 173 Judges of various High Courts.
(c) Supreme Court Collegium rejects on average of 30% of recommendations.
17

18
2.2. Filling up of vacancies of Judges in the High Courts is a continuous and collaborative process of
the Judiciary and Executive. After the striking down the constitutional validity of the Constitution (Ninety-
Ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 and the National Judicial Appointments Commission Act, 2014, the Supreme
Court passed an order regarding improving the Collegium system in December, 2015 by supplementing
the existing Memorandum of Procedure (MoP). As the process was likely to take some time, at the
initiative of the Government, the matter was taken up with the Supreme Court and the process of
appointment of Judges has been resumed, pending finalization of the revised MoP. As a result, of the
concerted efforts 121 Additional Judges have been made permanent and 86 fresh appointments of Judges
have been made in various High Courts from 01.01.2016 to 05.10.2016. The shortage of Judges is not
the sole reason for inordinate delay in disposal of case. Cases are delayed on account of improper
investigation, lack of forensic laboratories, shortage of public prosecutors, recurrent adjournments and
improper application of rules and procedures. Further, it is also mentioned that Delhi and Gujarat have
a higher number of Judges per million of their respective population, they still have a high number of
pending cases.
Further Observation
2.3. The Committees is not at all satisfied with the reply of the Department. Department
cannot evade its responsibility in ensuring that vacancies in higher judiciary are filled up in the
shortest possible time by saying that other factors are also responsible for huge pendency in
higher courts. In its in Eighty-seventh Report on the "Inordinate Delay in Filling up the Vacancies
in the Supreme Court and High Courts" the Committee has examined the issue in depth and
given its recommendations. The Department should give effect to those recommendations of the
Committee and ensure that vacancies in higher judiciary are filled up as soon as these arise.
Recommendations/Observations
3.0. The Committee also reiterates its recommendations contained in its Thirty-ninth Report on Demands
for Grants (2010-11) and Eighty-Second Report on Action Taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 75th report on Demands for Grants (2015-16), that the retirement
age of judges of High Courts be increased to 65 years to bring it at par with the retirement age
of judges of Supreme Court of India by effecting amendment to the Constitution and related
legislation(s) and to help in easing the pressure of mounting vacancies in High Courts by passing
the Bill. (Para 6.60)
Action Taken
3.1. For increase the retirement age of High Court Judges from 62 to 65 the Constitution (One Hundred
and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 25.08.2010. The Bill was
referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee for examination and report. The Committee in its
Forty-fourth Report on the Bill, recommended that the proposed Bill in its present form should be passed
without delay. However, the Bill could not be considered and lapsed due to dissolution of 15th Lok Sabha.
Further Observation
3.2. The Committee has recently examined the issue of retirement age of judges of higher
judiciary in its in Eighty-seventh Report of the Committee on the "Inordinate Delay in Filling

19
up the Vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts", wherein it has recommended that the
Government should increase the retirement age of the Supreme Court judge to 67 years and of
High Courts judge to 65 years.
Recommendations/Observations
4.0. The Committee feels that the Government should find avenues to generate revenue to meet
expenditure required for infrastructure requirements, supporting staff, etc. in the courts so as to make
them self - sustainable. The Committee accordingly, reiterates its recommendations contained in Seventy-
fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) that revenue should be raised from parties which can
afford to pay higher court fee, especially corporate houses for improving the basic amenities for Judges
and infrastructure. The surplus funds, if any, can also be utilised for improving the facilities of the
subordinate judiciary keeping in view that it is the sovereign duty of the Government to provide free
criminal justice. (Para 6.65)
Action Taken
4.1. A proposal was considered earlier for creation of a National Judicial Infrastructure Fund to be
managed by a Special Purpose Vehicle to carry out the work of infrastructure development of the
subordinate courts in the country. One of the proposed source of funding was enhanced court fees and
cost imposed on litigations. However, since the Planning Commission was of the view that creation of
the National Judicial Infrastructure Fund would be violation of Ministry of Finance guidelines on creation
of Reserve / Corpus funds, the proposal was dropped and was replaced by modified Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for development of infrastructure facilities for judiciary. A sum of Rs. 4,213 crore has been
released to the State Governments after revision of the Scheme in 2011 till 30th September, 2016.
Further Observation
4.2. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its recommendation contained in Seventy-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2015-
16). The Committee is of the view that rich and corporate should be charged at premium rate
for civil and taxation cases so that surplus funds generated can be utilised for improving subordinate
judiciary, where majority of litigations relating to poor are pending.
Recommendations/Observations
5.0. The Committee feels that Government should make some efforts for raising the percentage of
women judges in the High Courts and the Supreme Court. The Committee insists that ideally the strength
of women judges should be around 50 percent of the total strength of the judges. [Para 6.66]
Action Taken
5.1. Appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court of India and High Courts are made under Articles
124, 217 and 224 of the Constitution of India, respectively, which do not provide for reservation for
any caste or class of persons.

20
5.2. However, keeping in view of diversity principle and giving due representation to various classes
of society in the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts, the Government has
been requesting the Chief Justices of the High Courts to take into consideration suitable candidates
belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Minorities and Women while sending proposals for
appointment of Judges.
Further Observation
5.3. The Committee also examined the issue of representation of women and marginalised
sections in higher judiciary in its Eighty-seventh Report of the Committee on the "Inordinate
Delay in Filling up the Vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts". The Committee
reiterates the view taken in that Report that composition of higher judiciary should reflect the
diversity and composition of Indian society.
Department of Legal Affairs
INDIAN LA W INSTITUTE (ILI)
Recommendations/Observations
6.0. The Committee is constrained to note that the ILI has been dependent on the Government Grants-
in-aid. The Committee feels that ILI should generate its own fund by introducing relevant market driven
short-term courses as it cannot live forever by depending on Government grants. The Committee feels
that ILI needs to expand its activities and should explore moving into a bigger campus. The Committee
is of the view that it would be in fitness of things if ILI is given statutory backing. (Para 4.34)
Action taken
6.1. The ILI has reported that the Institute has leased out the first, second and third floor to Ministry
of Law & Justice. It is difficult for the Institute to introduce more academic course due to space
constraints and lack of infrastructure. The Institute has very less scope to earn more revenue through
expanded activities. The institute is in the process of exploring more avenues for expansion of its
activities both in terms of academic as well as infrastructure development by way of approaching
appropriate authority to allot land for a bigger campus. On the above observation of the Standing
Committee, ILI requested this Department to draft a legislation to place before the Parliament for
enactment of the Indian Law Institute as an Institute of National Repute like IITs, IIMs, and Central
University. Department of Legal Affairs is of the view that as the Institute has very less scope to
introduce more academic courses due to space constraints and lack of infrastructure, it may be appropriate
that ILI may first develop its infrastructure, and subsequently expand its academic activities. Thereafter,
matter relating to grant statutory backing to ILI may be considered by the Government at the appropriate
time.
Further Observation
6.2. In its recommendations, the Committee suggested for financial independence of ILI by
expanding its activities and thereby generating more revenues and also for the statutory back-

21
up to the institute. The reply by the Ministry does not comment on both the aspects rather gives
an evasive reply. The Committee fails to understand why this issue of the space constraint has
been highlighted particularly when the ILI has itself leased out its three floors to Ministry of
Law and Justice. The institute has, therefore, option to get these floors vacated and use the same
for expanded activities. Committee also does not agree with the Ministry's condition stipulating
that the statutory backing to ILI could be considered only after the requirement of space,
infrastructure, etc., are met. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department of
Legal Affairs and the ILI to resolve the issues and take action as suggested by the Committee
in its said recommendation.

22
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
Department of Legal Affairs
LA W COMMISSION OF INDIA
Recommendation/observation
1.0. The Committee is happy to note that 21st Law Commission has been constituted by the Government.
The allocation to Law Commission of India in BE (2016-17) is ` 14.91 crore as against the projected
demand of ` 15.63 which is ` 0.71 crore less. The Committee feels that the funds allocation may be
revised during the RE stage. The ATR of the Department should reflect the implementation of Reports
of the Law Commission and its references by Government. (Para 4.12)
Action Taken
1.1. The Law Commission of India has submitted 262 Reports on various subjects to Government of
India so far. Out of 262 Reports, 92 Reports have been implemented by the Government as indicated
below:
Sl. Report Name of the Report Year of
No. No. submission of
Report
12 3 4
1. 4. On the proposal that High Courts should sit in Benches at different 1956
places in a State.
2. 10. Law of Acquisition and Requisitioning of Land. 1958
3. 11. Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 1958
4. 14. Reform of Judicial Administration. 1958
5. 20. The Law of Hire-Purchase 1961
6. 21. Marine Insurance 1961
7. 24. The Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952 1962
8. 25. Evidence of Officers about forged stamps, currency notes, etc. 1963
Section 509-A Cr.P.C. as proposed.
9. 26. Insolvency Laws 1964
10. 27. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 1964
11. 28. The Indian Oaths Act, 1873. 1964
22

23
12 3 4
12. 29. Proposal to include certain Social and Economic Offences in the 1966
Indian Penal Code
13. 30. Section 5 of the Central Sales T ax Act, 1956, taxation by the States 1967
of Sales in the course of import.
14. 31. Section 30(2) of the Indian Registration Act, 1908-Extension to Delhi. 1967
15. 32. Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898-Appointment of 1967
Sessions Judges, Additional Session Judges and Assistant Sessions
Judges.
16. 33. Section 44, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 1967
17. 35. Capital Punishment. 1967
18. 36. Sections 497, 498 and 499 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898- 1967
Grant of bail with condition.
19. 37. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Sections 1 to 176). 1967
20. 39. Punishment of imprisonment for life under the Indian Penal Code. 1968
21. 40. Law relating to attendance of Prisoners in C ourts. 1969
22. 41. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 1969
23. 44. The Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in Civil Matters. 1971
24. 45. Civil Appeals to the Supreme Court on a Certificate of Fitness. 1971
25. 46. The Constitution (T wenty-fifth Amendment) Bill ,1971. 1971
26. 47. The Trial and Punishment of Social and Economic Offences. 1972
27. 49. The Proposal for inclusion of agricultural income in the total income 1972
for the purpose of determining the rate of tax under the Income-tax
Act, 1961.
28. 51. Compensation for injuries caused by automobiles in hit-and-run cases. 1972
29. 53. Effect of the Pensions Act, 1871 on the right to sue for pensions of 1972
retired members of the public services.
30. 54. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 1973
31. 55. Rate of interest after decree and interest on costs under sections 34 1973
and 35, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
32. 56. Statutory Provisions as to Notice of suit ot her than secti on 80, Ci vil 1973
Procedure Code.
33. 57. Benami Transactions. 1973

24
12 3 4
34. 58. Structure and Jurisdiction of the Higher Judiciary . 1974
35. 59. Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and Special 1974
Marriage Act, 1954.
36. 60. The General Clauses Act, 1897. 1974
37. 61. Certain problems connected with power of the States to levy a tax on 1974
the sale of goods and with the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.
38. 63. The Interest Act, 1839. 1975
39. 64. The Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956. 1975
40. 67. The Indian Stamp Act, 1899. 1977
41. 68 The Powers of Attorney Act, 1882 1977
42. 69 The Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 1977
43. 71 The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955-Irretrievable breakdown of marriage 1978
as a ground of divorce.
44. 72 Restriction on practice after being a permanent J udge, Article 220 of 1978
the Constitution.
45. 75 Disciplinary Jurisdiction under the Advocates Act, 1961. 1978
46. 76 Arbitration Act, 1940. 1978
47. 77 Delay and arrears in trial courts. 1979
48. 78 Congestion of under trial prisoners in jails. 1979
49. 79 Delay and Arrears in High Courts and other Appellate Courts. 1979
50. 80 Method of Appointment of Judges. 1979
51. 84 Rape and allied offences-some questions of substantive  law,  procedure 1980
and evidence.
52. 99 Oral and written arguments in the Higher courts. 1984
53. 104 The Judicial Of ficers' Protection Act, 1850. 1984
54. 105 Quality Control and Inspection of consumer goods. 1984
55. 114 Gram Nyayalaya. 1986
56. 116 Formation of an All India Judicial Service. 1986
57. 117 Training of Judicial Officers. 1986
58. 128 Cost of Litigation. 1988

25
12 3 4
59. 142 Concessional treatment for offenders who on their own initiative 1991
choose to plead guilty without any bargaining.
60. 143 Legislative safeguards for protecting the small depositors from 1991
exploitation.
61. 145 Article 12 of the Constitution and Public Sector Undertakings. 1992
62. 149 Removal of certain deficiencies in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 1994
(Act No. 59 of1988).
63. 154 The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act No. 2 of 1974). 1996
64. 155 The Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 1997
(Act No. 61 of 1985).
65. 163 The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997 1998
66. 164 The Indian Divorce Act, 1869 (Act IV of 1869) 1998
67. 165 Free and Compulsory Education for Children 1998
68. 167 The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 1998. 1999
69. 169 Amendment of Army, Navy and Air Force Act. 1999
70. 171 The Biodiversity Bill, 2000 2000
71. 173 Prevention of T errorism Bill, 2000 2000
72. 175 The Foreigners (Amendment) Bill, 2000 2000
73. 177 Law Relating to Arrest 2001
74. 180 Article 20 (3) of the Constitution of India and Right to Silence 2002
75. 181 Amendment to Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 2002
76. 182 Amendment of Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 2002
77. 186 Proposal to Constitute Environment Courts 2003
78. 189 Revision of Court Fees Structure 2004
79. 190 The Revision of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Insurance 2004
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999
80. 195 The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005 2006
81. 200 Trial by Media: Free Speech Vs. Fair Trial Under Criminal Procedure 2006
(Amendments to the Contempt of Court Act, 1971) (partly
implemented)
82. 201 Medical Treatment after Accidents and During Emer gency Medical 2006
Condition and Women in Labour

26
12 3 4
83. 202 Proposal to Amend Section 304-B of the Indian Pena l Code 2007
84. 214 Proposal for reconsideration of Judges cases I, II and III - SP 2008
GUPTA Vs. UOI
85. 216 Non-Feasibility of Introduction of Hindi as Compulsory Language in 2008
the Supreme Court of India
86. 219 Need for Family Law Legislations for Non-resident Indians. 2009
87. 220 Need to fix Maximum Chargeable Court-fees in Subordinate 2009
Civil Courts.
88. 223 Need for Ameliorating the lot of the Have-nots - Supreme Court's 2009
Judgments.
89. 226 The Inclusion of Acid Attacks as Specific Offences in the Indian 2009
Penal Code and a Law for Compensation for Victims of Crime.
90. 230 Reforms in the Judiciary - Some suggestions 2009
91. 231 Amendments in Indian Stamp Act 1899 And Court-Fees Act 1870 2009
Permitting Different Modes of Payment
92. 236 Court-fees in Supreme Court vis-a-vis Corporate Litigation 2010
93. 246 Amendment to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 2014
94. 253 "Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High 2015
Courts and Commercial Courts Bill, 2015"
Further Observation
1.2. The reply of the Department does not speak of the allocation for Law Commission of India
at RE stage. The reply is therefore not complete. The Department should explain the same it in
its Action Taken Notes. The Committee, also recommends that the Department should look into
the financial requirements, if any, of the Law Commission of India during the current financial
year.
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ICADR)
Recommendations/Observations
2.0. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of ICADR. However, the Committee feel that ICADR
instead of leasing its building to other Departments and earning rental income, should utilize its
premises to expand its activities. The Committee also feels that Department of Legal Affairs may
explore the option of making Arbitration at ICADR compulsory clause for PSUs, PSES and
Departments of Government of India. (Para 4.37)
Action Taken
2.1. The ICADR has reported to this Department that the Hon'ble Standing Committee is already aware
that the portion of the Administrative Block of ICADR has been temporarily rented out on lease to

27
facilitate optimum use and the maintenance of the building and to also generate necessary funds for
promotion of ADR activities by ICADR. ICADR has also reported this Department that the Hon'ble
Standing Committee was assured that the entire income from renting of space will be ultimately used
for ADR purposes, i.e. for creating public awareness by holding conferences, seminars and workshops
at various places in India, undertaking research work in the field of ADR, setting up and strengthening
of Regional Centres of ICADR. The said income is also being utilized for strengthening the present
facilities/ infrastructure to conform to International standards. ICADR updated its Court Rooms with
modern display systems, documentation camera and wi-fi facilities. ICADR intends to provide video-
conferencing, recording and transcription facilities, at competitive rates, for conducting arbitration cases
and educational and training programmes in Arbitration and Mediation.
2.2. As regards, exploring the possibility by the Department of Legal Affairs, for making Arbitration
at ICADR compulsory clause for PSUs, PSES and Departments of Government of India, Department
of Legal Affairs is of the view that several organizations in the country are doing arbitration work. If
a compulsory clause for making Arbitration at ICADR for PSUs, PSES and Department of Government
of India is made, the same would be against the interest of other organizations as well as healthy
competition for this sector. However, on the recommendation of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee, the then Law Secretary vide letter dated 25th October, 2007, had written to all the
Secretaries of the Government of India to direct the concerned authorities in their Department and also
PSUs falling under them to incorporate the arbitration/conciliation clauses formulated by ICADR, in the
agreement entered into by them with other parties. Thereafter, during the year 2010, on the recommendation
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee in its thirty-ninth report, the then Law Secretary vide letter
dated 7th June, 2010 had requested all the Secretaries of the Government of India to ensure that their
Department/PSUs under them invariably include a clause in the agreements entered into with other parties
which provides for referring matters to ICADR for arbitration in the event of dispute, instead of going
to the court directly.
2.3. As one of the main objectives of the ICADR is to conduct, propagate, promote and popularize the
settlement of domestic and international disputes by different modes of ADR, it may be appropriate that
ICADR may increase its outreach to different clients through use of IT enabled technologies and
expertise of its Arbitrators.
Further Observation
2.4. The Committee feels that the Department should prepare a roadmap for the expansion of
the activities of ICADR with the aim of making it a centre of excellence and also to ensure its
financial independence. The leasing of premises of ICADR is a cause for concern as it signifies
under-utilisation of resources of the ICADR.
Department of Justice
ACCESS TO JUSTICE- PROJECT
Recommendations/Observations
3.0. The Committee appreciates the activities undertaken under A2J Project and feels that it will go
a long way in achieving the objective of delivering justice to under-represented communities in

28
the country. Since the project is only for a five year period (2012-17), the Committee feels that
still a lot has to be done in the country in the area of justice delivery, especially for the
marginalised and poor sections of the society. The Committee also feels that the project may be
linked with customary law and practices to provide justice to tribal people in North-East. Therefore,
the Committee recommends the Department to continue and extend the project so that the project
can be used as a platform to bring about a synergy between regular justice system and customary
law and practices in the North-East India.  (Para 6.40)
Action Taken
3.1. The points have been noted down for further deliberation.
Further Observation
3.2. The Committee feels that A2J should be extended for another term and views that there
remains a vast scope to provide justice to marginalized sections in the country and A2J scheme
can and should play a very important role in this regard.

29
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative Department
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
1. The Committee notes the reply. (1.4., 2.10, 3.3, 4.2, 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2, 9.2, 10.2, 11.1, 11.2,
12.2 and 13.2)
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
2. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee may, however, be informed as to what
extent Official Languages Wing and Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan were able to utilize the amounts
sanctioned to them in BE (2016-17). (1.2)
3. The Committee notes that recruitment process for newly created posts for ILDR is at
different stages and hopes that the Department shall pursue with recruiting agencies to complete
the process at the earliest. (2.2)
4. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that ITAT will ensure that pendency is brought
down significantly in the shortest possible time. (3.3)
5. The Committee notes from the reply that more than 15 vacancies are yet to be filled and
there is still scope for increasing its disposal rate. The Committee feels that increase in the
monetary limit for disposal of cases by single member and filling of all vacancies shall help in
bringing down pendency and therefore department should make all out efforts to fill all vacancies
at the earliest. (4.2)
6. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee requests the Department to submit the
comments/decisions of the NJA on the issue while furnishing Action Taken Report on
recommendations of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2017-18). (5.2)
7. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is further of the view that based on
experience so far gained the Department of Justice may examine the utility of Gram Nyalayas
in ensuring quick and cheap justice and easy access to justice and apprise the Committee of the
results thereof so that matter is considered further by the Committee. (6.3)
8. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, would like an early decision of
the cabinet on the options suggested by the Department of Official Languages and would like
to be informed of the decision taken by the Government in the matter. (7.5)
29

30
9. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee hopes that its recommendations would be
given due consideration by the Department in the new Bill that may be drafted on withdrawal
of the pending Bill. (8.2)
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
10. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. It may be clarified as to whether grants for
establishing family courts would also be available under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for the
separate court complex and if so the extent of grants given under the scheme for establishment
offamily courts exclusively. (1.2)
11. The Committees is not at all satisfied with the reply of the Department. Department
cannot evade its responsibility in ensuring that vacancies in higher judiciary are filled up in the
shortest possible time by saying that other factors are also responsible for huge pendency in
higher courts. In its in Eighty-seventh Report on the "Inordinate Delay in Filling up the Vacancies
in the Supreme Court and High Courts" the Committee has examined the issue in depth and
given its recommendations. The Department should give effect to those recommendations of the
Committee and ensure that vacancies in higher judiciary are filled up as soon as these arise.
(2.3)
12. The Committee has recently examined the issue of retirement age of judges of higher
judiciary in its in Eighty-seventh Report of the Committee on the "Inordinate Delay in Filling
up the Vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts", wherein it has recommended that the
Government should increase the retirement age of the Supreme Court judge to 67 years and of
High Courts judge to 65 years. (3.2)
13. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its recommendation contained in Seventy-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2015-
16). The Committee is of the view that rich and corporate should be charged at premium rate
for civil and taxation cases so that surplus funds generated can be utilised for improving subordinate
judiciary, where majority of litigations relating to poor are pending. (4.2)
14. The Committee also examined the issue of representation of women and marginalised
sections in higher judiciary in its Eighty-seventh Report of the Committee on the "Inordinate
Delay in Filling up the Vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Courts". The Committee
reiterates the view taken in that Report that composition of higher judiciary should reflect the
diversity and composition of Indian society. (5.3)
15. In its recommendations, the Committee suggested for financial independence of ILI by
expanding its activities and thereby generating more revenues and also for the statutory back-
up to the institute. The reply by the Ministry does not comment on both the aspects rather gives
an evasive reply. The Committee fails to understand why this issue of the space constraint has

31
been highlighted particularly when the ILI has itself leased out its three floors to Ministry of
Law and Justice. The institute has, therefore, option to get these floors vacated and use the same
for expanded activities. Committee also does not agree with the Ministry's condition stipulating
that the statutory backing to ILI could be considered only after the requirement of space,
infrastructure, etc., are met. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department of
Legal Affairs and the ILI to resolve the issues and take action as suggested by the Committee
in its said recommendation. (6.2)
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
16. The reply of the Department does not speak of the allocation for Law Commission of India
at RE stage. The reply is therefore not complete. The Department should explain the same it in
its Action Taken Notes. The Committee, also recommends that the Department should look into
the financial requirements, if any, of the Law Commission of India during the current financial
year. (1.2)
17. The Committee feels that the Department should prepare a roadmap for the expansion of
the activities of ICADR with the aim of making it a centre of excellence and also to ensure its
financial independence. The leasing of premises of ICADR is a cause for concern as it signifies
under-utilisation of resources of the ICADR. (2.4)
18. The Committee feels that A2J should be extended for another term and views that there
remains a vast scope to provide justice to marginalized sections in the country and A2 J scheme
can and should play a very important role in this regard. (3.2)

MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 24th January, 2017 in Committee Room 'E', Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
3. Shri D. Raja
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Tiruchi Siva
6. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Idris Ali
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Shri B.V . Nayak
11. Shri M. Udhayakumar
12. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
13. Shri Pralhad V . Joshi
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
35

36
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the consideration
and adoption of the draft (*** and ***) Reports of the Committee on (i) Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 84th Report on Demands for
Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Law and Justice; and  (ii) *** Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 85th Report on Demands for Grants
(2016-17) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, respectively. Hon'ble Members
deliberated on the Reports, and thereafter, the Reports were adopted with minor amendments.
3. The Committee decided to present the Eighty-eighth and Eighty-ninth Reports to both Houses of
Parliament on the 7th February, 2017. It authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri D.Raja to
present the Report to Rajya Sabha and Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi and in her absence, Shri M. Udhayakumar
to lay the same in Lok Sabha.
4. The meeting adjourned at 3.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.