 
 
 
 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2025/ Chaitra 1947 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
150 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED FORTY FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON THE SUBJECT "JUDICIAL INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE NORTH-EASTERN 
STATES OF INDIA" 
PERTAINING TO 
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
 (MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th March, 2025) 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 27th March, 2025) 
 

pg. 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
Website : https://sansad.in/rs 

pg. 3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                    5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                            6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                    7  
  
(I) CHAPTER I           8 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN AC-
CEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                9 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COM-
MITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III    11 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS REC-
OMMENDATIONS    
(IV) CHAPTER IV                                                                                                             14 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RE-
CEIVED   
 
5.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE*  15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ______________________ 
*to be appended at later stage 

pg. 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal         Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
3. Ms. Swati Maliwal 
4. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
7. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. Shri P. Wilson 
10. *Shri Sana Sathish Babu 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Arup Chakraborty 
14. Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandanagouda 
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
16. Shri Varun Chaudhry 
17. Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
18. Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
19. Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
20. Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
21. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
22. Shri Radhakrishna 
23. Shri A. Raja 
24. Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao 
25. Shri Saleng A. Sangma 
26. Shri Pushpendra Saroj 
27. Shrimati Manju Sharma 
28. Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
_____________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 07.01.2025 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
Shri Kuldeep Kumar Vats, Under Secretary 
 

pg. 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Per-
sonnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Fiftieth Report (150th) 
on Action Taken on One Hundred Forty First (141st) Report of the Committee on the subject 
"Judicial Infrastructure in the North-Eastern States of India" pertaining to the Department of 
Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice). 
2. The One Hundred Forty First Report of the Department related Parliamentary Stan d-
ing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented 
to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2024.  
3. The Department of Justice, of the Ministry of Law and Justice furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on the One Hundred Forty First Report of the Committee on 22nd May, 2024. 
The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Fiftieth Report and adopted the same in its 
meeting held on 25th March, 2025. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
27th March, 2025 BRIJ LAL 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
 Law and Justice 
 
  

pg. 6 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Schemes  
NER North -Eastern Region 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
SNA Single Nodal Agency 
  

pg. 7 
 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the De-
partment of Justice  (Ministry of Law and Justice ) on the recommendations / observations of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice in its One Hundred Forty First (141st) Report on the subject "Judicial Infr a-
structure in the North -Eastern States of India", which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2024.  
2. The Committee had made 6 recommendations/observations in its 141st Report. R e-
plies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized under three chapters on 
the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendation/observation which have been accepted by t he Depar t-
ment, i.e. in respect of recommendation No. (vi) of the Report. The Co m-
mittee is pleased to note that the Department has ac cepted the recommen-
dation. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. in respect of 
recommendation Nos. (i) and (ii) of the Report. The Committee is satisfied 
with the explanations advanced by the Department and does not wish to 
pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. in respect of recommendation 
Nos. (iii), (iv) and (v ) of the Report . The Committee does not accept the 
reasons given by the Department and reiterates the same. 
Chapter – IV:    Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received.  
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed Ac-
tion Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by the 
Committee in this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the succee d-
ing pages. For reference purpose, Recommendation numbers of the original report (i.e. of 
141st Report) have been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
 
--- 
  

pg. 8 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.0 The Committee undertook study visit to all the North -Eastern States (except Mizoram) 
to assess the infrastructural facilities available in those states. The Committee found that 
among the North -Eastern States, Meghalaya has performed best in terms of utilizati on of 
funds under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for creation of infrastructural facilities for su b-
ordinate judiciary. The process followed by Meghalaya in terms of compliance of the cond i-
tions laid down by the Department of Justice and Ministry of Finance  for release of funds, 
needs to be emulated by others to derive maximum benefit from the Scheme.   (Recommenda-
tion No. vi) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1 The recommendation of the committee has been noted. 
 
 

pg. 9 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERN-
MENT  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 It is the duty of the State to provide access to justice to all its citizens and create jud i-
cial infrastructure to provide efficient, economic and timely delivery of justice. The status of 
judicial infrastructure in the North Eastern States can at best be termed as work in progress 
and a lot of work still needs to be done to meet the requirement at the lower end of the spe c-
trum. It does not augur well for a vibrant and aspirational democracy to have Courts which 
are functioning from dilapidated rented premises with insufficient space and which lack basic 
amenities like toilets, water connection, proper electricity supply, etc. Although, the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for Development of Infrastructure Facilities for Judicia ry, is a ray 
of hope in otherwise gloomy scenario, it is imperative to enhance the share of North eastern 
States  under the Scheme.  (Recommendation No. i) 
Action Taken 
2.1 The budgetary allocation done for the Scheme every year is required to be distributed 
to all the 28 States and 8 Union Territories.  To take care of the interest of the NER, there is 
mandatory allocation of at least 10% of budgetary allocation for the NE Region. Against total 
allocation of Rs.1051 crore for the scheme in the FY 2023-24, a provision of Rs.111 crore 
was kept for the NE Region.   
2.2 As per the laid down process, in the beginning of the financial year, based on the 
weightage formula as provided in the scheme, the tentative allocation for all the states is done 
and made known to them for preparing their action plan. They are required to seek funds im-
mediately and latest by June, after fulfilment of all the conditions, primary among which is 
the utilization of funds released earlier. However, after June, the release can be made to the 
States w.r.t. their requirements and need. The scheme guidelines provide for allocation of en-
hanced budgetary support to the needy States, having good pace of expenditure, if some other 
States are not in a position to seek their allocated funds and thus some savings are available.  
 2.3 Thus, subject to  the utilization of the funds released earlier and having the need and a 
good pipeline of projects, the NER States can also seek enhanced funds, if available, as indi-
cated in para above. In the FY 2023-24, against allocation of Rs.111crore, on account of 
these provisions, funds to the tune of Rs.130.14 crore were released to the states in NE Re-
gion.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4 The revised procedural guidelines fo r release of CSS funds under the new Public F i-
nancial Management System (PFMS) has apparently, slowed down the pace of release of 
funds. Due to stringent conditions attached for release of funds, most of the States are finding 

pg. 10 
 
it difficult to get their quo ta of funds despite having huge requirements for funds for their 
projects both ongoing and new. From the data provided by the Department, 3 out of 8 NE 
States did not get any funds during 2022 -23 due to such norms. The Committee is happy to 
note that the D epartment of Justice has made commendable efforts to ensure that funds are 
released to the states on time and that all of them become PFMS compliant. The Committee, 
however, recommends the Department to approach the MoF to get the guidelines on release 
of funds under the CSS relaxed, wherever the States are facing genuine difficulties in the i m-
plementation of such guidelines.  (Recommendation No. ii) 
Action Taken  
2.5 As per the guidelines of Ministry of Finance regarding the release of funds under the Ce n-
trally Sponsored Schemes in vogue in 2023 -24 not more than 25% of the funds earmarked to a State 
can be released at one go. Release of further instalment can only be done after the utilization of the 
previous funds released to it along with the State matching share. The purpose of these guidelines is to 
ensure efficient utilization of funds and to avoid parking of funds. As mentioned above, the scheme 
guidelines also provide for allocation of enhanced budgetary support to the needy states, having good 
pace of expenditure, if some other states are not in a position to seek their allocated funds and thus 
some savings are available.   
2.6 Fund is released to the States as soon as they reduce their unspent balance (Central share + 
state share lying with them) to  the permissible level. The funds using these procedures are released, 
on need basis and only those States get benefited which have exhausted the funds released to them 
earlier and have the capacity to utilize more funds and have ongoing/new projects to ut ilise the 
funds.   
2.7 The States which are not able to utilize the previous funds, are not provided more funds, so as 
to avoid unnecessary parking of funds at the level of the State Government. In the FY 2022 -23, funds 
could not be released to the States of Nagaland, Tripura and Mizoram, as all these States had unspent 
balance of funds available in their respective Single Nodal Agency (SNA) accounts.   The State-wise 
position is as under: 
 Nagaland: Funds to the tune of Rs.13.27 cr ore were released to the State in the F.Y. 2021-22. 
However, as the State did not utilize these funds, it did not become eligible for release of 
funds in 2022 -23. It was only after utilization of unspent balance of funds, that funds to the 
tune of Rs.4.3925 crore were released to the State in FY 23-24. 
 Mizoram: Funds to the tune of Rs.9.5 cr ore were released to the State in the F.Y. 2021 -22. 
However, as the State did not utilize these funds, it did not become eligible for release of 
funds in 2022 -23. It was only after utilization of unspent balance of funds that funds to the 
tune of Rs.8.855 crore were released to the State in FY 23-24. 
 Tripura: Funds to the tune of Rs.7.74 cr ore were released to the State in the F.Y. 2020 -21. 
However, as the State did not utilize these funds, it did not become eligible for release of 
funds in 2021 -22 as well as in 2022 -23. It was only after utilization of unspent balance of 
funds that funds to th e tune of Rs.40.4869 cr ore were released to the State in FY 23 -24. It is 
relevant to mention that  in F.Y.2023-24, Ministry of Finance was also  approached to relax 
the condition to enable this Department to release more than 25% of funds at one go to the 
States. However, this was not agreed to by the Ministry of Finance.    

pg. 11 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REI-
TERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 Apart from general PFMS related issues, the North -Eastern States face other cha l-
lenges in creation of infrastructure due to their remote location, hilly terrain, availability of 
unencumbered land. Also the NE States and other hilly States have a short working season 
which makes movement of men and material difficult over the treacherous terrain and ther e-
by making contract implementation difficult with increased time and cost overruns. Because 
of limited railways connectivity in the region, the cost of transportation becomes much higher, 
leading to substantial increase in cost of material. Other reasons include late receipt of project 
proposals and non-receipt of utilization of certificates from the respective state governments. 
The department should take these factors into account while prescribing the modalities of 
fund release. (Recommendation No. iv) 
Action Taken 
3.1 The Department is aware of the challenges in creation of infrastructure due to  remote 
location, hilly terrain, availability of unencumbered land etc. in North Eastern Region (NER). 
These peculiarities, in addition to problem of short working season, limited railways connec-
tivity, are hindering the creation of necessary infrastructure in the North Eastern Region. The 
Department is committed to releasing funds to all the States, particularly to States in NER as 
and when a particular State has utilized the funds previously released to it. As far as the prob-
lem like high transportation cost leading in NER States, the State contribution has been kept 
at only 10% as compared to 40% in other States in respect of funds sharing pattern under the 
scheme.  
3.2 It is relevant to illustrate an example of State of Arunachal Pradesh. In January 2023, 
against the request of the State seeking around Rs.122 crore for ongoing and new projects of 
Court Halls and Residential Units, after due approvals, a  sum of Rs. 32.38  crore wa s r e-
leased to the State in January 2023.  Thus funds to the tune of Rs. Rs.35.97 cr ore (Rs.32.38 
crore central share plus Rs.3.59 crore matching State share) were available to the State. How-
ever, the State has incurred only an expenditure of only of Rs.13. 26 crore (2023-24) out of 
these funds. Thus, the State could not get any funds in the financial year 2023-24, as it is hav-
ing a huge unspent balance of the previous year and is accordingly not eligible for receipt of 
more central funds. One of the importan t conditions for claiming funds under the scheme is 
utilization of funds released to the State earlier. Thus, speedy utilization of funds by the 
States is a pre-requisite for release of further central funds.   
Further observation 
3.3 The Committee takes n ote of th e reply of the D epartment. The C ommittee also 
understands that there is a n issue of non-utilization of the funds released earlier  in the 
north-eastern states which hinders the release of further installments in the scheme for 

pg. 12 
 
the creation of i nfrastructure.  The Committee further emphasizes that a system of p e-
nalties or incentives may be introduced in the scheme so that States may get motivated 
to improve their financial management practices and ensure that funds are used  fully 
and effectively. This could also create a sense of urgency among the States for  timely 
utilization of funds. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.4 The funding pattern under the CSS for the 8 North Eastern States and two Himalayan 
states is 90:10 (Center: State). However, in some cases the States are finding it difficult to 
even contribute 10% of the funds leading to delay in completion of projects. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends the Department to explore the possibility of providing a better deal 
in terms of enhanced allocation of funds and relaxation of spending norms under the Scheme, 
considering the peculiarities of the NE States. It is further recommended that the 10% of the 
state quota may also be relaxed for the NE States subject to subsequent recovery from the 
concerned state, so that the ongoing projects are not stalled for want of such meager amount  
of money. (Recommendation No. v) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5 As already mentioned the basic issue, which hampers release of funds to the States, 
including NER States is non-utilization of the funds released earlier. Also, the funds sharing 
patterns are prescribed by Ministry of Finance for all Centrally Sponsored Schemes across 
various Ministries of Union of India. Further, the primary responsibility of development of 
infrastructure facilities for judiciary rests with the State Government, the contribution of Cen-
tral Government through the scheme is supplementary in nature. For the contribution under 
the scheme being supplementary in nature, 10% of the State share is alrea dy a relaxation in 
comparison to States where the State share is 40%. 
 
Further observation 
3.6 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Department. However, the commi t-
tee reiterates its recommendation and suggests the Department to approach the Mini s-
try of Finance with the recommendation of the Committee and seek relaxation for the 
States of the North-eastern region of the country.  
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
3.7 During the interactions with the Committee, the Kohima Bar Association made a r e-
quest for a separate High Court for the State of Nagaland. The President of Bar informed that 
the States like Tripura, Meghalaya and Manipur which came under the jurisdiction of Gauhati 
High Court in 1971 have now established their own High Courts. However, the State of Na-
galand which has been under the jurisdiction of Gauhati High Court since 1963 does not have 
its own High Court. The Committee feels that there is merit in the demand for a separate 
High Court by State of Nagaland and the Ministry of Law and Just ice must coordinate with 
Ministry of Home Affairs to address the demand. (Recommendation No. iii) 

pg. 13 
 
Action Taken 
3.8 The Chief Minister, Nagaland vide his letter dated 25.06.2021 conveyed the decision 
of the State Cabinet taken on the 07.04.2021 for setting up a separate High Court for the State 
of Nagaland.  The proposal to set up a High Court for the State of Nagaland essentially i n-
volves amendment to the North -Eastern Area (Reorganization) Act, 1971, which mandates 
that the Gauhati High Court shall be the common High Court for the States of Assam, Aru n-
achal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland.   
3.9 The matter is currently under examination, in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
Further observation 
3.10  The matter of establishment of High Court for Nagaland has been in motion 
since 2021. The North-Eastern States like Tripura, Meghalaya and Manipur which were 
under the jurisdiction of Guwahati High Court along with Nagaland have got their     
respective High Courts established whereas the matter of e stablishment of High Court 
of Nagaland is still under examination. T he Committee recommends that the Depar t-
ment of Justice should expedite the necessary process such as consultation with the Min-
istry of Home Affairs etc. for early set up of High Court of Nagaland. 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

pg. 14 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL       
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

pg. 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 