Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY FOURTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
The Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013
REPORT NO. 
64


Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

117
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY FOURTH REPORT
The Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 127

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—9
A. Overview ....................................................................................................................... 1—2
B. Need for Judicial Appointments Commission .......................................................... 2—4
C. Provisions of the Bill and suggestions received from Stakeholders .................... 4—7
D. Committee’s Recommendations/Observations .......................................................... 7—9
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 10—12
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 13—27
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 29 —99
I. The Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013................. ................................ 31—39
II. Comments of the Department of Justice on the view/suggestions contained in
Memoranda submitted by individuals/organizations/experts on the Bill ... ............ 40—97
III. List of Individuals/organizations/experts and other Stakeholders who deposed
before the Committee ................................................................................................. 98—99
IV . Opinion of Attorney General of India ...................................................................... 100—109
8. A PPENDIX – List of Reports Presented by the Committee .............................................. 110—116

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2013)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Sixty-fourth Report of the Committee on the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013
(Annexure-I). The Bill seeks for establishment of the Judicial Appointments Commission for appointments
of Judges and transfer of Judges in the higher Judiciary.
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees,
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 29
th August,
2013 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 9 th September, 2013 for examination and report
within three months.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee issued a Press communiqué to solicit
views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on various provisions of the Bill. In response
thereto the Committee received numerous submissions out of which 32 memoranda containing
suggestions from various organizations/individuals/experts relevant to the issues dealt in the Judicial
Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 were forwarded to the Department of Justice for their comments
and placed before the Committee for its consideration (Annexure-II).
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry of
Law and Justice on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on the 20
th September, 2013. During
its Study Visit to Chennai, Mumbai and Jaipur from the 3 rd to the 10 th October, 2013 the Committee
interacted with the representatives of State Governments, High Courts Bar Associations, Retired
Judges, NGOs and other stakeholders on the Bill. The Committee also heard the views of Attorney
General of India and Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice on the
22
nd October, 2013.
4.1 In its sittings held on the 13 th and the 20 th November, 2013, the Committee recorded oral
evidence of legal luminaries such as Shri Fali S. Nariman, Ex. M.P., Rajya Sabha and Senior Advocate
(Supreme Court), Shri Ashok H. Desai, Former Attorney-General of India, Shri P.P. Rao, Senior
Advocate (Supreme Court), the Bar Council of India, various experts in the legal fraternity and other
stakeholders on the subject matter of the Bill. List of individuals/organizations who deposed before the
Committee are appended as Annexure-III.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it :–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) Supreme Court judgment in first judges, Second judges and Third Judges cases;
(iii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice thereon;
(iv) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the
stakeholders such as Legal luminaries and Bar Councils/Associations;
(v) Replies of Stakeholders to the questionnaire of the Committee on the Bill;

(iv)
(vi) Replies of the Department of Justice as well as stakeholders to the questionnaire of the
Committee on the Bill; and
(vii) Other research material/documents related to the Bill.
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 27 th November, 2013.
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
27th November, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice

ACRONYMS
AIJA : All India Judicial Service
ARC : Administrative Reforms Commission
JAC : Judicial Appointments Commission
SC : Supreme Court
(v)

1
REPORT
The Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 seeks to set up a six member body under
the Chairmanship of Chief Justice of India for the purpose of recommending names of individuals
having outstanding legal acumen and impeccable integrity and credibility to the post of Judges of
Supreme Court and the High Courts, to the President of India. It also recommends transfer of judges
of one High Court to another to the President of India.
2. The appointment of judges to the Supreme Court and the High Courts, as per the provisions
of the Constitution as it existed when Constitution was adopted, was made by the President of India
in accordance with the provisions of Articles 124(2) and 217(1) of Constitution of India, respectively.
Transfer of Judges from one High Court to another is done by the President of India in accordance
with provision of Article 222(1) of the Constitution of India.
A. Overview
3. The appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts and transfer of judges from
one High Court to another is primarily an act of the Executive as the President acts in accordance
with the advice tendered by the Council of Ministers under Article 74(1) of Constitution of India. But
constitutional obligation is cast upon the President of India under Articles 124(2), 217(1) and 222(1)
to consult the Chief Justice of India/Chief Justice of High Court concerned for appointment and
transfer of judges of higher judiciary. It is evident from the constitutional provisions that the
appointment/transfer of judges of higher judiciary is a joint venture of the Executive and the Judiciary
in participative and consultative way to protect independence of judiciary which is a “Basic Structure”
of the Constitution. Independence and impartibility of judiciary could only be subserved by appointing
individuals of outstanding legal calibre and impeccable integrity and credibility with correct consideration
to the Bench of higher judiciary.
4. Provisions of Articles 124(2), 217(1) and 222(1) have been interpreted by judiciary from time
to time under Article 141 of Constitution. In the S.P . Gupta and Ors Vs Union of India 1982, 2 SCR
365 (AIR 1982 SC, 149),  the majority comprising Hon’ble Justices P.N. Bhagwati, Fazal Ali, J Desai,
Venkataramiah took the following views:–
(a) that opinion of Chief Justice of India does not have primacy in the matter of appointments
of judges of Supreme Court and High Courts;
(b) the primacy is with the Union Government of India, which is to take decision after
consulting all constitutional functionaries and the Union Government is not bound to act
in accordance with the opinion of all constitutional functionaries; and
(c) the Executive should have primacy since it is accountable to people while the Judiciary
has no such accountability.
5. The Judiciary had a consultative role in the appointment of judges of higher judiciary till a nine-
judge Bench of the Supreme Court overruled the majority view of the S.P . Gupta case (First Judges
Case) in the Advocate on Records Vs Union Of India case (Second Judges Case) in 1993.  The
majority comprising Hon’ble Justices J.S. Verma, Yojeshwary Dayal, G.N. Roy, A.S. Anand and S.P.
Bharucha held as under:–
(a) Articles 124(2) and 217(1) of Constitution of India impose a mandate in the highest
functionaries drawn from the Executive and the Judiciary to perform the constitutional

2
obligation of making appointment of judges to the Supreme Court and the High Courts
collectively in consultation with each other;
(b) in the event of disagreement in the process of consultation, view point of judiciary being
primal has to be preferred;
(c) the Executive can appoint judges only if that is in conformity with the opinion of the
Chief Justice of India;
(d) the opinion of the Chief Justice of India is determinative for transfer of judges of High
Courts.
6. Since 1993 the recommendations of the Chief Justice of India for appointment and transfer
of judges to higher judiciary became binding upon the Executive which amounted to concurrence
with the opinion of the judiciary, the aid and advice tendered by the Council of Ministers to the
President of India under Article 74(1) of Constitution got circumscribed by judicial interpretation of
Articles 124 (2), 217(1) and 222(1) on the Second Judges Case. It made the judiciary the de facto
appointing authority of themselves which was not the intention of Constitution framers as gathered
from the Constituent Assembly Debates.
7. The framers of Constitution of India had given absolute discretion neither to the Executive nor
to the Judiciary in the participatory and consultative process for appointment of judges to Supreme
Court and High Courts. The Constituent Assembly after due deliberations, preferred the word
‘consultation’ to ‘concurrence’ in the process of appointment of judges knowing fully that appointment
of Judges was the sole discretion of the Executive (The Crown) under Government of India
Act, 1935.
8. The term ‘collegium’ has not been used in the Constitution of India by framers of Constitution.
However, the Judiciary through its power of interpretation of Constitution under Article 141 has
expanded the term ‘the Chief Justice of India’ occurring in Articles 124 (2), 217 (1) and 222(1) to
mean a collegium of select Judges which was three in Second Judges Case(1993) and further extended
to five in the Third Judge Cases(1998). In effect, the opinion of the Chief Justice of India really
means the views of Chief Justice taken in consultation with his four senior-most colleagues.
9. The Executive made a Presidential reference under Article 143 (1) of Constitution in 1998
where the nine–Judge Bench again confirmed that the opinion of the collegium of Judges have primacy
in appointment and transfer of Judges of higher judiciary. In the light of the opinion preferred by the
Supreme Court, a detailed Memorandum of Procedure for the purpose of appointment and transfer of
Judges of higher Judiciary was prepared by the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice.
10. While giving advisory opinion to the President of India in 1998, the Judiciary kept a condition
before the then Government that the apex Court would tender the opinion if law laid down in Second
Judges Case is considered binding upon the Government and the opinion to be tendered by them would
also be binding upon the Government of India. The then Attorney General had accepted the condition
of the Judiciary on behalf of Government of India and as a result of which the primacy of opinion
of collegium of Judges in the appointment and transfer of Judges to the higher Judiciary has the
validity of law of land till now.
B. Need for Judicial Appointments Commission
11. The Constitution (One Hundred and Twentieth Amendment) Bill, 2013, provides for setting up
of Judicial Appointments Commission by inserting Article 124(A) to Constitution of India and also
amending Articles 124(2), 217(1) and 222(1). The structure and functions of the proposed Commission
are provided in the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 which is under examination of this
Committee. The proposed legislation is an ordinary legislation and amendable by simple majority.

3
12. The Commission proposed under both the Bills has to take the place of current collegium of
senior-most judges of Supreme Court including Chief Justice of India. As mentioned in the Statement
of Objects and Reasons to the Bill, the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill would broad-base the
appointment process with equal participation of the judiciary and the executive and make it participatory
so as to ensure greater transparency and objectivity in the appointments to higher judiciary. The
proposed Commission has the presence of persons of eminence from civil society which is an
improvement including non-constitutional functionaries in the appointment process of judges to higher
judiciary.
13. The present process adopted by the collegium of judges is beset with its own problem of
opacity and non-accountability besides excluding Executive entirely in the collaborative and consultative
exercise for appointment of judges to Bench of higher judiciary. Because of its inherent deficiencies
in the collegium, as many as approximately 275 posts of judges in various High Courts are lying
vacant, which has direct bearing upon justice delivery system and thereby affecting the institutional
credibility of judiciary. Arrears in courts are attributed to the large number of vacancies in the Benches
of High Courts amongst other reasons. Even Late Justice J.S. Verma, who was one of the authors
of Second Judges Case on a later reflection has observed that:
“…my 1993 judgment has been both misunderstood and misused. Therefore some kind of
rethink is required ….my judgment says that the appointment process of High Court and
Supreme Court judges is basically a joint or participatory exercise between the executive and
the judiciary both taking part in it”.
14. Two other distinguished jurists of the country, Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah and Justice B.R.
Krishna Iyer including Late Justice Verma have suggested creation of National Judicial Commission for
transparent appointment procedure to the higher judiciary.
15. Some of the Jurists who appeared before the Committee stated that the proposed Commission
has representation from Executive through the Minister of Law & Justice. This will amount to
interference of Executive in the appointment of judges and thereby will affect the independence of
judiciary. They were of the view that the present system would have worked well had the aspects
of transparency and accountability been taken care of. They also had the apprehension that the
proposed Bill may not be able to sustain the test of judicial scrutiny.
16. The Committee also came across with the suggestions where some of the witnesses had
expressed that the collegium was not transparent and accountability was not inbuilt. Now, through the
proposed Commission, assessment of legal acumen would be done by the members of the Commission
from judiciary, while members of the Commission from executive will assess antecedent/character of
the candidate for appointment to the Bench of higher judiciary. It is expected that the broad base of
appointment process will ensure greater transparency and objectivity in the appointments of Higher
Judiciary.
17. The Committee acknowledged the recommendation of the Second Administrative Reforms
Commission (ARC) in its Fourth Report titled ‘Ethics in Governance’ for establishment of National
Judicial Commission.
18. Law Commission in its Two-hundred and Fourteenth Report (2008) has observed that the
Indian Constitution provides a beautiful picture of check and balances under Articles 124(2) and 217(1)
for the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts where both the Executive and
Judiciary have been given an equal and balanced role. This balance has been upset by the Second
Judges Case and the original balance of power needs to be restored.
19. Eminent jurists such as Shri M.N. Venkatachaliah and J.S. Verma, Chief Justices of India
(Retired), Justice Ravindaran, Supreme Court Judge(Retired) and Professor Madan Gopal have expressed

4
concern at the quality and the system of appointments made to High Courts under the present
collegium system where lobbying is rampant and most eligible are often ignored. They have strongly
advocated for setting up of Judicial Appointments Commission to select eligible and meritorious
candidate for appointment of High Court Judges.
20. The National Commission to Review the Working of the Indian Constitution (2002) recommended
on the issue of appointment, transfer and removal of Judges of higher courts as under:-
“It would be worthwhile to have a participatory mode with the participation of both the
executive and the judiciary in making such recommendations. The Commission proposes the
composition of the Collegium which gives due importance to and provides for the effective
participation of both the executive and the judicial wings of the State as an integrated scheme
for the machinery for appointment of Judges. This Commission, accordingly, recommends the
establishment of a National Judicial Commission under the Constitution.”
21. The Attorney General for India, in 2010 was of the view that the Memorandum of Procedure
for appointment of Chief Justice and Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts do not reflect the
correct position in the law and requires to be revised. According to him, the Executive is also a
consultee and if appointment can only be made as a result of consensus between all the consultees
then a negative opinion from the Executive cannot be ignored or overridden. Another negative opinion
can come from any consultee and not from the Executive alone. The entire text of opinion of Attorney
General is at Annexure-IV.
22. The same Attorney General of India who appeared before the Committee on the Bill was of
the opinion:–
●●●●● That appointment of judges of higher judiciary is a part of Basic Structure of Constitution
and the structure of Constitution as it was at the time of its enactment in 1950 has to
be considered from the point view of Basic Structure doctrine of Constitution. Judicial
pronouncement in 1993 has altered the Basic structure of Constitution by interpreting the
word ‘consultation’ to mean the ‘concurrence’ within the meaning of Articles 124(2) and
217(1) of Constitution.
●●●●● The present collegium which has been evolved through judicial decisions in 90s has
received criticism especially from retired Chief Justices and judges for failing to attract
outstanding people in legal fraternity to the Bench of higher judiciary thereby affecting
independence of judiciary which is one of the Basic Structures of Constitution.
●●●●● As to the aspect of sustainability of the Bill he averred that Parliament may in its wisdom
keep structure and function of Judicial Appointments Commission under a new Schedule
to the Constitution to make it difficult for the Government to alter its composition through
ordinary legislation in future.
23. None of the democratic countries in the world has the mechanism where Judges are appointing
themselves. However, evidence of the mechanism of Commission having presence of Executive therein
is found in the United Kingdom, South Africa, Russia, Canada, Sri Lanka, Japan etc.
C. Provisions of the Bill and suggestions received from stakeholders
24. In the course of examination of the Bill, the Committee came across the various suggestions
from the witnesses and also from those who submitted their views in writing. The Committee went
through the suggestions made by stakeholders before it. Some of the important suggestions which
drew the attention of the Committee on the provisions of the Bill are enumerated in the succeeding
paragraphs.

5
Structure of JAC
25. The composition of Judicial Appointments Commission as provided in the Bill (Clause 3) is as
under:–
● Chief Justice of India - Chairperson - Ex-officio;
● Two senior most Judges of Supreme Court next to Chief Justice of India - Member -
Ex-officio ;
● Union Minister in-charge of Law and Justice - Member Ex-officio; and
● Two eminent persons to be nominated by a Committee comprising the Prime Minister,
Chief Justice of India and Leader of Opposition in the House of People - Members.
26. The Secretary to Government of India in the Department of Justice would be the convener
to the Commission.
27. Two eminent persons shall be nominated for a period of three years without being re-
nominated.
28. The important suggestions on the composition of Judicial Appointments Commission are as
under:–
● Structure and functions of Judicial Appointments Commission needs to be protected under
Article 368 of the Constitution of India to safeguard independence of judiciary which is
a Basic Structure of Constitution;
● The area of eminence for the Eminent members in the Judicial Appointments Commission
to be specified in the Bill;
● Consensus in the Commission may be near impossible always. To avoid the tie in the
Commission, composition of the Commission may be increased to seven with Hon’ble
Vice President of India as Chairman;
● Bar is one of the stake holders for appointment to higher judiciary needs representation
in the composition of the Commission;
● Retired Chief Vigilance Commissioner should be made the ex-officio member of the
Commission;
● Registrar-General, Supreme Court of India may be convener of the Commission instead
of the Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice; and
● Attorney-General for India may be a member of the Commission in place of Minister of
Law and Justice.
Functions of JAC
29. The function of JAC is to recommend persons of outstanding calibre in legal profession with
impeccable integrity for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of Supreme Court, Chief
Justices of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts to the President of India. It also recommends
to President of India for transfer of Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts
from one High Court to other High Court. The Commission will have to elicit views of Governor,
Chief Minister and Chief Justice of High Court of that State for appointment of Judges of that High
Court as provided in Clause 5 of the Bill.

6
30. The important suggestions on the function of Judicial Appointments Commission are as
under:–
● State level Judicial Commission on the lines of JAC may be provided in the Bill;
● A body comprising Governor, Chief Minister, Leader of Opposition of Legislative Assembly,
Chief Justice of High Court may be provided for consultation of names to be recommended
to JAC for appointment of judges of that High Court; and
● Fifty percent of High Court Judges may be reserved for judges of Subordinate Judiciary.
Independent Secretariat
31. The Secretariat to the Commission will be constituted which will initiate the process of short-
listing of candidates by rules and regulations under Clause 6 of the Bill.
32. Suggestions have been received to provide independence and permanent Secretariat to the
Commission.
Filling-up of vacancies in Higher Judiciary
33. Clause 7 of the Bill provides time period within which intimation for filling up of vacancies
caused by superannuation, resignation, death, etc. Two months’ period for the Government to intimate
to the Commission before occurrence of vacancy on account of superannuation and two months’
period after the occurrence of resignation and death is provided in the Bill.
34. It was put forth before the Committee that the process of appointment should be initiated
atleast six months before the occurrence of those vacancies arising due to superannuation while the
process of initiation of filling up vacancies arising due to death or resignation of a judge, the process
should be initiated seven days after its occurrence.
Procedure of Shortlisting of Candidates
35. Procedures for short-listing candidates for selection to the Bench of higher Judiciary mentioned
under Clause 8(3) of the Bill is to be laid down through rules and regulations under Clauses 11 and
12 of the Bill.
36. Suggestions have been received to create a Statutory Search Committee of short-listing
candidates for the consideration of JAC as members of JAC are high-profile persons having role in
the selection of the candidate to the Bench of the higher Judiciary. It could be more practicable if
Panel is prepared by the Search Committee for selection by the JAC.
Other Issues
37. Some important suggestions received by Committee on issues not directly connected to the
provisions of the Bill are as under:-
● Laying down of guidelines for transfer of judges should be made clear by the Commission;
● Casting vote to the chairman of the Commission in the event of split in the Commission
on the name of candidate for appointment to the Bench of higher judiciary;
● All India Judicial Service as envisaged of Article 312 of Constitution should be made
operational to attract best available talents for subordinate judiciary which is a recruiting
ground for higher judiciary. Necessary legislation be enacted for the purpose.

7
● 2/3 judges are appointed to the High Courts from the Bar of High Court. Provisions may
be made in the Bill for including the Members of Bar also in the consultation process for
appointment of Judges;
● Retirement age of High Courts and Supreme Court Judges to be increased from 65 to
68, respectively;
● Rotation of the post of Chief Justice of India amongst Judges of Supreme Court;
● Cooling off period of ten years for Judges for post-retirement appointment in Commissions
and Tribunals;
● Keep Judicial Appointments Commission within ambit of the Right of Information
Act, 2005; and
● Judicial Appointments Commission to recommend to the President of India for removal
of judges and replace the cumbersome process of impeachment of judges.
● Impeachment procedure of judges of higher judiciary is too cumbersome and impracticable.
Removal of judges needs to be assigned to Judicial Appointments Committee for being
recommended to the President of India. Necessary Constitutional amendment should be
enacted.
D. Committee’s Recommendations/Observations
38. The Committee appreciates the attempt of Government to set up Judicial Appointments
Commission in place of present collegium which has inherent deficiencies and problems of
opacity and non-accountability and reducing the Executive to a secondary position in the
process of appointment of judges to the higher judiciary. It feels that the proposed Commission
would ensure equal and active participation of both the Executive and the Judiciary in
collaborative and participatory manner to find best and brightest persons with impeccable
integrity to the Bench of higher Judiciary for the purpose of securing independent and
impartial judiciary which is a Basic Structure of the Constitution, as per judicial pronouncement,
whether one agrees or not.
39. The Committee joins the concern echoed by many stakeholders who appeared before
the Committee pleading for giving protection of Article 368 of the Constitution to structure
and functions of JAC so as to protect the Basic Structure of Constitution. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that structure and functions of the Commission should be mentioned
in the Constitution itself. The Committee while endorsing their views, observes that
constitutional status to the appointment and transfer of Judges by the Commission may be
given to allay apprehension expressed by legal luminaries.
40. The Committee observes the Bill is not seeking to restore the pre-1993 position which
the Government could have rightfully exercised. The Committee appreciates the attempt of
Government to maintain a balance between the executive and the judiciary in regard to judicial
appointments.
41. The Committee observes that the present Judicial Appointments Commission is broad
based having representation from Judiciary, Executive and civil society which would facilitate
wider consultation for assessing the suitability and integrity of the persons to be appointed as
judges to Bench of higher judiciary. In that context, the Committee suggests that there should
be three eminent persons in the Commission instead of two as provided for in the Bill and at
least one out of the three Members should be from SC/ST/OBC/Women/minority preferably by
rotation. The Committee also suggests that the fields of eminence may be specified in the Bill.

8
42. The Committee feels that the Judicial Appointments Commission would be overridden
to handle appointment of eight hundred odd Judges of 24 High Courts in the country. The only
procedure prescribed in the case of appointment of High Court Judges is to elicit views of
Governor and Chief Minister of concerned State and Chief Justice of concerned High Court
in writing. It is not mentioned how shortlisting of candidates to the Bench of higher Judiciary
would be done upon which the views of these three constitutional functionaries are to be sought.
43. The Committee notes that according to Clause 5 of the Bill the views of three
constitutional functionaries of the State, namely, Governor, Chief Minister and Chief Justice
of the concerned High Court would be solicited separately in writing. It implies that there will
not be any consultation amongst the three constitutional functionaries of the State. The
Committee feels that this process is time consuming and also limits the scope of consultation,
amongst themselves.
44. Considering the responsibility of Judicial Appointments Commission to select 800 odd
Judges of 24 High Courts in the country and also the fact that suitable involvement of the
Constitutional and other functionaries at the State level in the process of appointment,
Committee feels that in order to assist the Judicial Appointment Commission, Government
may consider the feasibility and practicability of creation of State Level Commission at the
earliest. The State Level Commission may be consisted of the Chief Minister of the State,
Chief Justice of High Court and Leader of Opposition. The Committee hopes this would not
only lessen the burden of Commission at apex level but will also provide for a more broad
based appointment process.
45. One of the responsibilities of Judicial Appointments Commission is transfer of judges
of High Court from one to another. The initiative of the proposal of transfer is made by Chief
Justice of India whose opinion in this regard is determinative. This has been reflected in the
Memoranda of Procedure for appointment and transfer of Chief Justice and Judges of High
Courts prepared by Department of Justice. The Committee desires that regulations may be
made at the earliest by the Commission for transfer of the judges in supersession of
Memoranda of Procedure for appointment and transfer of Chief Justice and Judges and of
High Courts prepared by Department of Justice. The Committee also desires that the judge
of High Court who is in-charge of administration should be invariably from outside of the State
concerned.
46. The objective of the Bill is not only to ensure fairness and transparency in appointment
of judges to the Bench of higher judiciary, but also to ensure timely filing up of vacancies in
the judiciary. The Committee desires that the Judicial Appointments Commission should
initiate process for appointment to judges of High Courts well in advance so that the vacancy
is filled up in time-bound manner so as to improve justice delivery system in order to gain
confidence of the people.
47. The Committee notes that the Bill delegates its primary function to the Commission
i.e., procedure for short-listing the candidates for their selection as High Court Judges. It
implies that Parliament is delegating its legislating power to the Commission which should
have been part of this Bill. The Committee feels that leaving vital thing to the regulations to
be made by the Commission need not only to be reasonably restricted but also the Bill should
specifically provide therefor. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the Government may
consider that Clause 8(3) should lay down the broad parameters in respect of procedure for
short listing the candidates for selection of Judges in the High Courts.
48. The earlier selection processes i.e. pre and post 1993, did not provide any opportunity
to the aspiring eligible advocates to express their willingness to be the judge of the High Court.

9
The Committee feels that Government may consider for a procedure whereby such opportunity
is given through public notification etc. to the members of Bar. The Committee recommends
that the eligible member of Bar should be given an opportunity to be considered for appointment
of judge of High Court in an objective and transparent manner through advertisement as is
the practice in the United Kingdom.
49. The Constitution (One Hundred and Twentieth Amendment) Bill is directly linked to
this Bill, whereas the Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill is also linked to both the Bills.
The Committee recommends to Government that all the three Bills may be taken into
consideration at the earliest.
50. All India Judicial Service has been envisaged under Article 312 of the Constitution of
India. The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in its creation. The Committee
insists that AIJS may be created without further delay to attract best talent to the subordinate
judiciary from where 33 percent of the judicial officers are elevated to the Bench of High
Courts. Reservation as per existing policy of Government of India may be made applicable in
the All India Judicial Service also.
51. The Committee recommends that suitable modifications, accordingly, may be made in
the proposed Bill in the light of Committee’s recommendations in the preceding paras.

10
10
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee appreciates the attempt of Government to set up Judicial Appointments
Commission in place of present collegium which has inherent deficiencies and problems of
opacity and non-accountability and reducing the Executive to a secondary position in the
process of appointment of judges to the higher judiciary. It feels that the proposed Commission
would ensure equal and active participation of both the Executive and the Judiciary in
collaborative and participatory manner to find best and brightest persons with impeccable
integrity to the Bench of higher Judiciary for the purpose of securing independent and
impartial judiciary which is a Basic Structure of the Constitution, as per judicial pronouncement,
whether one agrees or not. [Para 38]
2. The Committee joins the concern echoed by many stakeholders who appeared before
the Committee pleading for giving protection of Article 368 of the Constitution to structure
and functions of JAC so as to protect the Basic Structure of Constitution. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that structure and functions of the Commission should be mentioned
in the Constitution itself. The Committee while endorsing their views, observes that
constitutional status to the appointment and transfer of Judges by the Commission may be
given to allay apprehension expressed by legal luminaries. [Para 39]
3. The Committee observes the Bill is not seeking to restore the pre-1993 position which
the Government could have rightfully exercised. The Committee appreciates the attempt of
Government to maintain a balance between the executive and the judiciary in regard to judicial
appointments. [Para 40]
4. The Committee observes that the present Judicial Appointments Commission is broad
based having representation from Judiciary, Executive and civil society which would facilitate
wider consultation for assessing the suitability and integrity of the persons to be appointed as
judges to Bench of higher judiciary. In that context, the Committee suggests that there should
be three eminent persons in the Commission instead of two as provided for in the Bill and
at least one out of the three Members should be from SC/ST/OBC/Women/minority preferably
by rotation. The Committee also suggests that the fields of eminence may be specified in the
Bill. [Para 41]
5. The Committee feels that the Judicial Appointments Commission would be overridden
to handle appointment of eight hundred odd Judges of 24 High Courts in the country. The only
procedure prescribed in the case of appointment of High Court Judges is to elicit views of
Governor and Chief Minister of concerned State and Chief Justice of concerned High Court
in writing. It is not mentioned how shortlisting of candidates to the Bench of higher Judiciary
would be done upon which the views of these three constitutional functionaries are to be
sought. [Para 42]
6. The Committee notes that according to Clause 5 of the Bill the views of three
constitutional functionaries of the State, namely, Governor, Chief Minister and Chief Justice
of the concerned High Court would be solicited separately in writing. It implies that there will
not be any consultation amongst the three constitutional functionaries of the State. The
Committee feels that this process is time consuming and also limits the scope of consultation,
amongst themselves. [Para 43]

11
7. Considering the responsibility of Judicial Appointments Commission to select 800 odd
Judges of 24 High Courts in the country and also the fact that suitable involvement of the
Constitutional and other functionaries at the State level in the process of appointment,
Committee feels that in order to assist the Judicial Appointment Commission, Government
may consider the feasibility and practicability of creation of State Level Commission at the
earliest. The State Level Commission may be consisted of the Chief Minister of the State,
Chief Justice of High Court and Leader of Opposition. The Committee hopes this would not
only lessen the burden of Commission at apex level but will also provide for a more broad
based appointment process. [Para 44]
8. One of the responsibilities of Judicial Appointments Commission is transfer of judges
of High Court from one to another. The initiative of the proposal of transfer is made by Chief
Justice of India whose opinion in this regard is determinative. This has been reflected in the
Memoranda of Procedure for appointment and transfer of Chief Justice and Judges of High
Courts prepared by Department of Justice. The Committee desires that regulations may be
made at the earliest by the Commission for transfer of the judges in supersession of
Memoranda of Procedure for appointment and transfer of Chief Justice and Judges and of
High Courts prepared by Department of Justice. The Committee also desires that the judge
of High Court who is in-charge of administration should be invariably from outside of the State
concerned. [Para 45]
9. The objective of the Bill is not only to ensure fairness and transparency in appointment
of judges to the Bench of higher judiciary, but also to ensure timely filing up of vacancies in
the judiciary. The Committee desires that the Judicial Appointments Commission should
initiate process for appointment to judges of High Courts well in advance so that the vacancy
is filled up in time-bound manner so as to improve justice delivery system in order to gain
confidence of the people. [Para 46]
10. The Committee notes that the Bill delegates its primary function to the Commission
i.e., procedure for short-listing the candidates for their selection as High Court Judges. It
implies that Parliament is delegating its legislating power to the Commission which should
have been part of this Bill. The Committee feels that leaving vital thing to the regulations to
be made by the Commission need not only to be reasonably restricted but also the Bill should
specifically provide therefor. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the Government may
consider that Clause 8(3) should lay down the broad parameters in respect of procedure for
short listing the candidates for selection of Judges in the High Courts. [Para 47]
11. The earlier selection processes i.e. pre and post 1993, did not provide any opportunity
to the aspiring eligible advocates to express their willingness to be the judge of the High Court.
The Committee feels that Government may consider for a procedure whereby such opportunity
is given through public notification etc. to the members of Bar. The Committee recommends
that the eligible member of Bar should be given an opportunity to be considered for appointment
of judge of High Court in an objective and transparent manner through advertisement as is
the practice in the United Kingdom. [Para 48]
12. The Constitution (One Hundred and Twentieth Amendment) Bill is directly linked to
this Bill, whereas the Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill is also linked to both the Bills.
The Committee recommends to Government that all the three Bills may be taken into
consideration at the earliest. [Para 49]
13. All India Judicial Service has been envisaged under Article 312 of the Constitution of
India. The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in its creation. The Committee

12
insists that AIJS may be created without further delay to attract best talent to the subordinate
judiciary from where 33 percent of the judicial officers are elevated to the Bench of High
Courts. Reservation as per existing policy of Government of India may be made applicable in
the All India Judicial Service also. [Para 50]
14. The Committee recommends that suitable modifications, accordingly, may be made in
the proposed Bill in the light of Committee’s recommendations in the preceding paras.
[Para 51]

13
MINUTES

15
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 22 nd October, 2013 in Room No. ‘62’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shri T.R. Baalu
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri N.S.V . Chittan
9. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Pinaki Misra
12. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
13. Shri S. Semmalai
14. Shrimati Meena Singh
15. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
16. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
I. Attorney General of India
Shri G E Vahanvati
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
●●●●● Department of Legal Affairs
1. Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Secretary;
2. Shri D. Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisors; and
3. Shri M. Khandelwal, Additional G.A.

16
●●●●● Legislative Department
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary;
2. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shrimati Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
●●●●● Department of Justice
1. Shri Praveen Garg, Joint Secretary; and
2. Shri V .K. Tripathi, Director.
III. ***
2. At the outset Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, Attorney General of India, Law
Secretary, and other Senior Officers of Department of Justice, Legal Affairs, Personnel and Training
and Legislative Department. He requested the Attorney General of India to express his opinion on
Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 and the Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
The Judicial Appointment Commission Bill, 2013
3. Appreciating the proposed Commission over present collegium for the appointment of judges
to higher judiciary, the Attorney General held that the reform in the appointment procedure in higher
judiciary was long over due. The present collegium which has been evolved through judicial decisions
in 90s has received criticism especially from retired Chief Justices and judges for failing to attract
outstanding people in legal fraternity to the Bench of higher judiciary thereby affecting independence
of judiciary which is one of the Basic Structures of Constitution. Replacing present collegium system
by Judicial Appointments Commission, in his opinion, could ensure independence of judiciary as people
of integrity, ability and standing in legal profession would be selected to the higher judiciary through
wider consultation process with the involvement of judiciary executive and civil society.
4. Responding to one of the query of the Committee, the AG was of the opinion that appointment
of judges of higher judiciary is a part of Basic Structure of Constitution and the structure of
Constitution as it was at the time of its enactment in 1950 has to be considered from the point view
of Basic Structure doctrine of Constitution. Judicial pronouncement in 1993 has altered the Basic
structure of Constitution by interpreting the word ‘consultation’ to mean the ‘concurrence’ within the
meaning of Articles 124(2) and 217(1) of Constitution.
5. Responding to the query as to how violation of Basic Structure doctrine of Constitution by
judiciary through its judgment in 1993 has been tolerated, till now, the Attorney General submitted that
an attempt was made to reopen the case by one of the presidential reference by the Government
in 1998 under Article 143 of Constitution. Attorney General of India further informed the Committee
that on receiving the reference from President, the Supreme Court told the Government that if they
accept the correctness of 1993 judgment and accept that whatever the Supreme Court says would be
binding on Government. Government or Attorney General of India gave a statement to the apex court
to the effect that they accept the judgment of 1993 and the advisory opinion of that court to be
tendered would be also binding on them. As a result, the interpretation of court to the word
‘consultation’ to mean as ‘concurrence ‘came into jurisprudence. Memorandum on Procedure for
appointment of judges was prepared thereafter by the Department of Justice in consultation with the
Chief Justice of India for appointment of judges for that purpose.
6. As to the aspect of sustainability of the Bill he averred that Parliament may in its wisdom keep
structure and function of Judicial Appointments Commission under a new Schedule to the Constitution
to make it difficult for the Government to alter its composition through ordinary legislation in future.
*** Relates to some other matter.

17
7. Short listing and selection of candidates for higher judiciary could be absolutely transparent and
fool proof for independence of judiciary. He referred the practice in United Kingdom where applications
were invited and interview of the candidates from legal fraternity conducted for becoming judge by
the Commission. He desired that short listing of candidates by the Judicial Appointments Commission
which to be regulated by Rules and Regulation of the Commission should take into account the best
procedure available for the purpose.
8. Referring to the seniority principle on the appointment of judges as Chief Justice of India/Chief
Justices of High Courts which is developed by convention has not been considered for appointment
in other countries which the Committee may like to deliberate in its wisdom.
9.  Queries relating to State Judicial Appointments Commission, All India Judicial Services, casting
vote for Chief Justice of India being the Chairman of the Judicial Appointments Commission,
representations of Bar of District judiciary for appointment of judges of High Courts were also
responded to by Attorney General.
The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013
10. * * *
1 1 . ***
12. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs submitted that both Constitution (One Hundred
Twentieth Amendment) Bill, 2013 as well as Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 are welcome
steps. The Constitution of Judicial Appointments Commission for appointment of judges to higher
judiciary would sustain judicial scrutiny. Regarding composition of Judicial Appointments Commission
either it may be inscribed in the Constitution itself or left to Parliament to be given by law as proposed
in the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013. In that context he referred to recommendations
of 214
th report of Law Commission of India as well as 28 th Report of this Committee.
13. * * *
14. * * *
(The witnesses then withdrew)
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
16. The Committee then adjourned at 4.41 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 30 th October, 2013.
*** Relates to some other matter.

18
RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 13 th November, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Shri Pinaki Misra
8. Shri S.D. Shariq
9. Shrimati Meena Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shumsher K. Sheriff, Secretary-General
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
I. Non-official Witnesses
1. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, MLA, Foundation for Democratic Reforms (Lok Satta),
Hyderabad
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal, RTI Activist, New Delhi
3. Dr. Lokesh Kumar, RTI Activist, New Delhi
4. Shri Ishwar Dayal Goyal, Noida, U.P.
5. Shri Fali S. Nariman; Ex. M.P., Rajya Sabha and Senior Advocate, Supreme Court
6 Shri Ashok H. Desai, Former Attorney General for India
7. Shri P.P. Rao, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court
Official Witnesses
●●●●● Department of Justice
1. Shri Praveen Garg, Joint Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Tripathi, Director
18

19
●●●●● Legislative Department
Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, non-official witnesses and senior officers of
Department of Justice and Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice. He requested Dr.
Jaiprakash Narayan to express his opinion on the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013, in
addition to the written submission made by him.
3. Dr. Jaiprakash Narayan opined that some of the provisions of the Constitution of India have
been misread by the Supreme Court of India in the Second Judges case in 1993, as well as in the
Presidential reference, widely known as the Third Judge’s case. He is also of the view that the
appointment process is increasingly becoming non-transparent and, in many cases, questionable.
4. Citing example from other democratic countries, he said that in no democratic country has the
Supreme Court arrogated to itself the power to appoint Judges in the Supreme Court. He also opined
that All India Judicial Services, on par with the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police
Service, for recruitment of Judges at the Subordinate Judges level is necessary. He further opined that
all the three Bills i.e The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, The Constitution (120
th Amendment)
Bill and the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill should be considered together in the same session.
5. Shri. Subash Chandra Agrawal supports the points raised by Dr. Jaiprakash Narayan, and
opined that the appointment process in judiciary must involve both judiciary and legislative in a
participatory manner. He further expressed his concern with the rampant lobbying to reach the
Supreme Court and to deal with this problem, he suggested that the retirement age of High Courts
and the Supreme Court judges should be same, i.e 65 years. He also suggested the creation of a
permanent National Judicial Commission.
6. Shri Ishwar Dayal Goel, expressed his concern with the high number of vacancies and high
pendency of cases in the judiciary. He pointed out that since the date of establishment of the High
Court, the judges strength has never been full which has negative effect on the justice delivery system.
He further opined that in order to fill up the vacancies in the Supreme Court and the High Court, three
months as proposed in the Bill for the Commission to fill up vacancies may be reduced to one month.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
7. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, legal luminaries Shri. Fali S. Nariman,
ex. M.P (Rajya Sabha and Senior Advocate), Ashok H. Desai, Senior Advocate and P.P. Rao, Senior
Advocate and senior officers of Department of Justice and Legislative Department, Ministry of Law
and Justice.
8. Shri Fali S. Nariman expressed that the collegium system has failed entirely. Therefore, an
alternative has to be tested whose results can be known only when it starts working and the proposed
Judicial Appointments Commission must be given a try. He opined that it is vital to include the
provision in Section 3 about appointment of a Judicial Appointments Commission in the Constitution
itself to guard it against political interference.
9. He is of the view that the appointment through the High Courts is the bedrock of the judicial
system, as such the present Bill should make a more detailed and elaborate provision for it. He
advocated for a Judicial Appointments Commission for the High Courts to guard it against political
interference. He also opined that in case of tie or deadlock in appointment, the Chief Justice may be
given a casting vote.
10. Shri Ashok H. Desai shared similar concern and opined that the collegium has failed to deliver
a transparent system. He further opined that the Bill should be a part of the Constitution itself and
not a standalone Bill as proposed. He suggested that the appointment should be based on transparency,

20
merit and integrity, and seniority should only be one of the factors, unlike the present system where
seniority is a crucial factor. He said that the appointment should be made by a mix of various
stakeholders, including Bar and civil society, none of whom will have a dominating influence. He also
opined that an independent full time Secretariat may be established for keeping record of all the judges
at national level.
11. Shri P.P. Rao opined that the word collegium mentioned in Clause 3(1)(d) should be dropped
because of the in-breeding of disillusionment in the name of collegium and the appointments that take
place. He further opined that the Basic Structure of the Constitution which is defined from time to
time by the Supreme Court with vagueness, coupled with the nature of amplitude of powers and
thereby makes it the most powerful institution today in the Constitutional set up. He also opined that
judicial independence forms the Basic Structure of the Constitution and therefore the Bill is dealing
with a part of Basic Structure of the Constitution. He pointed out that the basic feature of the
Constitution, which cannot be amended and abridged by Parliament, cannot be made through indirect
process of leaving the composition of the Commission to be decided by law, which can be amended
easily, by simple majority vote in the Parliament, which needed to be part of the Constitution. He
pointed out those provisions in Part V of the Constitution.
12. Speaking on the ‘eminent persons,’ he said that the words ‘two eminent persons’ may be
substituted with the words, ‘two persons of ability, integrity and eminence known for their knowledge
and experience in judiciary, administration, education, journalism, law or public affairs.’ He also opined
that a Search Committee of eminent persons may be constituted for recommending candidatures for
appointments.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
13. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
14. The meeting adjourned at 5.55 
P.M. to meet again at 11 A.M. on 20 th November, 2013.

21
RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 20 th November, 2013 in Main Committee
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
4. Shri T.R. Baalu
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Shri Pinaki Misra
7. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
8. Shri S. Semmalai
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
II. NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Forenoon Session - 11.00 
A.M.
1. Bar Council of India
(i) Shri S. Prabakaran, Co-Chairman
(ii) Shri Ramchander Rao, Member
(iii) Shri Nilesh Kumar, Member
(iv) Shri Bhoj Chander Thakur, Member
(v) Shri J.R. Sharma, Member
21

22
(vi) Shri Ashok K. Pandey, Member
(vii) Shrimati Shiva Priyamvadu, Member
2. The Madras Bar Association, Chennai
(i) Shri R. Muthukumaraswamy, President
(ii) Shri V .R. Kamalanathan, Secretary
3. Advocates forum for Social Justice, Tamil Nadu
(i) Shri K. Balu, President
(ii) Shri K. Muthuramalingam
4. Association of Lawyers Against Corruption & Oppression, Chennai
Shri A.P Surya Prakasam
5. Shri Naik. Holiyappa. Kanna (Adv. Supreme Court), New Delhi
6. Shri Radhey Shyam Gora (Advocate, Supreme Court), New Delhi
7. Shri Suniti Kumar Chaudhuri (Advocate) Hooghly, West Bengal
8. Dr. Durlabh Chandra Bhattacharyya (Advocate Calcutta High Court), Kolkata
Afternoon Session - 2.30 
P.M.
1. Association of Retired Judges of Supreme Court & High Courts of India (UP State
Chapter), Lucknow.
Justice K.L. Sharma
2. Justice A.N. Gupta (Retd.), Lucknow
3. Shri V .P. Singh, District Judge (Retd.)
4. Madras High Court Advocates Association
(i) Shri R.C. Paul Kanagaraj, President
(ii) Shri N. Kannan, Advocate
(iii) Shri C. Kanagaraj, Advocate
(iv) Shri S. Arivazhagan, Advocate
5. Women Lawyers’ Association, Chennai
(i) Shrimati D. Prasanna, President
(ii) Shrimati V . Nalini
6. Shri Harvinder Oberoi, New Delhi
7. Shri T.G.N. Kumar, Kochi
8. Shri Abhishek Sudhir, (Advocate) Bangalore
9. Suraz India Trust, Rajasthan
(i) Shri Rajiv Daiya, Chairman

23
(ii) Shri Narender Bhansali, Advocate
(iii) Shri L.P. Upadhyay, Judge (Retd.)
II. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri Praveen Garg, Joint Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Tripathi, Director
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr. G. Narayana Raju, JS and LC
2. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and senior officers of the Department of Justice and
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice. The Chairman requested Shri. S. Prabakaran, Co-
Chairman, BCI to express their opinion on the provisions of the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill,
2013, in addition to the written submission made by them.
3. Shri. S. Prabakaran opined that in view of the provisions of Article 124(2) of the Constitution,
the Bill is completely against the basic structure of the Indian Constitution. He also opined that the
proposal relating to the composition of Judicial Appointments Commission, its selection, appointment
of Supreme Court Judges, transfer of Chief Justice and Judges of High Courts, etc., will practically
be subjected to the pleasure of the Government in power on that day.
4. The witness expressed that the original Constitution does not permit any outsider except the
President of India and members of higher judiciary in the appointment of higher judiciary. However,
this Bill intends not only to replace the Collegium, but also to include politicians, nominees of the
politicians in the process of appointments, transfers and disciplinary action against the Judges of the
High Courts and the Supreme Court. He therefore, felt that this Bill is totally unconstitutional.
5. Shri R. Muthukumaraswamy put forward that just as the other Constitutional bodies, the
proposed Judicial Appointments Commission, its constitution, composition, functions, etc., must be
part of the Constitution to safeguard the independence of judiciary. He felt that qualifications of the
term ‘two eminent persons’ must be prescribed. He further said that the Law Minister is a political
personality and is a part of the Government and therefore his inclusion in the proposed Commission
should be deleted and can be replaced with three eminent persons instead of two as proposed now.
He also opined that, the Secretary to the Law Department is a Government officer and is subordinate
to the Law Minister. Therefore, in place of Secretary, the Registrar-General or the Registrar Judicial
may be made the Convener.
6. Shri K. Balu, supporting the proposed Judicial Appointments Commission opined that the
present system of selection needs to be changed for three reasons. as, there is no transparency in the
present system; absence of merit assessment process in the present system; and no proper representation
for all sections of the society. He further opined that there should be three eminent persons in place
of two, including representation from backward sections of the society. He further submitted that India
is the only country where judges are selected by the judges themselves.
7. Shri Radhey Shayam Gora desired that there should have been a thorough exercise before
introducing this Bill in the Parliament and submitted that the present collegium, despite its shortcomings
have produced some brilliant jurists of international repute. However, he opined that the present
collegium system require some improvement and the All India Judicial Services may be created to
fulfill the rising aspirations of the students of law.

24
8. Dr. Durlabh Chandra Bhattacharya expressed his belief that the proposed Bill will bring
transparency in the judicial system. He submitted that clause 10 of the Bill relating to acts or
proceedings of the Commission may be clarified.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
9. Justice (Retd.) K.L. Sharma opined that the constitution of the Commission should be made
more broad-based and supported involving both the executive and legislature in the constitution of the
proposed Commission. He said that the Speaker of the Lok Sabha should be made an ex officio
member in addition to other two members and there should be three eminent persons instead of two
to be nominated for a period of two years by a collegium comprising the Prime Minister of India,
the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha. He further opined that the
time gap of three months for filling up of vacancies as proposed in clause 7(1) may be reduced to
one month and the Central Government should intimate the sanctioned strength of judges of each High
Court to the Registrar-General of the High Courts and of Supreme Court to the Registrar-General of
the Supreme Court and to the Chairman of the Commission. The Registrar General of the Supreme
Court should be made responsible to compile vacancies in the High Courts and the Supreme Court
and inform the Chairman of the Commission on 1st January and 1st July every year, so that he can
initiate the process with the Chairman of the Commission in accordance with the regulations to be
made by the Commission.
10. Shri V .P. Singh, District Judge (Retd.), supported the Bill, however, he proposed that the
appointment to High Court Judges should be made in the ratio of 50:50 from Higher Judiciary officers/
District Judges and from Advocates of Bar respectively.
11. Shri R.C. Paul Kanagaraj opposed the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 in its
entirety and opined that the Bill should not be allowed to be passed in its present form, as it takes
away the safeguards provided to the judiciary in the Constitution of India and brings in political
intervention. He opined that any change in the process of selection and appointments of Judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts can only be done by constitutional amendment under Article 368 and
not through legislation. He further pointed out that the exiting collegium system needs to bring some
transparency and accountability into it.
12. Smt. D. Prasanna opposed the Bill in its entirety and opined that it will affect the independence
of judiciary. She also opposed the presence of Law Minister of India in the Commission as he is a
political personality functioning under the Government whose political compulsion and actions come
under the judicial scrutiny of High Court and Supreme Court. She further opined that 33 percent
reservation to women may be included with Bill.
13. Shri Abhishek Sudhir while supporting the Bill was hopeful that it would bring much-needed
accountability in the judiciary. However, he also voiced concern over the even number of members
in the proposed Commission, i.e. six members. He felt that in case of a tie, the chairperson of the
Commission should be given the casting vote. He desired to replace the words ‘two eminent persons’,
with ‘two distinguished jurists’ citing the use of distinguished jurists in article 124 (3). He also
expressed concern with the short tenures of the Chief Justices of the higher judiciary in recent times
and said that it has become like a ceremonial position. He further opined that the practice of
appointment of Chief Justice in the United Kingdom could be followed. He also desired that the Bill
be given Constitutional status.
14. Shri Rajiv Daiya pointed out that there was no methodology in the Constitution of India for
appointment of judges of higher judiciary by Collegium but the Supreme Court by judicial verdict took

25
away the power of the Parliament to appoint judges of High Courts and the Supreme Court. He opined
that judiciary cannot function as a third house, and must function within its limit. The President of
India being the head of the nation, and the head of the Legislature, Executive and Judiciary, the
Collegium which is the part of judiciary cannot undermine the President of India by bringing the head
of the nation under judicial subordination. He further opined that unless Constitutional Amendment
process for institutionalizing of the Commission is completed no judicial appointment or no Act can
be brought under the Constitutional provisions.
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
16. The meeting adjourned at 3.52 
P.M.

26
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 27 th November, 2013 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri T.R. Baalu
8. Shir P.C. Gaddigoudar
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri Pinaki Misra
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri S.S. Ramasubhu
13. Shrimati Meena Singh
14. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
15. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
16. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
WITNESSES
***
2. * * *
3. * * *
26
*** Relates to some other matter.

27
4 . ***
5 . ***
6. The Committee then took up for consideration its draft Sixty-third and Sixty-fourth Reports
on the Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013 and the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013.
The Members expressed their views on the draft Reports and adopted the same with some minor
modifications.
7. The Committee then authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar and in his absence, Shri Abhijit
Mukherjee to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha, on Friday, the 6
th December, 2013.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 12.48 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE -I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
19 Aug., 2013
Bill No. LXI of 2013
THE JUDICIAL APPOINTMENTS COMMISSION BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for the composition of the Judicial Appointments
Commission for the purpose of recommending persons for
appointment as Chief Justice of India and other Judges of the
Supreme Court, Chief Justices and other Judges of High
Courts, its functions, procedure to be followed by it and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Judicial Appointments
Commission Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Judicial
Appointments Commission referred to in clause ( a) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 3;
31
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.

32
(b) “Commission” means the Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
(c) “Member” means a Member of the Commission and
includes its Chairperson;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made
under this Act;
(e) “regulations” means the regulations made by the
Commission under this Act.
3. (1) The Judicial Appointments Commission, referred to in
clause (1) of article 124A of the Constitution, shall consist of—
(a) the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio ;
(b) two other Judges of the Supreme Court next to the
Chief Justice of India in seniority—Members, ex officio ;
(c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice—
Member, ex officio ;
(d) two eminent persons, to be nominated by the collegium
consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and
the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Members:
Provided that the eminent persons shall be nominated for
a period of three years and shall not be eligible for re-nomination.
(2) The Secretary to the Government of India in the Department
of Justice shall be the convener of the Commission.
(3) The fee and allowances payable to the eminent persons shall
be such as may be prescribed.
4. It shall be the duty of the Commission,—
(a) to recommend persons for appointment as Chief
Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices
of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts;
(b) to recommend transfer of Chief Justices of High
Courts and the Judges of High Courts from one High Court to
any other High Court; and
(c) to ensure that the person recommended is of ability,
integrity and standing in the legal profession.
5. In case of appointment of Judge of a High Court, the views
of the Governor and the Chief Minister of the concerned State as also
of the Chief Justice of High Court shall be elicited in writing in
accordance with the procedure as may be specified by regulations
made by the Commission.
6. (1) The Central Government may appoint such number of
officers and other employees as it may consider necessary for the
discharge of functions of the Commission under this Act.
Constitution of
Judicial
Appointments
Commission.
Functions of
Commission.
Procedure for
recommendation
with respect to
appointment of
High Court
Judges.
Officers and
employees of
Commission.

33
(2) The terms and other conditions of service of the officers
and other employees of the Commission appointed under sub-section
(1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of three
months from the date of coming into force of this Act, intimate the
vacancies existing in the Supreme Court and a High Court to the
Commission for making of its recommendations.
(2) The Central Government shall, two months prior to the date
of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of completion of the term
of Judge of the Supreme Court and a High Court, make a reference
to the Commission for filling up the vacancies.
(3) The Central Government shall, within a period of two
months from the date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of
death, resignation of the Judge of the Supreme Court and a High
Court, make a reference to the Commission for filling up the vacancies.
8. (1) The Convenor of the Commission shall initiate the process
for selection by inviting recommendations from the Chief Justices of
High Courts, the Central Government and the State Governments in
respect of candidates fulfilling the eligibility criteria.
(2) The Commission may, by regulations, specify the procedure
for short-listing of candidates for considering their appointment as
Judges to the Supreme Court.
(3) The Commission may, by regulations, specify the procedure
for short-listing of candidates for considering their appointment as
Judges to the High Court.
9. (1) The Commission shall meet at such time and place as the
Chairperson may decide.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to specify, by
regulations, the procedure for the discharge of its functions under the
Act.
10. No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be questioned
or shall be invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any
vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Commission.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the fee and allowances payable to the eminent persons
under sub-section ( 3) of section 3;
(b) the terms and other conditions of service of officers
and other employees of the Commission under sub-section ( 2)
of section 6;
Reference to
Commission for
filling up of
vacancies.
Procedure for
short-listing of
candidates.
Meetings of
Commission.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to invalidate
proceedings of
Commission.
Power to make
rules.

34
(c) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed,
in respect of which provision is to be made by the rules.
12. (1) The Commission may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure for recommendation with respect to
appointment of Judge of a High Court under section 5;
(b) the procedure for short-listing of candidates for
considering their appointment as Judges of the Supreme Court
under sub-section ( 2) of section 8;
(c) the procedure for short-listing of candidates for
considering their appointment as Judges of the High Court under
sub-section ( 3) of section 8;
(d) the procedure to be followed by the Commission in
discharging of its functions under sub-section ( 2) of section 9;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by regulations or in respect of which provision is to
be made by regulations.
13. Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the
rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
14. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, after consultation with the
Commission, by an order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
a period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Power to make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations
to be laid
before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

35
35
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President
under clause (2) of article 124 of the Constitution while the Judges of
the High Courts are appointed by the President under clause (1) of
article 217 of the Constitution. The President is required to hold
consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the
High Courts in the States as he may deem necessary for the purpose.
However, every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the
President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor
of the State and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the
Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court.
2. The transfer of Judges from one High Court to another High
Court is made by the President after consultations with the Chief
Justice of India under clause (1) of article 222 of the Constitution.
3. As regards the appointment of Judges of Supreme Court and
High Courts, the Supreme Court in the matters of the Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association Vs. Union of India and its Advisory
Opinion 1998 in Third Judges case, had interpreted articles 124(2) and
217(1) of the Constitution with respect to the meaning of “consultation”
as “concurrence”. It was also held that the consultation of the Chief
Justice of India means collegium consisting of Chief Justice and two
or four Judges, as the case may be. This has resulted in a Memorandum
of Procedure laying down the process which is being presently followed
for appointment of Judges to both the High Courts and the Supreme
Court. The Memorandum of Procedures confers upon the Judiciary
itself the power for appointment of Judges.
4. After review of the pronouncements of the Supreme Court
and relevant constitutional provisions, it was felt that a broad based
Judicial Appointment Commission could be established for making
recommendations for selection of Judges. It would provide a meaningful
role to the executive and judiciary to present their view points and
make the participants accountable while introducing transparency in
the selection process.
5. Thus, the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 seeks
to broad base the appointment process and make it more participatory
to ensure greater transparency and objectivity in the appointments to
higher judiciary.
6. The proposed Bill provides for the constitution of the Judicial
Appointments Commission, comprising of —(a) the Chief Justice of
India, an ex officio Chairperson; ( b) two other Judges of the Supreme
Court next to the Chief Justice of India in seniority as ex officio
Members; ( c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice as

36
ex officio Member; and ( d) two eminent persons, to be nominated by
the collegium consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of
India and the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People, as
members.
7. The proposed Bill would enable equal participation of Judiciary
and Executive, make the system of appointments more accountable,
and thereby increase the confidence of the public in the institutions.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; KAPIL SIBAL
The 24th August, 2013

37
37
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment
of the Judicial Appointments Commission, referred to in clause (1) of
article 124A of the Constitution, comprising — ( a) the Chief Justice
of India an ex officio Chairperson; ( b) two other Judges of the
Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of India in seniority as
ex officio Members; ( c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and
Justice as ex officio Member; and ( d) two eminent persons to be
nominated by the collegium consisting of Prime Minister, Chief Justice
of India and the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha.
Sub-clause ( 2) of clause 3 provides that Secretary to the
Government of India in the Department of Justice be the convener of
the Commission.
Sub-clause ( 3) of clause 3 provides that the fee and allowances
payable to eminent person shall be such as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 6 provides that the Central Government
may appoint such number of officers and other employees as it may
consider necessary for the discharge of functions of the Commission
under this Act.
The expenditure on account of the aforesaid provisions would
be negligible. At this stage, it is not practicable to make an estimate
of expenditure likely to be involved in the financial year 2013-2014,
both recurring and non-recurring. However, the expenditure would be
met from the Consolidated Fund of India.

38
38
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government
to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters
in respect of which rules may be made are—( a) the fee and allowances
payable to the eminent persons under sub-section ( 3) of section 3;
(b) the terms and other conditions of service of officers and other
employees of the Commission under sub-section ( 2) of section 6; and
(c) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed, in respect
of which provision is to be made by the rules.
2. Clause 12 of the Bill confers power upon the Judicial
Appointments Commission to make regulations consistent with the Act
and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of the Act.
The matters in respect of which, regulations may be made are matters
relates to—( a) the procedure for recommendation with respect to
appointment of Judge of a High Court under section 5; ( b) the
procedure for short-listing of candidates for considering their
appointment as Judges of the Supreme Court under sub-section ( 2) of
section 8; ( c) the procedure for short-listing of candidates for
considering their appointment as Judges of the High Court under sub-
section ( 3) of section 8; ( d) the procedure to be followed by the
Commission in discharging of its functions under sub-section ( 2) of
section 9; and ( e) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by regulations or in respect of which provision is to be
made by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and the regulations
made by the Commission shall be laid as soon as may be after they
are made before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations
may be made are generally matters of procedure and administrative
detail and it is not practicable to provide them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

39
39
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the composition of the Judicial Appointments Commission for the purpose
of recommending persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India and other
Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices and other Judges of
High Courts, its functions, procedure to be followed by it
and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Law and Justice )

40
ANNEXURE -II
Replies of Department of Justice on the views/suggestions of individuals, organisations on the Judicial appointments
Commission Bill, 2013
Part I : Comments and Suggestions on the Bill
Sl. Name of the Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
1. Sri Bipin Bihary Ratho (i) Make Attorney General of India an
ex-officio member in place of Union
Minister of Law and Justice under
clause (c) of subsection (1) of section 3.
(ii) Some reservations about the term
‘eminent persons’ and that ‘eminence’ in
which field needs to be specified and
clarified. Eminent persons must have
adequate ability, integrity and standing in
the legal profession upto the Supreme
Court level.
(iii) To alter the word ‘may’ before the
word appoint in section 6 (i), add ‘in
consultation with the Commission’.
The composition of the JAC ensures that the views of
Judiciary, Executive, and other stake-holders are effectively
represented in the process of appointment of judges. The
Union Minister of Law and Justice, as a democratically
elected public representative, would represent and articulate
the perspective and views of the Government, accountable
to the Parliament. The proposed JAC can always invite the
opinion of the Attorney General, without his being a Member
of JAC.
The inclusion of two eminent persons as members of the
Commission has been made to facilitate wider democratic
consultation for assessing the suitability and integrity of
persons to be appointed as judges. The eminent persons
could belong to legal profession or from civil society.
The role and responsibilities of the officers and other
employees of the JAC is of a secretarial nature to provide
administrative and logistics support. The officers and
employees would· have no role in decision making process
in the Commission.

41
(iv) Under section 6 (ii) of the Bill, the
terms and conditions of service should be
on par with the officers and other
employees of the Supreme Court
(v) A specific time limit may be fixed for
the Commission to recommend persons
for filling up the vacancy(s} referred to
therein
The expenditure on the officers and employees of the
Commission would be out of the budget of the DoJ. The
Central Government, under section 11 (i) of the Bill, may
by notification in the Official Gazette make rules to determine
the terms and other conditions of service of officers and
other employees of the  Commission under sub-section (2)
of section 6.
The time limits for intimation of vacancies to the Commission
have been indicated in clause 7.
Clause 7(1) The Central government shall, within a
period of three months from the date of coming into
force of this Act, intimate the vacancies existing in
the Supreme Court and High court to the Commission
for making its recommendations.
Clause 7(2) states: The Central Government shall,
two months prior to the date of occurrence of any
vacancy by reason of completion of the term of
Judge of the Supreme Court and a High Court,
make a reference to the Commission for filling up
the vacancies.
Clause 7(3) states: The Central Government shall,
within a period of two months from the date of
occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death,
resignation of the judge of the Supreme Court and
a High Court,  make reference to the Commission
for filling up the vacancies.
It is not possible to prescribe a time limit for completion
of the process of appointments in view of complex nature
of the appointments process,  which entails consideration
of diverse factors before recommendations for appointments
are made.

42
12 3 4
(vi) For convenience the office of the
Commission should be located either
within the Supreme Court premises or
nearer to the said premises
(vii) As suggested under Section 6(2) the
terms and other conditions of service of
officers and other employees of the
Commission under sub-section (2) of
section 6 should be in par with the terms
and other conditions of services of officers
and other similar employees of the
Supreme Court of India
(viii) The “proviso” of section 14(2) to be
deleted.
(i) Section (4) may be added to clause 8
of the Bill stating that appointments
to high court judges may be made in
the ratio of 50:50 from bar and
higher judiciary officers/district judges
respectively
The JAC would be serviced by DOJ. It would be situated
at an appropriate location.
See reply to view (iv)
This provision provides for removal of difficulty, which
normally would come to light within the first three years.
This is a standard provision in the removal of difficulty
clause.
The matter relating to the ratio of Judges in each High
Court was discussed in the Chief Justices conference held
on 3
rd and 4 th December 1999. It was resolved that the
complement of Judges of each High Court would consist
of 66-2/3% of members of the Bar
, and 33-1/3 rd of Judicial
Officers from the Subordinate Judiciary. A copy of the
letter dated 24 th February 2000 from the then Minister;
for Law; Justice and Company Affairs is attached at
Annexure-1 for information.
Clause 8(2) and (3) of the proposed JAC Bill provide for
the Commission to specify the procedure for short-listing
of candidates for appointment as Judges to the High Courts
and Supreme Court. The determination of ratio between
the members of the bar and the judicial service does not
fall within the purview of this clause.
2. Shri Harvinder Oberoi

43
(ii) Section 7(3) may be amended to the
extent that the Central Government shall
within a period of ‘6 months rather than
2 months’, from the date of occurrence
of any vacancy…..make a reference to
the Commission for filling up the vacancies
(i) The Bill does not fulfill the criteria of
transparency and objectivity as the
Commission can only scan the names
forwarded by a Collegium of three judges
for appointment of judges to High Court.
This is as good as the existing procedure
for appointment by the Collegium. Against
one post, the Collegium should forward
the names of at least three persons.
(i) A Judge of High Court shall be qualified
for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme
Court if he has been for at least ten
years Judge of a High Court or two or
more High Courts in succession, and no
advocate of a High Court shall be qualified
for such appointment.
(ii) Advocates may be selected on an all
India basis after initial nomination by the
Chief Justice of the High Courts for
appointment as Judges of High Courts.
Suggestion may be considered by the Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
Clause 8(2) and (3) provide for the Commission to specify
the procedure for short-listing of candidates for appointment
as Judges to the High Courts and Supreme Court. The
whole purpose of JAC is to ensure transparency in the
selection of persons of ability, integrity and standing in the
legal profession as a Judge. The JAC will evolve its own
procedures to ensure transparency in the selection process.
Art 124(3) of the Constitution of India lays down the
qualification of Judges of the Supreme Court. It states,
inter alia that “person shall not be qualified for appointment
as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he has been for
at least five years a Judge of a High Court or of two or
more such courts in succession, or has been for at least
ten years an advocate of a High Court or of two or more
such courts in succession, or is in the opinion of the
President a distinguished jurist”. No changes are proposed
to be made to the constitutional provisions.
Clause 12 (1) of the JAC Bill provides that the Commission
may make regulations and rules to carry out the provisions
of the Act. These include, inter alia , the procedure for
(a) recommendation with respect to appointment of High
Court Judges, (b) shortlisting of candidates for considering
their appointment as Judges of the Supreme Court and
High Court.
Shri J.S. Raina
Shri Suniti Kumar
Chaudhuri
3.
4.

44
12 3 4
(i) The nomination of two eminent persons
in the Commission may be done by a
body consisting of Vice President, Prime
Minister, and leader of the opposition in
the Lok Sabha, which means substituting
the Chief Justice of India by Vice
President of India
(8) An advocate or judicial officer
may be transferred within
30 days of appointment as
judge to any other High Court
if his relatives are practicing
or is a judicial officer in the
same High Court.
(ii) Other judges who have no relatives
should to transferred to the other High
Courts after 3 years.
(iii) For appointment as High Court
Judges, the Collegium may consist of
Chief Justice, senior most judge, Speaker
of legislative Assembly, leader of
opposition, and two eminent persons of
the state nominated by the Chief Minister,
one of whom should be Padma Bhushan,
Padma Vibhushan or Gnanpith awardee.
(vi) The Judges appointed to High Courts
must not be below fifty years, must have
25 year of practice, and should not
elevated to High Court unless he has 5
years to retire
The proposed JAC provides for nomination of two eminent
persons by a body comprising the Chief Justice of India,
the Prime Minister and the leader of the opposition in the
Lok Sabha. The inputs of the Chief Justice of India would
be crucial if the eminent persons are nominees from the
legal fraternity.
The JAC Bill under Clause 12 provides that Commission
may make regulations to carry out the provisions of the
proposed Bill. The JAC, after coming into existence would
specify the procedure with regard to transfer of Judges
from one High Court to another.
Clause 3 (l)(d) provides for two eminent persons to be
nominated to the  Commission by a Collegium comprising
of Prime Minister, Chief Justice of India, and the leader of
the Opposition in the house of the people. The JAC Bill
does not envisage a separate Collegium in the state for
appointment of High Court Judges.
The JAC will frame appropriate rules and regulations as
regards the appointment of Judges and short-listing of
candidates for considering their appointments as Judges of
Supreme Court and High Court.
5.
6.
Dr. Lokesh Kumar
Shri Prasanta Kumar
Khuntia

45
(i) Instead of two senior most judges of
Supreme Court, there should be one
Judge of the Supreme Court. The other
should be senior most Chief Justice of
the High Courts.
(ii) Total membership of the Commission
may be increased from 6 to 7 by inclusion
of President of Bar Council of India.
(iii) At the preliminary stage, all the bar
councils of High Courts and Supreme
Court should recommend the names of
the prospective advocates and district
judges to the Commission.
(i) The Bill should mandate that the views
of the majority will prevail in situations
where a consensus cannot be reached on
prospective appointee. The Bill must
mention which member of the Commission
will be vested with the casting vote in the
event of a tie. The Chief Justice must be
vested with the casting vote.
(ii) Replacement of two eminent persons
by distinguished jurists under Clause 3 of
Bill.
The JAC will select Judges for the Supreme Court and the
High Courts, and in doing so it will consult different
constitutional functionaries, including Chief Justices of the
High Courts.
The JAC Bill provides for the appointment of two eminent
persons. If found suitable by the Collegium referred to in
Clause 3, the President of the Bar Council of India can
also be considered under this category.
Clause 8(1) significantly broadens the sources from where
recommendations are invited, to specifically include and
directly invite recommendations from the Central and State
Governments, and High Courts. The JAC would formulate
rules and regulations under the Act which can further
elaborate the process for receiving recommendations of
persons. The procedure for seeking names will be evolved
by the JAC. Nothing prevents the Bar Council of India to
suggest names for consideration.
Clause 12 of the proposed JAC Bill provides that the
Commission will make  regulations by specifying procedures
for recommendations for appointment of Judges; this
includes the procedure to be followed in case there is no
agreement on the name(s).
The inclusion of two eminent persons as members of the
Commission has been made to facilitate wider democratic
consultation for assessing the suitability and integrity of
persons to be appointed as Judges. The Committee consisting
of the Primes Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the
leader of the opposition in Lok Sabha may in their wisdom
7.
8.
Shri C D Mohapatra
Shri Abhishek Sudhir

46
12 3 4
(iii) The procedure to be followed when
appointing the Chief Justice of India
should be provided for in the Bill, and
must necessarily exclude the two judges
of the Supreme Court, next in seniority
to the  incumbent Chief Justice, from
being part of the selection process
(iv) Entire Clause 3 of the Bill dealing
with the composition of the Commission
should be included in the Constitution
Amendment Bill 2013, so that the
composition of the Commission is
contained in the constitution and is just
not an ordinary piece of legislation.
This act may be called the National
Judicial Appointments Commission
Act 2013, (Reason: in order to provide a
scope for the respective states to enact, if
need be, a state level commission for
consider the names of eminent jurists and other legal
luminaries, under the category of eminent persons, as
members of the Commission.
Clause 12 of the proposed JAC Bill provides that the
Commission will make regulations by specifying procedures
for recommendations. As per Clause 12 (2)(e), any other
matter specified by regulations or in respect of which
provision is to be made by regulations would be notified
and made by the Commission.
The Constitutional (99th Amendment) Bill is an enabling
legislation to provide for the JAC Bill, which delineates all
aspects for the smooth functioning of the JAC, including
its composition and functions. It enables the Parliament to
legislate on the composition of the JAC. Any apprehension
that the composition of the JAC in the JAC Bill could be
changed in the future is unwarranted in view of the power
of Judicial Review enshrined in the Constitution.
Government is aware that any reduction in the representation
of the Judiciary would have serious implications for the
independence of the Judiciary. There should be no
apprehension that any attempt will be made to change the
balance in the future. The Parliament, Executive and the
Judiciary would actively guard the independence of the
Judiciary.
No comments. The Standing Committee may take a view.9. Association of retired
judges of Supreme Court
and High Courts of
India Shri Justice K.L.
Verma, Section (1)

47
appointments to the District Judiciary. The
constitution (One Hundred Twentieth
Amendment) Bill, 2013 as passed by Rajya
Sabha omits to prefix the word, “National”
to the name of the commission but it is
still to be passed by Lok Sabha. The select
committee may make a recommendation
in this regard also, if, considered
appropriate).
The word “National” be prefixed to the
word ‘Judicial’ wherever appearing in
these sections.
Insert Clause “(d) the leader of
opposition in the house of people (Lok
Sabha) member ex officio”. Re-describe
the existing clause (d) as clause (e) and
be replaced by the following clause (e) :-
Three eminent persons as members from
amongst those person who are or have
been constitutional functionaries or
eminent jurist declared as such by the
supreme Court, having been nominated
one each by the Prime Minister of India,
the Chief Justice of India and the
Speaker of the House of the People (Lok
Sabha)”. Replace the word “three” by
the word “Two” used in the proviso to
section 3(1). Add Clauses (f) and (g) as
follows:
(f) “Every member shall before entering
upon his office, subscribe an oath of
secrecy, objectivity, independence and
fairness in the discharge of his functions.”
No comments. The Standing Committee may take a view.
The composition of the JAC has been proposed after due
consultation, and the number of eminent persons is proposed
to be retained at two. The rationale for increasing the
number of eminent persons from two to three so that one
eminent person each is nominated by the Prime Minister,
the Chief Justice of India and the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha is not desirable, since the nomination of eminent
persons is expected to be a consensual exercise.
Can be provided in the Rules to be framed under
clause 11.
Section 2 (a) and (b)
and Section 3 (1)
Section 3 (1) (c)

48
12 3 4
(g) “A nominated member shall cease to be a member
if he or she fails to attend three consecutive meetings
of the commission or may resign his office and then
the chairperson shall inform the nomination authority
for a fresh nomination within a fortnight.”
This should be replaced by the sub-section (2): the
Secretary General Supreme court of India shall be
the convener of the Commission (reason: to promote
expedient and coordinated functions of the commission).
Insert the Word “Select and” between the words,
“To” and the word “Recommend”.
Add, at the end of clause (c):- “Salutary reputation,
good conduct and behaviour”.
Add clause (d) to section 4: To ensure further that no
person is recommended for appointment if he or she:
I. is not a citizen of India;
II. has more than one living spouse;
III. is related to any member of the commission;
IV. is removed or dismissed from service under the
Government of India, Parliament, Supreme
Court, Sate Government, State Legislature, High
Court or Union Territory administration,
assembly or council or Statutory Authority, Board
or Tribunal or debarred by Union public Service
Commission or the State public Service
Commission or any court of Law;
Can be provided in the Rules to be framed
under clause 11.
The appointments of Judges are processed for
seeking Presidential approval in the Department
of Justice. Therefore, Secretary, Justice has
been proposed as Convenor of the JAC.
The role of the JAC is to make
recommendations to the President for·
appointment of Judges. Therefore, the word
‘select’ is not appropriate.
No comments, Standing Committee may take
a view on this.
Art 124 and 217 provide inter alia that a
person will not be qualified for appointment
as Judge in the Supreme Court or the High
Court unless he is a citizen of India. The
other conditions stated above may be covered
in the Rules to be framed under clause 11 of
the proposed JAC Bill.
Section 3 (2)
Section 4 (a)
Section 4 (a)
Section 4 (d)

49
The Chief Minister is included in his capacity
as the head of a democratically elected
Government in the State.
The role and responsibilities of the officers
and other employees of the JAC is of a
secretarial nature to provide administrative and
logistics support. The officers and employees
would have no role in decision making process
in the Commission.
This will be addressed in the Rules to be
framed under clause 11.
While the intimation of the sanctioned strength
of the High Courts can be made within one
month, the intimation of High Court-wise
vacancies, as presently provided under
clause 7(1) will take upto three months.
V. Is or has been member of or is  associated with
any political party;
VI. Is associated with an organization which is
prejudicial to the security, sovereignty and
integrity of India and the State and is defiant of
the constitution of India and the Laws in force;
VII. Is involved in any litigation, offence, criminal
activity or has been convicted of any offence
involving moral turpitude.
Delete the words “and The Chief Minister” (Reason:
The Governor acts on the advice of the Chief Minister
and so the views of the Chief Minister will be obtained
through the Governor and article 217(1) of the
Constitution of India merely mentions the Governor
of the State and Chief Justice of India and the Chief
Justice of the high Court.
Insert the words “in consultation with the commission”
between the words “necessary” and “for”  appearing in
2
nd line of sub-section (1). Add sub-section (3) to
section 6.
All the officers and other employees of the commission
shall work under control, superintendence and
supervision of the chairperson who shall be their
appointing and disciplinary authority.
This sub-section should be replace by: “The Central
Government shall within a period of one month from
the date of coming into force of this Act, intimate the
sanctioned strength of the permanent and temporary
posts of Judges in each High Court in India and also
Section (5)
Section 6 (1)
Section 6 (3)
Section 7 (1)

50
12 3 4
The suggestion for Registrar General of each High Court
to intimate to the convener the occurrence of the vacancy
of a Judge or Chief Justice of the High court within 7
days of its occurrence can be incorporated in the
Regulations under clause 12.
The suggestion here cannot replace the existing clause 7(3)
which relates to intimation of vacancies arising out of
unforeseen circumstances such as death or resignation.
The provision made for inviting recommendations from the
Chief Justices of High Courts, the Central Government
and the State Governments in respect of candidates fulfilling
the sanctioned strength of permanent and
temporary posts of Judges in the supreme
court of India to the convener and shall
keep him fully informed of the changes
if any”. (reason: with a view to eliminate
delay and promote expediency in the
selection process).
Should be replaced by the substitution of
sub-section (2) “it shall be the duty of
the Registrar General of each High Court
to intimate to the convener the occurrence
of the vacancy of a Judge or Chief Justice
of the High court within 7 days of its
occurrence”
This sub-section should be replaced by
the sub-section (3) “it  shall be duty and
responsibility of the convener to compile
the vacancies arising in each High Court
and the Supreme Court as on 1
st January
and 1 st July of every year by reason of
superannuation, resignation, transfer,
promotion death or otherwise and shall
obtain the orders of the chairperson for
initiation of the process of selection”.
(Reason: with a view to eliminate delay
and promote expediency in the selection
process ad no need of any reference by the
Central Government to the Commission)
Should be replaced by sub-section (1) as
follows: “The convener of the commission
shall initiate the process for selection of
Section 7 (2)
Section 7 (3)
Section 8 (1)

51
the eligibility criteria may be supplemented/elaborated in the
Regulations under clause 12.
The word ‘candidate’ presently used in the JAC Bill is a
broader word, and can include eminent jurists who can be
appointed under Article 124 as Supreme Court Judge.
This suggestion relates to procedure, which shall be provided
in the Rules/Regulations to be formulated under clauses 11
and 12 of the Bill.
This can be provided in the Regulations under Clause 12.
The role of the JAC is to make recommendations to the
President for appointment of Judges. Therefore, the word
judicial officers and advocates immediately
in accordance with the Regulations”.
Insert the words “Selection of Judicial
officers and advocates and for” before
the word “short listing” appearing in sub-
section (3)”.
Insert sub-section (4) to section 8 in these
words:- “Soon after short-listing of
the candidates for considering their
appointments as judges to the High Court,
the convener shall send their names and
Bio-datas to the Governor of the concerned
state and the Chief Justice of the High
Court and the Central Government for
obtaining their views in respect of
suitability of each of the candidates or in
the event of adverse view with cogent
reasons, within the specified period”.
Insert sub-section (3) to section 9 in the
following words: “the quorum at every
meeting of the commission should be five
members including the chairperson. If
there is any disagreement in the views of
the members of the commission, the
decision about an eligible candidate should
be based on the majority view of at least
three members present at the meeting
and having adjudicatory experience (Reason :
this provision appears to be necessary in
view of the multi member commission).
Insert the words “Selection and” before
the word “recommendation” used in
Section 8 (3)
Section 8 (4)
Section (9)
Section 12 (2) (a) and (c)

52
12 3 4
clause (a) and before the word “short-
listing” used in clause (c).
The Bar and bench representing the
judicial fraternity is required to have a
say in the appointment process apart from
Central and State Governments to make
the appointment process transparent and
participatory.
Participation of Judges of Supreme Court
and High Courts
Parliament to enact the substantive
law/enabling Act itself as necessitated
under Article 124A (2) of the Constitution
of India.
Composition of the proposed Judicial
Appointments Commission (JAC)
The State-level consultation process
towards High court Appointments.
The Consultation process at the JAC level
‘select’ is not appropriate
The Bill provides that the JAC would under Clause 12 (2)
(b) and (c) make the procedure for shortlisting of candidates
for considering their appointment as Judges of the Supreme
Court and the High Courts by way of regulations. These
regulations may take different stakeholders on board
including the Bar and Bench to make the process transparent
and participatory.
In the proposed Bill, JAC has the Chief Justice of India
along with two senior-most Judges of the Supreme Court,
and as elaborated in the preceding response JAC would lay
down the procedure for short-listing of candidates.
The proposed JAC Bill sets out the broad policies and
guidelines on the subject matter as enumerated in
Article 124 A (2), as it can be seen from Clause 3 to 8
of the proposed Bill.
The present composition of JAC is broad based with
representation of Judiciary, Executive and Civil Society.
The JAC Bill provides for appointment of a Judge of the
High Court under Clause 5. The suggestion of a State-level
body for recommending the name of a person for a Judge
of the High Court is not envisaged in the proposed JAC
Bill as Clause 5 provides for consultation with State-level
constitutional authorities. The fear that this process is
cumbersome is unfounded.
The consultation process as proposed in the JAC Bill is
widespread and elicits views of the Judiciary and the
Shri Rajeev Daiya (Suraz
India Trust)
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan10.

53
Transfer of Judges
Observation
The composition of JAC will have no
constitutional status and it may be victim
of legislative whim.
Suggestion
The composition of JAC as detailed within
Clause 3 of the Bill should also be
specified within the Constitution of India
under the proposed Article 124; through
the Constitution (One Hundred and
Twentieth amendment) Bill of 2013.
Observations
(a) The role of two senior most
judges in the appointment of
Chief Justice of India
(hereinafter referred as ‘CJI’)
is not clear.
(b) For the appointment of the CJI,
the two senior most judges
should not be present in the JAC.
If the two senior most judges
are not separated from the JAC,
then are they going to be excluded
from the position of the CJI?
Executive so it meets the recommendations of report
prepared by three eminent jurist Shri Justice M.N.
Venkatachaliah, Shri J.S. V erma and Shri Justice V .R.
Krishana Iyer together with the foundation for Democratic
Reforms (FDR).
The proposed JAC would by making regulations under
Clause 12 for transfers of Judges from one High Court to
another would ensure a transparent and a credible policy.
The Constitutional (99th Amendment) Bill is an enabling
legislation to provide for the JAC Bill, which delineates all
aspects for the smooth functioning of the JAC, including
its composition and functions. It enables the Parliament to
legislate on the composition of the JAC. Any apprehension
that the composition of the JAC in the JAC Bill could be
changed in the future is unwarranted in view of the power
of Judicial Review enshrined in the Constitution.
a. & b. The JAC will formulate rules and procedures to
ensure that the person recommended is of ability, integrity
and standing in legal profession. The Commission shall
enumerate rules and procedure about the presence of senior
most Supreme Court Judges in the zone of consideration
for appointment as CJI and would make regulations for
such eventualities
Legislative
Research and Policy Club,
National Law University,
Odisha
11.

54
12 3 4
(i) If yes then, on what grounds?
(ii) If not them, on what grounds
the Parliament can justify their
presence despite they are the
interested party?
Suggestion
The Parliament may add an explanation
to Clause 8 of the present Bill, expounding
the position of the two senior most judges
with respect to either their appointment
as the CJI or their exclusion, as the case
may be.
Observations
(a) The term ‘Eminent Persons’
mentioned in Clause 3 of the
JAC Bill has not been defined.
(b) The term ‘Eminent Persons’ gives
wide discretion to the selection
committee to choose any person
as a member of the JAC.
Suggestions
(a) An explanation as to ‘Eminent
Persons’ may be added in
Clause 3 of the JAC Bill
describing some basic
qualifications;
The inclusion of two eminent persons as members of the
Commission has been made to facilitate wider democratic
consultation for assessing the suitability and integrity of
persons to be appointed as judges. The eminent persons
could belong to legal profession or from civil society by a
Collegium comprising the Prime Minister, the Chief of
India and the Leader of the Opposition in the Lak Sabha.

55
(b) Such explanation may include
persons possessing elementary
knowledge as to functioning of
legal structures or may belong
to other backgrounds; such as
those who are members of civil
society having minimum
prudence for deciding as to who
is the best person suited for the
post in appointment of judges.
Observation
The even composition of the JAC would
create hindrance in case of a tie, as their
votes will not lead to a valid conclusion.
In such a situation, there is no clarity
whether the decision of the CJI (who will
be acting as the Chairman of the JAC)
will be taken as the final report.
Suggestions
(a) A proviso may be added to clause 3
which would explain that in case
of a tie, the decisive factor
should be the observation made
by the Chairman of the JAC,
i.e. the Chief Justice of India;
Or
(b) The decision may be made on
the basis of confirmation of all
the members;
Or
(c) The number of members may be
raised from even composition to
odd composition.
The present composition of JAC is broad based with
representation of Judiciary, Executive and Civil Society. It
is for the JAC to lay down the procedure for appointment
of Judges.

56
12 3 4
Observations
(a) Ambiguity in the use of the word
‘recommendation’ in Clause 8 (1)
and the use of the word
‘recommend’ in Clause 4 (a)
(b) Scope of recommendations for
short listing has been restricted
under Clause 8(1) by virtue of
inviting the recommendations
only from the entities/persons
mentioned therein.
(c) The scope of the regulation
making power of the JAC under
Clause 8 (2) and 8(3) requires
further explanation. As it is can
be said that the word regulation
in Clause 8(2) and 8 (3) is only
confined to the procedure for
short listing and setting eligibility
criteria for the candidates.
Suggestions
(a) The ambiguity with the word
recommendation may be resolved
by scripting Clause 8(1) reads
as follows, “The Convenor of the
Commission shall initiate the
process for selection by inviting
recommendations for shortlisting
from the Chief Justices of High
Courts, the Central Government,
the State Governments and the
Bar Council of India in respect
of candidates fulfilling the
eligibility criteria.”
a. & b. The provision made for inviting
recommendations from the Chief Justices of High
Courts, the Central Government and the State
Governments in respect of candidates fulfilling the
eligibility criteria may be supplemented/elaborated in
the Regulations under clause 12. The role of the
JAC is to make recommendations to the President
for appointment of Judges.
c. There is no ambiguity in the role of Commission as
enshrined in JAC Bill Clause 8(2) and (3). The
Commission will devise its procedure for shortlisting
the candidates for consideration to be appointed as
Judges to the Supreme Court and High Courts
respectively.

57
(b) Alternatively, Clause 8(1) may
also be made to read as the
convenor of the Commission
shall initiate the process
for selection by inviting
recommendations from the
judges of the Supreme Court,
the Chief Justices of High
Courts, the Central Government,
the State Governments and the
other entities in respect of
candidates fulfilling the eligibility
criteria.”
(c) Further, an Explanation may be
added in Clause 8(1) to bring
about clarity with regards to the
power of JAC in making
regulations. In addition to this,
Clause 8 (2) and 8 (3) may
accompany a rider for providing
an explanation of the word
‘regulations’.
Observations
(a) If the seat of one of the
members of the Judiciary is
vacant than the executive will
have a greater say in the
selection.
The larger say of the executive
would eventually affect the
independence of the judiciary and
will hinder the separation of
power which is the basic structure
of the constitution.
a. & b.  The JAC is the broad based institution giving
representation to Judiciary, Executive and Civil Society.
The recommendation for appointment of a person as Judge
to the higher judiciary will be as per a procedure laid
down by the JAC, and the apprehensions raised are ill
founded. The role of Executive shall be participative and in
no way encroach upon the independence of judiciary. It
will in no way affect the separation of power of Judiciary
from Executive as enumerated in the Constitution of India.

58
12 3 4
(b) If the seat of one the two
members selected is vacant than
the Judiciary will have a greater
say in the selection.
In this situation the judiciary
will become the major role player
in the appointment of the judges
of the Supreme Court and High
Court and also in cases of the
transfer of the judges. This will
eventually defeat the  whole
purpose of the act which is to
ensure checks and balances
system on the judiciary.
Suggestions
(a) An explanation stating: “This
clause will not be applied in cases
where final recommendation of
the selection of the judges is
being made” may be introduced.
Or
(b) The impugned clause may be
removed.
To give effective Judicial Administration
and A.D.R at the root level it is obviously
required that their must be 50% of high
Court Judges to be given to subordinate
Judiciary accordingly further 50% of
Supreme court Judges post also to be
given to Subordinate Judiciary with an
internal ratio of 50% each for direct
District Judges and primitives from Munsif
level out of the above 50% of subordinate
Judiciary Post
12. Shri R. Paranjothi The matter relating to the ratio of Judges in each High
Court was discussed in the Chief Justices conference held
on 3
rd and 4 th December 1999. It was resolved that the
complement of Judges of each High Court would consist
of 66-2/3% of members of the Bar, and 33-1/3 rd of Judicial
Officers from the Subordinate Judiciary.
Clause 8(2) and (3) of the proposed JAC Bill provide for
the Commission to specify the procedure for short-listing
of candidates for appointment as Judges to the High Courts
and Supreme Court.

59
Replies of Department of Justice on the views/suggestions of individuals, organisations on the Judicial Appointments
Commission Bill, 2013
Part II : Other issues not covered by the Bill
Sl. Name of the Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
13.
14.
15.
16.
Shri Subhash Chandra
Agrawal
Shri Prasanta Kumar
Khuntia
Shri Prasanta Kumar
Khuntia
Shri Rajeev Daiya (Suraz
India Trust)
(i) Post retirement assignments for judges
be banned till 2 years of their retirement.
The proposed JAC should also be assigned
task of appointing members of all judicial
panels and commission, either by Union
or State Governments.
(iv) The age of the Supreme Court Judge
to be raised to 68 years, and the High
Court Judge to 65 years respectively
(v) There should be no post-retirement
appointments of Supreme Court and High
Court Judges. The statutory posts of
Judges in bodies like Human Rights
Commission, National Consumer
Commission, CAT etc., to be filled by
sitting Judges.
To incorporate the provisions of Judges
Accountability Bill in the Judicial
Appointment Commission Bill on the
premise of Section 16 of the General
Clauses Act.
The proposed JAC Bill is concerned with the appointment
of Judges to High Courts and Supreme Court, and not for
appointments to judicial panels and commissions.
A bill is under consideration for increasing the age of the
High Court Judges to 65 years.
The issue post-retirement assignment for judges is not the
subject matter of the proposed JAC Bill.
The Judicial Standard and Accountability Bill 2010 was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 1
st December, 2010, and
referred to the Parliament Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Law and Justice for examination
and report. The Parliamentary Standing Committee after
wide consultation finalized its report containing the
recommendations, which was presented to the Parliament

60
12 3 4
To amend the Judges (Enquiry) Act, 1968
suitably empowering Judicial Appointments
Commission to conduct enquiry against
the Judges of higher judiciary.
on 30
th August, 2011. The Lok Sabha passed the Bill on
29th March, 2012. It is pending before Rajya Sabha.
-Same as above-

61
Replies of Department of Justice on the views/suggestions of individuals, organisations on the Judicial Appointments
Commission Bill, 2013
Part 1 : Comments and Suggestions on the Bill
Memo Name of the Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. organisation/individual
12 3 4
17. Shri Radhey Shyam Gora,
Advocate, Supreme Court
i. Before proceeding further for
enactment of the JAC Bill, Suitable
Constitution Amendment may be made
first
ii. In place of JAC Bill, 2013 a suitable
Legislation may be introduced by
making necessary amendment in the
constitution for creation of full fledged
Constitutional body like UPSC which
may cover entire Judicial appointments
i.e. from lower Judiciary to Higher
Judiciary.
Accordingly National Judiciary Service
Commission [NJSE] may be
constituted and services under National
Judicial Service Commission may be
classified as –Indian Judicial Services
(IJS) covering the following.
(a) Appointments for Gram Nyayalaya
Courts.
(b) Appointments for District Courts.
(c) Appointments for Higher courts.
The Constitution (Ninety Ninth Amendment) Bill, 2013, an
enabling legislation to provide for the JAC Bill delineating
all aspects for the smooth functioning of the JAC including
its composition and functions, was considered and passed
by Rajya Sabha on 5th September, 2013
The proposed JAC Bill is concerned with the appointment
of Judges to the Supreme Court and High Court only, and
not for appointments to Gram Nyayalayas, and district and
subordinate courts.

62
12 3 4
18. Justice A.N. Gupta
Judge, High Court
(Retd.)
iii. In view of Globalization of Legal
System and impact of fast growing
advance technology for evolving
suitable system a National Level
Committee may be constituted on the
above referred subject matter.
i. Immediate necessity of creating Indian
Judicial Service.
ii. Filling up of vacancies in the district
Judiciary
iii. Reduction in the maximum age for
recruitment of Judicial Officers from
35 to 27 years.
iv. Dominance of Advocate/Judges in the
High Court and the Supreme Court.
v. Direct recruitment to higher judicial
service must stop immediately.
vi. Recruitment by the High Court must
stop and Higher Judicial Service
Examination should be conducted by
Public Service Commission.
The point regarding use of advanced technology is noted.
It is for the JAC  to consider in the procedure laid down
under clause 8 of the proposed Bill for appointments to the
Higher Judiciary.
Appointments to the Higher Judiciary are made from the
cadre of Judicial Officers as well as members of the bar.
The AIJS will address the appointments of Judicial Officers
to the Higher Judicial Service in the States. It will however,
not directly address the appointments of the members of
the Bar as Judges of the High Courts and Supreme Court.
Therefore, the creation of the AIJS is quite distinct from
the establishment of the Judicial Appointments Commission.
The proposed JAC Bill is concerned with the appointment
of Judges to Supreme Court and High Courts, and not for
district and subordinate courts.
The matter relating to the ratio of Judges in each High
Court was discussed in the Chief Justices  conferences
held on 3rd and 4th December, 1999. It was resolved that
the complement of Judges of each High Court would
consist of 66-2/3% of be members of the Bar, and 33-
1/3rd of Judicial Officers from the Subordinate Judiciary
Clause 8(2) and (3) of the proposed JAC Bill provide for
the Commission to specify the procedure for short-listing
of candidates for appointment as Judges to the Supreme
Court and High Courts. The determination of ratio between
the members of the bar and the judicial service does not
fall within the purview of this clause.
As regards recruitment of Judicial Officers for district and
subordinate courts, it may noted that in terms of Art 235
of the Constitution, control over district and subordinate

63
courts, including the posting and promotion of persons
belonging to Judicial Service vests with the High Courts.
The procedure of transfer of Judges from one High Court
to another will be laid down by the JAC.
The current practice of making available reports of the
Intelligence Bureau may be continued enable the JAC to
determine the suitability candidates for appointment of the
Judges to the High Courts.
The composition of the JAC ensures that views judiciary,
executive and other stake holders are effectively represented
in the process of appointment of Judges. The eminent
person may be from legal profession or from civil society.
Video recording of court proceedings is a desirable objective,
but is not the subject matter of the present legislation. The
proposed JAC provides for Commission to make regulations
specify criteria and procedures for recommendations of
Judges which will ensure that persons recommended are
of ability integrity and standing in legal profession.
Lawyers campaign of
Judicial Transparency and
Reforms.
19.
vii. Three fourth of the Judges should be
transferred to other High Court.
viii. Intelligence wings should be made
available to the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court to determine the
suitability of the candidates for
appointment of Supreme Court /High
Court Judges
i. The Judicial Appointment Bill, 2013 is
heavily represented by the Judiciary.
The JAC, proposed strength of six
should be increased to seven by
increase of two independent members
to 3. The three independent may not
be eminent Jurist at least one member
should be a layman.
ii. They should be transparency not only
in appointment but in every aspects of
administration of justice, and, in
particular, video-recording of Court
to proceedings;
iii. Declaration of Assets By Judges;
iv. Banning by law the kith and kin of
Judges practising in the very same
Court where their ‘Godfathers’ officiate;
v. Introduction of a Judicial Ombudsman,
where the litigant public, lawyers and
all stakeholders could put across their
grievances and secure redressal.

64
12 3 4
i. The JAC Bill directly affects the
independence of the Judiciary in as
much as the provisions at present in
the Constitution regarding the selection
of Judges is being taken out of the
Constitution and is relegated to an
ordinary law to be made by the
Parliament. Such a change will have
very serious and drastic consequences
affecting each and every person in
this country and especially the legal
fraternity. Further such an amendment
would tantamount to abrogation of the
concept and principle of separation of
powers enshrined in our Constitution
which is essential for preservation of
democracy.
ii. The proposed Constitutional Amendment
proposes to take away, the Supreme Court
and High Courts Judges appointment,
provisions from the Constitution to Judicial
Appointments Commission (JAC) to be
passed by the Parliament. Due to this
change, the Supreme Court and the High
Court’s Judges Appointment provisions shall
not have the protection of Article 368 of
the Constitution, which prescribes the
stringent method for amendment.
20. The Madras Bar Association i. Presently Art 124 (2) reads as follows:
“Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall he appointed
by the President by warrant under his hand and seal
after consultation with such of the Judges of the
Supreme Court and of the High Court in the States as
the President may deem necessary for the purpose ....”
Pursuant to the 1993 Judgement, the Supreme Court
set up a ‘Collegium’ for appointment of judges.
The word ‘Collegium’ does not exist in the
Constitution of India. The Supreme Court rewrote
the constitution through a process of interpretation,
which was not envisaged by the constitution makers.
Further, it may be noted that appointments are an
executive, not a judicial function. Moreover, the
JAC is chaired by the Chief Justice of India, who
is also involved in the process of identification of
eminent persons to be appointed to the Commission;
The present Bill envisages a participatory and
collaborative process to Therefore, the present
Ninety Ninth Constitutional Amendment Bill and the
Judicial Appointments Commission Bill does not
abrogate the principle of separation of powers
enshrined in the Constitution.
ii. It is submitted that it would be difficult to visualize
legislation on judicial Appointments commission
which would exclude judiciary in the process of
appointment. to the posts of judges in High Courts
and Supreme Court. Judiciary being an important
element in the consultative process.

65
iii. When, Supreme Court and High Courts
Judges, appointment provisions are
taken to the Judicial Appointments
Commission Act, the said provisions
would become easily amendable as an
ordinary law made by the Parliament
by simple majority of Members present
and voting. It necessarily means the
entire provision, contained in the
Judicial Appointments Commission Bill/
Act will be subject to amendment as
per the will and pleasure of the party/
parties in power on the day. In other
words the law relating to, the
composition of JAC,  its selection,
appointments of Supreme Court and
High Court Judges, transfer of Chief
Justices and Judges of High Courts
etc. will practically subject the pleasure
of the Government in power on the
day, which will seriously undermine
not only independence of the Supreme
Court and High Courts and its
composition of Judges.
iv. The Secretary to Government of India,
(Justice) is to function as the Convenor
of the Commission. It would be
apparent from the composition of the
Commission the executive
representatives is given equal say in
the appointment and transfer of Judges,
Chief Justice. This will undermine the
independence of the Judiciary.
iii. The Constitutional (99
th Amendment) Bill is an
enabling legislation to provide for the JAC Bill,
which delineates all aspects for the smooth
functioning of the JAC, including its composition
and functions. It enables the Parliament to legislate
on the composition of the JAC. Any apprehension
that the composition of the JAC in the JAC Bill
could be changed in the future is unwarranted in
view of the power of Judicial Review enshrined in
the Constitution.
Government is aware that any reduction in the
representation of the Judiciary would have serious
implications for the independence of the Judiciary.
There should be no apprehension that any attempt
will be made to change the balance in the future.
The Parliament, Executive and the Judiciary would
actively guard the independence of the judiciary.
The appointments of Judges are processed seeking
presidential approval in the Department of Justice. Therefore,
Secretary Justice has been proposed as convener of JAC.
It may be noted that Secretary is Convenor of the JAC
and not a Member-Convenor. The Bill preserves the balance
between the executive and the judiciary in the matter of
appointment of judges, and does not in any way affect the
independence of the Judiciary, which is part of the Basic
Structure of the Constitution. In fact, this Bill provides for
a collaborative selection process which while upholding
independence of judiciary restores the role of the executive
in the appointments of Judges.

66
12 3 4
v. Secretary (Justice) as the convenor is
vested with the power, to convene the
JAC Meeting and also to call for names
for the appointment of Judges from
Chief Justices of the High Court’s
concerned, Central Government and
State Governments of the concerned
High Courts. The calling of names
from the State Governments and
Central Government may result in
induction of candidates with political
affiliation.
vi. Secretary (Justice) cannot function
under two masters. Frequently, he will
have to face contradictory/different
directions from the Law Minister and
the Chief Justice of India, offending
the basic features of the. constitution
i.e. the separation of the Judiciary from
the Executive.
vii. The Proposed JAC  Bill should be
passed by the Parliament as a
Constitution Amendment along with and
as a part of the proposed Article 124A
and appended as 13
th schedule to the
Constitution and not as an Act of
Parliament
Two Bills were Proposed for introduction in the Rajya
Sabha namely the Constitutional (One A Hundred and
Twentieth Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Judicial
Appointment Commission Bill, 2013. The Constitution
(One Hundred and Twentieth Amendment) Bill, 2013
proposes to insert a new Article 124A to constitute a
Judicial Appointment Commission for making
recommendation with respect to the appointment of the
Judges in the Higher Judiciary. The Constitution (One
Hundred and Twentieth Amendment) was considered and
passed by the Rajya Sabha as the Constitutional (Ninety
Nine Amendment) Bill on 5
th September, 2013. The JAC,

67
viii. Sub Section D of Clause 2 of the JAC
Bill, 2013 shall be omitted and the
contents of the Rule should be spelt
out and incorporated as part of the
proposed 13
th Schedule to the constitution.
ix. The composition of JAC should omit
the Law Minister as one of the
Member.
x. The two eminent persons to be
nominated by the collegium consisting
of PM, CJI and Leader of opposition
in Lok Sabha should be replaced by
nomination of three eminent Jurist by
collegium consisting of PM, CJI or
Acting CJI and Leader of opposition
Lok Sabha. The eminent person may
be a retired Judge of Supreme Court,
High Court, retired professor of a
university recognised by UGC. Retired
professor of National Law College/
School with a PHD Degree in law or
Senior Advocate in Supreme Court.
xi. Provision of 3 years tenure and not
eligible for re-nomination in respect of
eminent persons should be deleted and
he should be nominated for a period
of 3 years or till he attains the age of
75 years whichever is earlier.
Bill has been referred to the Parliament Standing
Committee.
Clause 2(d) relates to the definition of the word ‘prescribed’,
which is a standard provision and needs to be retained.
The inclusion of the Union Minister of Law and Justice in
the JAC is required as he is a democratically elected public
representative, representing and articulating the perspective
and views of the Government.
The composition of the JAC has been proposed after due
consultation and the number of eminent persons is proposed
to be retained at two. This ensures that views of judiciary,
executive and other stake holders are effectively represented
in the process of appointment of Judges. The Committee
consisting of the Prime Minster the Chief Justice of India
and Leader of opposition of Lok Sabha may in their
wisdom consider the names of eminent Jurists and other
legal luminaries under the category of eminent persons, as
members of the Commission.
The rationale for keeping the tenure for a period of three
years is to enable two eminent persons as members to
have reasonable time to contribute to the functioning of the
Commission. As such there would not be any prescribed
age limit for the eminent members.

68
12 3 4
xii. The nominated members shall be
entitled to the pay and allowances
and all other perquisites at applicable
to the Judge of the Supreme Court of
India.
xiii. Insert sub Clause (d) to Section 4 of
the JAC Bill relating to the functions
of the Commission as follows:
(d). (i) The JAC shall endeavour to
take decisions unanimously.
(ii) The recommendations of the JAC
shall be valid only they are approved
by at least five of its members present
and voting.
xiv. Delete the term Chief Justice from
Section 5 regarding procedure for
recommendation with respect to
appointment to High Court Judges.
xv. Delete Clause 1 and 2 from Section 6
regarding officers and employees of
Commission by inserting the following:
The Chief Justice of India may appoint
such number of officers and other
employees as it may consider necessary
for the discharge of functions of the
Commission under this Act form
among the employees of the Supreme
Court on deputation with lien, subject
to the Same service conditions.
It has proposed in the JAC Bill 2013 that the fee and
allowance payable to the eminent person shall be such as
may be prescribed.
The Commission will make regulations by specifying
procedures for recommendations for appointment of Judge;
this includes the procedure to be followed in case there is
no agreement on the name(s).
The Chief Justice of the High Court has a crucial role to
play in appointment of judges in that High Court. He has
intimate knowledge about advocates practicing in that High
Court. Hence deletion of the term Chief Justice from
Section 5 is not tenable.
The role and responsibilities of the officers and other
employees of the JAC is of a Secretarial nature to provide
administrative and logistic support. The officers and
employees would have no role in decision making process
in the  Commission. Therefore, it is for the Central
Government to appoint the officers and employees of the
Commission.

69
xvi. Delete section 7 (1) relating to
reference to Commission for filling up
of vacancies and replace the word
Central Government in Clause 2 of
section 7 with the words “the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court or the
High Court, as the case may be”.
Replace the word Central Government
in Clause 3 of Section 7 with the
words “the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court or the High Court, as
the case may be”.
xvii. Delete the Words “the Central
Government and the State Government”
from Clause 1 of Section 8 relating to
procedure for short listing of
candidates. Add Clause 1 (a) and 1 (b)
as Follows:
(a) Upon the receipt of the request
from the Convener or on his own
motion, the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court shall
recommend names after
consulting with the ten senior
most Judges of the High Court.
In the event of there been less
than ten Judges, after consulting
all the Judges.
(b) The Chief Justice while
recommending the names shall
obtain and forward to the JAC,
the bio data of the proposed
persons to be selected for
appointment as Judges of the High
The appointment of Judges is an executive Act. The JAC
would device an appropriate system through rules and
regulations to fill these vacancies. The major bottleneck in
the present system is that proposals for Appointment of
Judges are not initiated in time from the High Court. Hence
the word “Central Government” in Clause 2 and 3 in
Section 7 is appropriate.
Clause 8 (1) significantly broadens the sources from where
recommendations are invited, to specifically include and
directly invite recommendations from the Central and State
governments, and High Courts. The word “the Central
Government and the State Government” in Clause 1 of
Section 8 is apt.

70
12 3 4
Court, in the appropriate format
(Appendix I, II and III) as the
case may be.
xviii. The word “Act” in Section 9 (2)
relating to meetings of Commission may
be replaced with the word “the
schedule 13”.
xix. In Section 10 relating to vacancies
etc. not to invalidate proceedings of
Commission add the following.
Provided that the defect shall not
include ineligibility or disqualification
or undesirability of the member to hold
such high office.
xx. Section 11 relating to power to make
rules should be omitted and
incorporated as part of the 13
th
schedule to the Constitution. Replace
sub-Clause 1 & 2 of Section 12
regarding power to make regulations
and replace with the following:-
Subject to the provisions of this
schedule, the  Commission may make
Regulations for giving effect to the
provisions of this Schedule in particular
and without prejudice to the generality
The JAC will be headed by the Chief Justice of India with
distinguished members. The JAC  should have the autonomy
to devise its own procedures for its functioning, which
can evolve with time and experience. It is for this purpose
that the power to lay down procedures has been vested
with the Commission through regulations, subject to the
regulations being laid on the table of the Parliament.
This is a general Clause to protect the decisions of the
Commission. The addition proposed in Section 10 is not
required.
This issue has been addressed in the reply to xviii above.

71
of the foregoing power, the regulations
may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:-
(a) To (e) may be retained.
xxi. Section 13 relating to rules and
regulations to be laid before parliament
may be deleted.
xxii. Section 14 relating to power to remove
difficulties should be deleted.
i. The two eminent persons to be selected
from Human Right activists and Social
Reformers. The clause to be nominated
for three years and barred for re-
nomination may be considered.
ii. The recommendations for appointment
and transfer of Judges are to be based
on strict criteria of professional basis.
The Parliament has the power to accept or modify or
annul such rule and regulations without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation. This will ensure transparency in the formulation
of rules and regulations, and functioning of the JAC.
This is standard provision which provides for removal of
difficulty which normally would come to light within the
first 3 years. This section may be retained.
The inclusion of two eminent persons as Members of the
Commission has been made to facilitate wider democratic
consultation by broad basing the representation of civil
society in the JAC. The eminent members could also be
human rights activists and social reformers.
The rational for keeping the tenure for a period of three
years is to enable two eminent persons as members to
have reasonable time to contribute to the functioning of the
Commission.
The proposed JAC Bill provides for Commission to make
regulations to specify criteria and procedures for
recommendations of Judges which will ensure that persons
recommended are of ability, integrity and standing in the
legal profession.
The JAC, after coming into existence would specify the
procedure with regard to the transfer of Judges from one
High Court to another
21. Dr. Durlabh Chandra
Bhattacharyya

72
12 3 4
iii. The reg ulations to be made by the
Commission should follow the
procedure adopted by the present
collegium system.
iv. The Terms and conditions of the
appointment of officers and employees
by the Central Government should
follow the central code.
v. The Regulations to be made by the
commission should be strictly
consistent with the Act.
vi. Orders under this section shall be laid
before each House of Parliament.
vii. The exp enditure likely to be involved
in the Financial year 2013-2014 both
recurring and non-recurring to be met
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
i. There should be no political executive
interference in the appointment power.
Law Minister and two eminent persons
Unlike the present collegium system, which is restricted to
the judiciary for the appointment of judges, the proposed
JAC will be a broad-based, collaborative, participative
mechanism.
Clause 12(1) of the JAC Bill provides that the Commission
may make regulations and rules to  carry out the provisions
of the Act. These include, inter alia , the procedure for (a)
recommendation with respect to appointment of High Court
Judges, (b) shortlisting of candidates for considering their
appointments as Judges of the Supreme Court and  High
Court, (c) discharging the Commission’s functions under
the Act. Further clause 13 provides that every rule and
regulation under the Act shall be laid before each House of
Parliament, which has the power to accept, or modify or
annul such rule or regulation without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation. These provisions, which ensure that all rules
and regulations are placed before the parliament, will ensure
transparency in the formulation of rules and regulations,
and functioning of the JAC.
The expenditure on the officers and employees of the
Commission would be out of the Budget of the Department
of Justice.
The composition of the JAC ensures that views of judiciary,
executive and other stake holders are effectively represented
in the process of appointment of Judges. The Union
22. Lajpat Rai Thakral, B.A.,
CALLB., PGDM, Amritsar

73
will act in favour of the Government.
The Government can also influence
appointments by giving various gains
like appointing Governors or other
lucrative posts, hence chances of
obeying Government will be more.
i. The Secretary, Department of Law and
Justice who has direct knowledge and
who is well versed with the subject
pertaining to the persons who can be
appointed as Judges in the Supreme
Court and High Courts, should be
made an ex-officio member of the
Judicial Appointments Commission.
ii. The issue of transfer and posting of
Judges of the various High Courts in
India should be bought within the
purview of consideration of the Judicial
Appointment Commission, being
constituted.
i. Section 7(1), 7(2) and 7(3) be amended
which are as:–
(1) 7(1) The Central Government shall,
within a period of three months from
the date of coming into force of this
act, intimate the vacancies existing in
the Supreme Court and a High Court
to the Commission for its
recommendations.
Minister of Law and Justice, as a democratically elected
public representative would represent and articulate the
perspective and views of the Government, accountable to
the Parliament. The recommendation for appointment of a
person as Judge to the Higher Judiciary will be as per
procedure laid down by the JAC, and apprehensions raised
are ill founded. The role of the Government shall be
participative and in no way interfere upon the independence
of the Judiciary.
The appointments of Judges are processed seeking
presidential approval in the Department of Justice.
Therefore, Secretary Justice has been proposed as convener
of JAC. Secretary (Justice) would play his/her assigned
role in the Commission.
Clause 4(b) provides for the Commission to recommend
transfer of Chief Justices of High Courts and the Judges
of the High Courts from one High Court to any other High
Court.
Recommendations for amendment to clauses 7(1), 7(2)
and 7(3) are acceptable to the Department.
However, it is not possible to prescribe a time limit for
completion of the process of appointment in view of the
complex nature of the appointment process which entails
consideration of diverse factors before recommendations
for appointments are made.
23.
24.
Shri T.G .N. Kumar, 33/3004
Vennala P.O. Eranakulam,
Kochi
Shri Ishwar Dayal Goyal,
Member ZRUCC, Northern
Railway, Member, TAC,
Ministry of Tele
Communication

74
12 3 4
(The word three months be replaced
by one month)
(2) 7(2) The Central Government shall two
months prior to the date of occurrence
of any vacancy by reason of
completion of the term of judge of the
Supreme Court and a High Court, make
a reference to the commission for filling
up the vacancies.
(The word two months be replaced
by six months)
(3) 7(3) The Central Government shall,
within a period of two months from
the date of occurrence of any vacancy
of death, resignation of the judge of
the Supreme Court and a High Court,
make a reference to the commission
for filling up the vacancies.
(The word two months be replaced
by one month)
(4) That it will be the duty of the Registrar
General of Supreme Court and High
Court to intimate the date of
occurrence of any vacancy by reason
of death, resignation of the Supreme
Court and a High Court Judges
immediately and six months prior on
retirement of the judges.
(5) (l) The Commission shall complete the
recommendation process within two
months from the date of intimation of
vacancy of the Central Government.

75
25.
26.
(5) (2) The Central Government shall
decide and published and notified the
name of the judges in the official
gazette within two months and the
recommendation of the Judicial
Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 or
reject the recommendation.
High Courts and Governments need to prepare
lists of Competent Advocate to work on
contract basis as Judges and prosecutors as
and when required.
i. Replacement of leader of opposition in
Lok Sabha in the JAC by Chairman of
the Bar Council of India assisted by
the Chairman of the respective State
Bar Council in case of candidate
belonging to a particular State of
particular High Court. No role should
be assigned to the Prime Minister of
India as member of JAC.
ii. The Secretary in the Ministry of Law
and Justice may be replaced by the
Secretary General of the Supreme
Court of India assisted by the Registrar
General of the respective High Court
to which the prospective candidate
belongs.
iii. The Judges of Supreme Court and
High Courts should not get further
appointment to any Commission or
Tribunal or Authority.
Shri Santokh Singh Sahi,
Administrator : Indo-
American Law Centre
Shri K.M.M. Khan,
Advocate, Supreme Court
of India.
The JAC Bill does not envisage hiring of Judges and
Prosecutors on contract basis.
The leader of opposition is not a member of JAC. However
he along with the Prime Minister and the Chief Justice of
India would nominate two eminent persons as members of
the JAC.
The appointments of Judges are processed seeking
presidential approval in the Department of Justice. Therefore,
Secretary Justice has been proposed as convener of JAC.
The proposed JAC bill is concerned with the appointment
of Judges to Supreme Court and High Courts. The issue
of post-retirement assignment for judges is not the subject
matter of the proposed JAC Bill.

76
12 3 4
i. An additional section in section 8(4)
of the Draft Bill be added to the extent
that the appointment to High Court
Judges shall be made in the ratio of
66:34 from Higher Judiciary officers/
District Judges and from Advocates at
Bar respectively.
i. Appointment of judges should be
conducted in a fair and frank manner
and people particularly the Bar should
know in advance about the Bio-data
of the aspirants so that the bar can
also assist the consent selection
committee about the pros and cons of
the aspirants.
Further the system of collegium has
caused irrevocable damage to the
Judicial System of this country. In
several cases judges were appointed
not on the basis of merits but on
several other consideration and the
entire system was rotten with
allegations of favoritism and nepotism.
ii. We further oppose the move to
increase the retirement age of the
Judges as large number of talented
advocates are available in this country
and shutting their opportunities will
cause irreparable damages to the
Judicial system. We also wish to state
that already retired judges are being
Shri V .P. Singh,
District Judge, Firozabad
Shri A.P. Surya Prakasam,
Advocate
27.
28.
The matter relating to the ratio of Judges in each High
Court was discussed in the Chief Justices conference held
on 3 rd and 4
th December 1999. It was resolved that the
complement of Judges of each High Court would consist
of 66-2/3% of members of the Bar, and 33-1/3
rd of Judicial
Officers from the Subordinate Judiciary. The suggestion is
in accordance with the prevalent system
The present collegium system of appointment of Judges is
proposed to be replaced by the JAC. The proposed JAC
Bill provides for Commission to make regulations to specify
criteria and procedures for recommendations of Judges
which will ensure that persons recommended are of ability,
integrity and standing in legal profession.
The JAC Bill is not concerned with the age of retirement
of Judges.

77
re-employed in various tribunals and it
is not fair to claim that their experience
is wasted.
i. Proportionate representation at the apex
level should be given to women.
ii. Our constitution envisages Preference
to Judicial Service rather than advocate
for appointment as High Court Judges.
The present system of elevation is
against the real spirit of the constitution
envisaged under article 217, Hence 50%
must be given to Judicial Service.
29. Smt. R. Tharani, Principal
District Judge,
Dharmapuri.
Appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High
Courts are made under Article 124 and 217 of the
Constitution of India respectively, which do not provide
for reservation for any caste or class of persons.
The matter relating to the ratio of Judges in each High
Court was discussed in the Chief Justices conference held
on 3
rd and 4 th December 1999. It was resolved that the
complement of Judges of each High Court would consist
of 66-2/3% of members of the Bar, and 33-1/3
rd of Judicial
Officers from the Subordinate Judiciary.

78
30. Personal Comments
and Suggestions of
Shri Gopalan
Jayachandran, Law
Secretary, Govt. of
Tamil Nadu in his
individual Capacity on
the Questionnaire for
Stake Holders
circulated by Rajya
Sabha Secretariat.
1. A collegium comprising five
senior most judges of Supreme
Courts headed by Chief Justice
of India is in existence since
1993 for appointment and
transfer of Judges in Supreme
Court and 24 High Courts.
The Judicial Appointments
Commission Bill, 2013 intends
to replace the present collegiums
with another broad based
collegiums having participation of
judiciary, executive and civil
society. How do you appreciate
the proposed Commission over
the present collegiums for the
purpose of appointment and
transfer of judges in Supreme
Court and High Courts?
1. Presently under the collegium
system apart from Chief Justice
of concerned High Court the
senior judges of those High
Court are also consulted before
short listing the candidates for
appointment of High Court
judges. In the Judicial
Appointments Commission Bill,
there is no provision for
consulting the senior judges of
the High Court. The Chief Justice
of High Court are from other
states therefore without
consulting senior Judges of the
respective State the list proposed
by the Chief Justice may not be
a complete recommendation.
Further the eminent persons
selected by the collegium
consisting of Prime Minister,
Chief Justice and the Leader of
the opposition in the Lok Sabha
may not have sufficient inputs
about the aspirants throughout
Country. Therefore while short
listing the candidates for the
High Court the Commission
should have provision to co-opt
Replies of Department of Justice on the views/suggestions of individuals, organisations on the
Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013
Memo Name of the Questionnaire from Rajya Sabha Views/Comments of Shri Gopalan Response of Government
No. Organisation/individual Secretariat Jayachandran
12 3 4 5
Article 217 of the Constitution of
India stipulates that: Every Judge of
a High Court shall be appointed by
the President after consultation with
the Chief Justice of India, the
Governor of the State, and in case
of appointment of a Judge other
than the Chief Justice, the Chief
Justice of the High Court.
Clause 8(1) of the present JAC Bill
significantly broadens the sources
from where recommendations are
invited, to specifically include and
directly invite recommendations from
the Central and State Governments
and High Courts. The JAC would
formulate rules and regulation under
the act which can further elaborate
the process for receiving
recommendations of persons. The
procedure for seeking names will
be evolved by the JAC. For
selecting the Judges of Supreme
Court and High Courts the JAC will
consult different constitutional
functionaries including Chief Justices
of the High Courts.

79
eminent persons of concerned
state in the collegium to provide
inputs relevant to the respective
States (to avoid favouritism,
such eminent persons should not
be a practicing Advocate.)
2. The Judicial Appointment
Commission will provide for fair
consultation process and
transparency. Independence of
Judiciary predominantly lie on
the integrity of the judge and
the manner a dispute is decided
by him and not in the method
of appointment. The process
contemplated under the proposed
Act has sufficient check and
balance of powers among the
executive and judiciary. Therefore
there is no ground for any
apprehension that the
independence of judiciary will be
affected by inserting answering
Article 124A.
The Bill provides that the JAC would
under Clause 12(2) (B) & (C) make
the procedure for short-listing of
candidates for considering their
appointment as Judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts by
way of regulations. These regulations
may take different stakeholders on
board including the Bar and Bench
to make the process transparent and
participatory. The procedure of
transfer of judges from one High
Court to another will be laid down
by the JAC.
No Comments required.2. The present Collegium for
appointment and transfer of
Judges in Supreme Court and
High Courts is an invention of
judiciary while interpreting the
words after consultation in
Article 124(2) of Constitution.
The said Article along with
Article 217(1) of the constitution
is proposed to be deleted
through the Constitution (One
Hundred and Twentieth
Amendment) Bill, 2013 (which
has been passed by Rajya Sabha
in the last Monsoon Session)
for creation of Judicial
Appointments Commission by
the deletion of Article 124(2) and
217(1) and insertion of Article
124-A could any manner affect
the independence of judiciary

80
12 3 4 5
which is perceived to be a Basic
Structure of Constitution.
3. It is widely perceived that the
supersession of judges by the
executive in the past for the
post of Chief Justice of India
was an attempt to create
committed judiciary. It is also
equally perceived that post
retirement appointment of judges
particularly Chief Justice of India
affects their conduct in pre-
retirement time of a judge of
Supreme Court which has direct
bearing upon the independence
of judiciary.
What are the ways and means
to check such trend of any judge
being influenced by post
retirement appointment/benefits by
the Government compromising
independence of Judiciary?
Whether this Bill should also
cove this aspect?
3. Post retirement appointment to
the Judges definitely undermines
the independence of Judiciary.
It is evident from the conduct
of few sitting judges who are at
the verge of retirement expecting
favour from the ruling party
behave differently from what they
normally use to or expected to
behave. Similarly the conduct to
retire judges lobbying with
power centre is also evident.
Therefore we cannot turn out a
‘Nelson eye’ to the reality.
Statutes such as Human rights
Act, Consumer Protection Act,
Law Commission etc., which
provide post retirement
opportunities for the judges
should be suitability amended.
At the same time while imposing
a prohibition on judges from
taking up post retirement
assignment serious consideration
is required to enhance the
retirement age of High Court
Judges and Supreme Court
Judges thereby serving judges
hunting for post retirement
assignment can be substantially
avoided.
The proposed JAC Bill is concerned
with the appointment of Judges to
Supreme Court and High Courts.
The issue of post-retirement
assignment for judges is not the
subject matter of the proposed JAC
Bill.

81
4. What is your reaction of creation
of All India Judicial Service
under Article 312 of Constitution
to attract best talent in judiciary
through competitive manner who
could transfer to All India basis
particular in relation to creation
of Judicial Appointments
Commission for appointment and
transfer of judges in Supreme
Court and High Courts?
5. Do you feel that setting up
of Judicial Appointments
Commission through ordinary
legislation has chance of getting
altered the composition of
Judicial Appointments
Commission in future by the
Government thereby opening the
flood gate for committed
judiciary?
4. All India Judicial Service can be
successfully implemented only if
uniform language policy is
adopted throughout the country
in all courts. Further, the
representation of the States
should be proportionate to the
sanctioned cadre strength of the
cadre in each State. Since High
Court Judges are transferable
throughout the country, instead
of having All India Judicial
Service at the level of District
Judge cadre, if 1/3
rd of the High
Court strength is selected
through All India Judicial Service
Examination and posted as
District Judges for 5 years (as
Probationers) and then posted
as High Court Judges, it will
give the necessary result.
5. Setting up of Judiciary
Appointment Commission
through ordinary legislation will
definitely open the flood gate in
future by tinkering the Act.
Therefore, the provisions should
be incorporated in the
Constitution itself.
Appointments to the Higher Judiciary
are made from the cadre of Judicial
Officers as well as members of the
Bar. The AIJS will address the
appointments of Judicial Officers to
the Higher Judicial Service in the
States. It will however, not directly
address the appointments of the
members of the Bar as Judges of
the High Courts and Supreme Court.
Therefore, the creation of the AIJS
is quite distinct from the
establishment of the Judicial
Appointments Commission. The
proposed JAC Bill is concerned with
the appointment of Judges to
Supreme Court and High Courts,
and not for district and subordinate
courts.
The Constitutional (99
th Amendment)
Bill is an enabling legislation to
provide for the JAC Bill, which
delineates all aspects for the smooth
functioning of the JAC, including
its composition and functions. It
enables the Parliament to legislate
on the composition of the JAC. Any
apprehension that the composition
of the JAC in the JAC Bill could be
changed in the future is unwarranted
in view of the power of Judicial
Review enshrined in the Constitution.
Government is aware that any

82
12 3 4 5
6. The present collegiums system
for appointment of Judges in
Supreme Court and High Courts
is alleged to be opaque. To what
extent the present Bill removes
such opaqueness and how the
selection process proposed by
the Bill can be made objective
and more transparent?
6. The present Bill has no answer
to remove the present
shortcomings found in the
collegium system. Already under
the present system, the collegium
is not able to fill up the
vacancies in time. The present
Bill which has more procedures
certainly will take more time than
the present.
reduction in the representation of
the Judiciary would have serious
implications for the independence of
the Judiciary. There should be no
apprehension that any attempt will
be made to change the balance in
the future. The Parliament, Executive
and the Judiciary would actively
guard the independence of the
judiciary.
The JAC Bill, 2013 proposes to
remove opaqueness and to make the
selection process objective and more
transparent by making the process
of appointment more participatory
and collaborative. The composition
of the JAC as suggested in the Bill
ensures that the views of judiciary,
executive and other stake holders
are effectively represented in the
process of the appointment of judges.
The JAC can expeditiously fill up
the judicial vacancies as the Bill
mentions the procedure for
reference to commission for filling
up of vacancies along with time-
frames. The JAC Bill specifies the
following time frame for intimation
of vacancies as reasonable:
1. Three months for intimation
of existing vacancies on
enforcement of the Act. DoJ

83
has agreed in response to
an earlier suggestion to
replace the words ‘three
months’ by the words ‘one
month’.
2. Two months prior to the date
of occurrence of any
vacancy by reason of
completion of the term of
Judge of the Supreme Court
or High Court. DoJ has
agreed in response to an
earlier suggestion to replace
the words ‘two months’ by
the words ‘six months’.
3. Within two months from the
date of occurrence of
vacancy by reason of death
or resignation. DoJ has
agreed in response to an
earlier suggestion to replace
the words ‘two months’ by
the words ‘one month’.
However, it is not possible to
prescribe a time-limit for completion
of the process of appointment in
view of the complex nature of the
appointment process which entails
consideration of diverse factors
before recommendations for
appointments are made.
This can be considered in the
regulations under Section 12.
7. Since the Composition of
Judicial Appointments
Commission is 6 whether the
7. Instead of giving casting vote to
the Chairman the commission
should have a provision to co-

84
12 3 4 5
Chairman of Judicial
Appointments Commission need
to be given a casting vote? If
so, does it required to be
mentioned in the Act or leave to
the Government to mention the
same in the rules and regulations
thereunder?
opt a member from the
respective States in the
commission whenever short
listing of candidates for high
court is done. Likewise while
deciding the selection of
Supreme Court Judges, the
former President or Chief Justice
of Supreme court shall be co-
opted.

85
Replies of Department of Justice on the views/suggestions of individuals, organisations on the Judicial Appointments
Commission Bill, 2013
Memo Name of the Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
31. Women Lawyers’
Association, Chennai
i. The procedure for the selection and
appointment of the Judges should be
contained in the constitution itself and
it would not be appropriate to delegate
such power, which is fundamental for
uploading the rule of law and
maintaining the Independence of
Judiciary, to another Organ of the
State viz., the legislature (Parliament)
ii. The proposed JAC Bill should be
passed by the Parliament as a
constitution Amendment along with and
as part of the proposed Article 124A
and appended as 13
th Schedule to the
Constitution and not as an Act of
Parliament.
iii. Sub-Section (d) shall be omitted and
the contents of the Rule now itself
should be spelt out and incorporated
as part of the proposed 13
th schedule
to the Constitution.
iv. The composition of JAC should omit
the Law Minister as one of the
Member.
Two Bills were proposed for introduction in the Rajya
Sabha namely the Constitutional (One Hundred and Twentieth
Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Judicial Appointment
Commission Bill, 2013. The Constitution (One Hundred
and Twentieth Amendment) Bill, 2013 proposes to insert a
new Article 124A to constitute a Judicial Appointment
Commission for making recommendation with respect to
the appointment of the Judges in the Higher Judiciary. The
Constitution (One Hundred and Twentieth Amendment) was
considered and passed by the Rajya Sabha as the
Constitutional (Ninety Nine Amendment) Bill on 5
th
September, 2013. The Constitutional (99 th Amendment) Bill
is an enabling legislation to provide for the JAC Bill, which
delineates all aspects for the smooth functioning of the
JAC, including its composition and functions. The JAC,
Bill has been referred to the Parliament Standing Committee.
Clause 2(d) relates to the definition of the word ‘prescribed’,
which is a standard provision and needs to be retained.
The inclusion of the Union Minister of Law and Justice in
the JAC is required as he is a democratically elected public
representative, representing and articulating the perspective
and views of the Government.

86
12 3 4
v. The two eminent persons to be
nominated by the collegium consisting
of PM, CJI and Leader of opposition
in Lok Sabha should be replaced by
nomination of three eminent Jurist by
collegium consisting of PM, CJI or
Acting CJI and Leader of opposition
Lok Sabha. The eminent person may
be a retired Judge of Supreme Court,
High Court, retired professor of a
university recognised by UGC. Retired
professor of National Law College/
School with a PHD Degree in law or
Senior Advocate in Supreme Court.
vi. Provision of 3 years tenure and not
eligible for re-nomination in respect of
eminent persons should be deleted and
he should be nominated for a period
of 3 years or till he attains the age of
75 years whichever is earlier.
vii. Replace the Secretary, Department of
Justice as convenor of the
Commission by the Registrar General
of the Supreme Court or any of the
Registrar of the Supreme Court
appointed by the Chief Justice of India.
viii. The nominated members shall be
entitled to the pay and allowances and
all other perquisites applicable to the
Judge of the Supreme Court of India.
The composition of the JAC has been proposed after due
consultation and the number of eminent persons is proposed
to be retained at two. This ensures that  views of judiciary,
executive and other stake holders are effectively represented
in the process of appointment of Judges. The Committee
consisting of the Prime Minster the Chief Justice of India
and a Leader of opposition of Lok Sabha may in theirwisdom
consider the names of eminent Jurists and other legal
luminaries under the category of eminent of persons, as
members of the Commission.
The rationale for keeping the tenure for a period of three
years is to enable two eminent persons as members to
have reasonable time to contribute to the functioning of the
Commission. As such there would not be any prescribed
age limit for the eminent members.
The appointments of Judges are processed seeking
presidential approval in the Department of Justice. Therefore,
Secretary Justice has been proposed as convenor of JAC.
It may be noted that Secretary is Convenor of the JAC
and not a Member-Convenor.
It has proposed in the JAC Bill, 2013 that the fee and
allowance payable to the eminent person shall be such as
may be prescribed.

87
ix. Insert sub Clause (d) to Section 4 of
the JAC Bill relating to the functions
of the Commission as follows:
(d). (i) The JAC shall endeavour to take
decisions unanimously.
(ii) The recommendations of the JAC
shall be valid only they are approved
by at least five of its members present
and voting.
x. Delete the term Chief Justice from
Section 5 regarding procedure for
recommendation with respect to
appointment to High Court Judges.
xi. Delete Clause 1 and 2 from Section 6
regarding officers and employees of
Commission by inserting the following:
The Chief Justice of India may appoint
such number of officers and other
employees as it may consider
necessary for the discharge of
functions of the Commission under
this Act from among the employees
of the Supreme Court on deputation
with lien, subject to the same service
conditions.
xii. Delete section 7 (1) relating to
reference to Commission for filling up
of vacancies and replace the word
Central Government in Clause 2 of
section 7 with the words “the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court or the
The Commission will make regulations by specifying
procedures for recommendations for appointment of Judge;
this includes the procedure to be followed in case there is
no agreement on the name(s).
The Chief Justice of the High Court has a crucial role to
play in appointment of judges in that High Court. He has
intimate knowledge about advocates practicing in that High
Court. Hence deletion of the term Chief Justice from
Section 5 is not tenable.
The role and responsibilities of the officers and other
employees of the JAC is of a Secretarial nature to provide
administrative and logistic support. The officers and
employees would have no role in decision making process
in the Commission. Therefore, it is for the Central
Government to appoint the officers and employees of the
Commission.
The appointment of Judges is an executive Act. The JAC
would device an appropriate system through rules and
regulations to fill these vacancies. The major bottleneck in
the present system is that proposals for Appointment of
Judges are not initiated in time from the High Court. Hence
the word “Central Government” in Clause 2 and 3 in

88
12 3 4
High Court, as the case may be”.
Replace the word Central Government
in Clause 3 of Section 7 with the
words “the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court or the High Court, as
the case may be”.
xiii. Delete the Words “the Central
Government and the State Government”
from Clause 1 of Section 8 relating to
procedure for short listing of
candidates. Add Clause 1 (a) and 1 (b)
as Follows:
(a) Upon the receipt of the request from
the Convenor or on his own motion,
the Chief Justice of the concerned
High Court shall recommend names
after consulting with the ten senior
most Judges of the High Court. In
the event of there been less than ten
Judges, after consulting all the Judges.
(b) The Chief Justice while recommending
the names shall obtain and forward to
the JAC, the bio data of the proposed
persons to be selected for appointment
as Judges of the High Court, in the
appropriate format (Appendix I, II and
III) as the case may be.
xiv. The word “Act” in Section 9 (2)
relating  to meetings of Commission
may be  replaced with the word “the
schedule  13”.
Section 7 is appropriate.
Clause 8 (1) significantly broadens the sources from where
recommendations are invited, to specifically include and
directly invite recommendations from the Central and State
Governments, and High Courts. The word, “the Central
Government and the State Government” in Clause 1 of
Section 8 is apt.
The JAC will be headed by the Chief Justice of India with
distinguished members. The JAC should have the autonomy
to devise its own procedures for its functioning, which
can evolve with time and experience. It is for this purpose
that the power to lay down procedures has been vested

89
xv. In Section 10 relating to vacancies
etc. not to invalidate proceedings of
Commission add the following:
Provided that the defect shall not
include ineligibility or disqualification
or undesirability of the member to
hold such high office.
xvi. Section 11 relating to power to make
rules should be omitted and
incorporated as part of the 13
th
schedule to the Constitution. Replace
sub Clause 1 and 2 of Section 12
regarding power to make regulations
and replace with the following:-
Subject to the provisions of this
schedule, the Commission may make
Regulations for giving effect to the
provisions of this Schedule in particular
and without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing power, the regulations
may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:-
(a) To (e) may be retained.
xvii. Section 13 relating to rules and
regulations to be laid before Parliament
may be deleted.
with the Commission through regulations, subject to the
regulations being laid on the table of the Parliament.
This is a general Clause to protect the decisions of the
Commission. The addition proposed in Section 10 is not
required.
This issue has been addressed in the reply to xiv above.
The Parliament has the power to accept or modify or
annul such rule and regulations without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation. This will ensure transparency in the formulation
of rules and regulations, and functioning of the JAC.

90
12 3 4
32. Shri P.P. Rao,
Senior Advocate,
Supreme Court
This is standard provision which provides for removal of
difficulty which normally would come to light within the
first 3 years. This section may be retained.
Presently Article 124 (2) reads as follows:
“Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by
the President by warrant under his hand and seal after
consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court
and of the High Court in the States as the President may
deem necessary for the purpose ...”
Pursuant to the 1993 Judgement, the Supreme Court set
up a ‘Collegium’ for appointment of judges. The word
‘Collegium’ does not exist in the Constitution of India. The
Supreme Court rewrote the constitution through a process
of interpretation, which was not envisaged by the
constitution makers.
The Constitutional (99
th Amendment) Bill is an enabling
legislation to provide for the JAC Bill, which delineates all
aspects for the smooth functioning of the JAC, including
its composition and functions. It enables the Parliament to
legislate on the composition of the JAC. Any apprehension
that the composition of the JAC, its functions and power,
duties as well as eligibility in the JAC Bill could be changed
by a law enacted in Parliament is unwarranted in view of
the power of Judicial Review enshrined in the Constitution.
The inclusion of two eminent persons as Members of the
Commission has been made to facilitate wider democratic
consultation by broad basing the representation of civil
society in the JAC. The eminent members could also be
from the fields of judiciary, administration, education,
xviii. Section 14 relating to power to remove
difficulties should be deleted.
i. The proposed Judicial Appointments
Commission pertains to the basic
structure of the composition of the
superior judiciary i.e. the Supreme
Court and the High Courts. Therefore,
the composition of the Commission,
its functions powers, duties as well
as eligibility for membership should all
be part of the Constitution itself. They
cannot be regulated by a law enacted
by Parliament.
ii. Two persons of ability, integrity and
eminence known for their knowledge
and experience in judiciary,
administration, education, journalism,
law, or public affairs.

91
iii. I suggest substituting the word
‘collegium’ by the word ‘Committee’
or ‘body’ because the word collegium
has acquired a certain connotation. It
is better to avoid the word ‘collegium’
in the Bill as we want to switch over
from the present collegium system of
selection of Judges to a new system.
iv. Replacement of the word ‘Leader of
the Opposition by Other Leaders of
the two Houses of Parliament’ may
be substituted.
v. I strongly recommend a broad-based
statutory Search Committee for
preparing, from time to time, panels
of eligible and suitable candidates for
candidates by the Judicial Appointments
Commission for elevation to High
Court or the Supreme Court with
variable composition in the case of
each High Court. It may include
recently retired Chief Justices and
Judges of the High Courts, retired
Judges of Supreme Court residing in
a State and eminent leader of the Bar.
The Search Committee should also
include representatives of the Union
and State Governments. The Chairman
could be a Senior Judge of the
Supreme Court or the Chief Justice
of each High Court as the case may
journalism, law, or public affairs.
The suggestion has been noted.
The Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha has been included
as per convention in similar bodies for selection of the
Chief Vigilance Commissioner, Chief Information
Commissioner. This will ensure wider acceptance of the
nominated persons in the JAC.
The suggestion has been noted. The proposed JAC Bill
provides for Commission to make regulations to specify
criteria and procedures for recommendations of Judges
which will ensure that persons recommended is of ability,
integrity and standing in legal profession. In this connection,
attention is invited to the 80
th Report of the Law
Commission of India, which had made comprehensive
recommendations as to the method of appointment of High
Court and Supreme Court Judges. The proposed JAC may
draw on the wisdom of similar reports and international
experiences in ensuring that persons of ability, integrity and
standing in the legal profession are appointed as Judges to
the higher judiciary. Section 8 (1) significantly broadens
the sources from where recommendations are invited, to
specifically include and directly invite  recommendations
from the Central and State Governments, and High Courts.

92
12 3 4
be. The Secretary to the Government
of India in the Department of Justice
may be the ex officio  Member-
Secretary of the Search Committee.
vi. I propose that in Section 8,
consequential changes may be made
providing for inviting recommendations
from the Search Committee or
Committees concerned to be placed
before the Judicial Appointments
Commission for consideration, making
it clear that it will be open to the said
Commission to consider suitable
candidates not recommended by the
Search Committee if need be, for
reasons to be recorded.
vii. I suggest enlargement of the scope of
the proposed Bill to incorporate the
following aspects: Direct appointment
from the Bar are necessary at least,
to the extent of 1/4
th of the vacancies
to be  filled in the Supreme Court on
a regular basis in order to infuse fresh
blood into  the system. For this,
Judgeship has to be  made much
more attractive that what it is now.
The need to make even District
Judge’s post more attractive is felt in
every state.
viii. As an inducement to Judges to
maintain their integrity, reputation and
The matter relating to the ratio of Judges in each High
Court was discussed in the Chief Justices conference held
on 3
rd and 4 th December 1999. It was resolved that the
complement of Judges of each High Court would consist
of 66-2/3% of members of the Bar, and 33-l/3
rd of Judicial
Officers from the Subordinate Judiciary. The need to make
even the District Judge’s post is a desirable objective but
it is not a subject matter of the JAC Bill as is relates to
appointment of Judges to Higher Judiciary.
The JAC Bill is not concerned with the retirement age of
judges. However a Bill for increasing the retirement age of

93
efficiency and also to tackle the
problem of dearth of suitable
candidates for Judgeship, I propose
increasing the age of superannuation
of High Court Judges from 62 to 65
years and of Supreme Court Judges
from 65 to 68 years subject to
assessment of fitness and performance
including reputation and integrity on
attaining the age of 61 years in the
case of a High Court Judge and of 64
years in the case of a Supreme Court
Judge on the same lines as the
Supreme Court has prescribed in
the case of judicial officers in All
India Judges’ Association v Union of
India (1993) 4 SCC 288 at 314-315
pr. 52 (b).
ix To tackle the problem of corruption,
which unfortunately has entered the
Judiciary and having regard to the
paramount need to maintain the
independence of judiciary, I propose
insertion of a provision in the
Constitution empowering the president
of India to pass an order of termination
forthwith of the appointment of a
Judge of a High Court or of the
Supreme Court including the CJI on a
recommendation made by the Judicial
Appointments  Commission stating that
a particular Judge is a person of
doubtful integrity, whose continuance
in office will not be in public interest,
subject to payment of appropriate
High Court judges from 62 to 65 is under consideration in
Parliament.
The subject matter of the present legislation relates solely
to appointment of Judges in higher judiciary. The issue of
corruption has been addressed in the he Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010. This Bill incorporates a
mechanism for enquiring into complaints against the Judges
of the Supreme Court and High Courts, lays down judicial
standards and requires the judges to declare their assets
and liabilities. Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill
2010 which was introduced on 1st December, 2010 and
referred to the Parliament Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Law and Justice for examination
and report. The Parliamentary Standing Committee after
wide consultation finalised its report containing the
recommendations which was presented to the Parliament
on 30
th August, 2011. The Bill was passed by the Lok
Sabha on 29 th March, 2012. It is pending before Rajya
Sabha.

94
12 3 4
Shri Ashok H. Desai
compensation as may be determined
by a Tribunal headed by a retired
Chief Justice of a High Court, after
hearing the judge concerned.
x. There is need for a mandatory
provision in law to the effect that
unless and until a judicial officer/Judge
whose name has been recommended
for elevation to a High Court or the
Supreme Court, as the case may be,
by the Judicial Appointments
Commissions pronounces the
judgments and orders in all cases
where hearing has concluded and
judgments or orders are reserved, the
warrant of appointment shall be
withheld. I have myself seen several
cases where without delivering
judgments which were reserved after
long hearing, judicial officers and
Judges take the oath on their elevation
necessitating re- hearing of the same
cases by another Judge, which is
indeed regrettable. It causes
underserved hardship and irreparable
loss to the unfortunate litigants.
i. Parliament would not be able to pass
the Judicial Appointments Bill as it
would violate the present provisions
of Article 124. It is true that the
Constitutional Amendment Bill, 2013
which was passed by Rajya Sabha
The suggestion has been noted.
Two Bills were proposed for introduction in the Rajya
Sabha namely the Constitutional (One Hundred and Twentieth
Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Judicial Appointment
Commission Bill, 2013. The Constitution (One Hundred
and Twentieth Amendment) Bill, 2013 proposes to insert a
new Article 124A to constitute a Judicial Appointment
33.

95
seeks to amend Article 124 of the
Constitution and to add Article 124A.
In my view the present Bill by itself
cannot be passed by Parliament unless
a suitable Constitutional Amendment is
passed.
ii. Any changes of material nature in the
manner of appointment of Judges by
future amendments of the Judicial
Appointments Commission Act would
fall foul of the constitutional provisions
regarding amendment to chapters in
the Constitution relating to judiciary.
Any process of appointment should
be by a body composed of
representatives of Judiciary, the
Executive, the Bar and the Civil
Society without anyone of them
Commission for making recommendation with respect to
the appointment of the Judges in the Higher Judiciary. The
Constitution (One Hundred and Twentieth Amendment) was
considered and passed by the Rajya Sabha as the
Constitutional (Ninety Nine Amendment) Bill on
5
th September, 2013. The JAC, Bill has been referred to the
Parliament Standing Committee. Once the requisite approvals
are received, both the Bills will be moved simultaneously
for seeking the assent of the President.
The Constitutional (99
th Amendment) Bill is an enabling
legislation to provide for the JAC Bill, which delineates all
aspects for the smooth functioning of the JAC, including
its composition and functions. It enables the Parliament to
legislate on the composition of the JAC.
It is submitted that it would be difficult to visualize
legislation on Judicial Appointments Commission which
would exclude judiciary in the process of appointment to
the posts of judges in High Courts and Supreme Court.
Judiciary being an important element in the consultative
process, any legislation which excludes judiciary from such
a process would be struck down under judicial review. It
is pertinent to mention here that though the process of
appointment of judges is an executive process, yet the
judiciary has a significant role to play in this regard.
Accordingly, the present Bill provides Chief Justice of
India to chair the Judicial Appointment Commission which
will also include two senior most Judges of the Supreme
Court.
The JAC Bill makes the process of appointment more
participatory and collaborative. The composition of the
JAC ensures that the views of Judiciary, Executive and
other Stake holders are effectively represented in the process
of appointment of Judges. The provision under Section 8

96
12 3 4
enjoying dominance;
The process should be well defined
and transparent. It should provide for
wide consultation with various
stakeholders including the Bar;
The primary criterion for appointment
should be merit. Seniority should only
be one factor;
There should be a full time independent
secretariat and registry  maintaining
relevant records. One, way of assuring
such independence could be on the
lines of Article 146 providing for
Officers and Servants and expenses
of the Supreme Court.
The expenses of the Judicial
Commission should be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India.
iii. These features should be incorporated
in the Constitution itself. This has been
done in different ways in the
Constitution including in the case of
Union Public Service Commission
(under Article 313), to a lesser degree
for Election Commission (under Article
324) and in greater details in Part
relating to Village Panchayats and
Municipalities, namely Part IX and Part
IXA
Clause (1) significantly broadens the sources from where
recommendations are invited, to specifically include and
directly invite recommendations from the Central and State
Governments, and High Courts. The Rules and Regulations
framed under the Act can further elaborate the process for
receiving recommendations of persons fulfilling the eligibility
criteria from Central and State Governments, and High
Courts.
In the proposed JAC Bill, the names would first be
shortlisted the Commission Secretariat and then views of
different Constitution Authorities would be obtained. The
Secretariat would also maintain permanent records of
appointments which will ensure transparency in
appointments.
The expenses of the Judicial Commission would be borne
out of the budget of the Department of Justice.
May see reply to memo 32(i) above.

97
iv. There is one another point to be made
at this stage. The power of the
collegiums to govern the destiny of
High Court Judges has been perceived
in such a manner by the Judges
themselves that the High Court Judges
are in danger of being deferential to
the Supreme Court. The Supreme
Court is the Appellate Court which
can reverse the High Court. But
Constitution does not envisage any
subordination. One way to avoid this
is to have parity in the age of
retirement for both High Court and
Supreme Court Judges so that High
Court Judges also retire at 65. This
would also require a Constitutional
amendment which is something to be
considered for recommendation of the
Committee.
The High Courts are sovereign in their own rights the
Judicial Appointment Commission further strengthens the
independence of the High Court judges. The issue of
increase in the retirement age of High Court judges has
been engaging the attention of the Government. A Bill for
increasing the retirement age of High Court judges from 62
to 65 is under consideration in Parliament.

98
ANNEXURE-III
List of individuals/organizations/experts and other
stakeholders who deposed before the Committee
1. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, MLA and President, Foundation for Democratic Reforms (Lok
Satta), Hyderabad;
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal, RTI Activist, New Delhi;
3. Dr. Lokesh Kumar, RTI Activist, New Delhi;
4. Shri Ishwar Dayal Goyal, Noida, U.P.;
5. Shri Fali S. Nariman; Ex. M.P., Rajya Sabha and Senior Advocate, Supreme Court;
6 Shri Ashok H. Desai, Former Attorney General of India; and
7. Shri P.P. Rao, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court
8. Bar Council of India:
(i) Shri S. Prabakaran, Co-Chairman
(ii) Shri Ramchander Rao, Member
(iii) Shri Nilesh Kumar, Member
(iv) Shri Bhoj Chander Thakur, Member
(v) Shri J.R. Sharma, Member
(vi) Shri Ashok K. Pandey, Member
(vii) Shrimati Shiva Priyamvadu, Member
9. Madras Bar Association, Chennai:
(i) Shri R. Muthukumaraswamy, President
(ii) Shri V .R. Kamalanathan, Secretary
10. Advocates Forum for Social Justice, Tamil Nadu:
(i) Shri K. Balu, President
(ii) Shri K. Muthuramalingam
(iii) Shri Karunakaran
11. Shri A.P. Surya Prakasam, Association of Lawyers Against Corruption and Oppression, Chennai
12. Shri. Naik. Holiyappa. Kanna (Advocate, Supreme Court), New Delhi
13. Shri. Radhey Shyam Gora (Advocate, Supreme Court), New Delhi
14. Dr. Durlabh Chandra Bhattacharyya (Advocate Calcutta High Court), Kolkata
15. Justice K.L. Sharma Association of Retired Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts of India
(U.P. State Chapter), Lucknow
98

99
16. Shri V .P. Singh, District Judge (Retd.)
17. Madras High Court Advocates Association:
(i) Shri R.C. Paul Kanagaraj, President,
(ii) Shri N. Kannan, Advocate
(iii) Shri C. Kanagaraj, Advocate
(iv) Shri S. Arivazhagan, Advocate
18. Women Lawyers’ Association, Chennai:
(i) Shrimati D. Prasanna, President
(ii) Shrimati V . Nalini, Secretary
19. Shri T.G.N. Kumar, Kochi
20. Shri Abhishek Sudhir, (Advocate) Bangalore
21. Shri Rajiv Daiya, Chairman, Suraz India Trust, Rajasthan
22. Shri Mathews J. Nedumpara, President, National Lawyers Campaign for Judicial Transparency
and Reforms, Mumbai

100
ANNEXURE-IV
Opinion of Attorney General of India
100
G. E. V AHANV ATI
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR INDIA
OPINION
Subject: Re-visiting the Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Chief Justice and the
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts in light of the Constitution Bench
Judgment in Supreme Court Advocates on Record Association v. Union of India ,
(1993) 4. SCC 441, and the Advisory Opinion in Special Reference No . 1 of 1998,
Re, (1998) 7 SCC 739.
1. The Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Chief Justice of India and the Judges
of the Supreme Court provides in para 3.5 that “After receipt of the final recommendation
of the Chief Justice of India, the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
will put up the recommendations to the Prime Minister who will advise the President in
the matter of appointment”. Similar provisions have been made in para 6 and para 15.1
of the Memorandum of Procedure for appointment and Transfer of Chief Justices and
Judges of High Courts. Though not expressly stated, the implication of the above paras
is that what is described as the “final recommendation” of the Chief Justice of India is
binding on the Executive.
2. In my opinion this is not the correct position in law and requires to be revised. In my
opinion, the Union Executive has the power to disagree with and reject the recommendation
made by the Collegium, even if it is reiterated for the second time. I shall now proceed
to give the reasons for my opinion.
3. The decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-
Record Association v.  Union of India, (1993) 4 SCC 441, needs to be carefully analysed:
(i) The Judgment was passed by a Bench of 9 Hon’ble Judges. The majority decision
has been given by Justice J.S. Verma (as his Lordship .then was), speaking for
himself, Yogeshwar Dayal, G.N. Ray; A.S.  Anand and S.P. Bharucha, JJ. The
relevant paragraphs pertaining to the appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court
(particularly with regard to the nature of the consultation process) are paragraphs
462 and 468 of  the SCC Report, which read as follows:
OFF : 26, SUPREME COURT, NEW DELHI-110 001, TEL. : 23383254 FAX : 23782101
RES: 10 MOTILAL NEHRU MARG, NEW DELHI - 110 011, TEL. : 23018122
E-MAIL : goolam@vahanvati.net

101
462. The constitutional purpose to be served by these provisions is to  select the
best from amongst those available for appointment as judges of the superior
judiciary, after consultation with those functionaries who are best suited to make
the selection. It is obvious that only those persons should be considered ·fit for
appointment as  judges of the superior judiciary who combine the attributes
essential for making an able, independent and fearless judge. Several attributes
together combine to constitute such a personality. Legal expertise, ability to
handle cases, proper personal conduct and ethical behaviour, firmness and
fearlessness are obvious essential attributes of a person suitable for appointment
as a superior judge. The initial appointment of Judges in the High Courts is
made from the Bar and the subordinate judiciary. Appointment to the Supreme
Court is mainly from amongst High Court Judges, and on occasions directly
from the Bar. The arena of performance of those men are the courts. It is,
therefore, obvious that the maximum opportunity for adjudging their ability and
traits, is in the Courts and, therefore, the Judges are best suited to assess their
true worth and fitness for appointment as Judges. This is obviously the reason
for introducing the requirement of consultation with the Chief Justice of India
in the matter of appointment of all Judges, and with the Chief Justice of the
High Court in  the case of appointment of a Judge in a High Court. Even the
personal traits of the members of the Bar and the Judges are quite often fully
known to  the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of the High Court
who get such information from various sources. 
There may , however , be some
personal trait of an individual lawyer or Judge, which· may be better known to
the executive and may be unknown to the Chief Justice of India and the Chief
Justice of the High Cour t, and which may  be r elevant for assessing his
potentially to  become a good Judge. It is for this r eason, that the executive is
also one of the consultees i n the pr ocess of appointment. The object of
selecting the best men to constitute the superior judiciary is achieved by
requiring consultation with not only the judiciar y but also the executive to
ensure that ever y r elevant par ticular about the candidate is known and duly
weighed as a r esult of effective consultation between all the consultees befor e
the appointment is made. It is the r ole assigned to  the judiciar y and the
executive in the pr ocess of appointment of Judges which is the tr ue index for
deciding the question of primacy between them, in  case of any differ ence in
their opinion. The answer which best sub serves this constitutional purpose
would be the cor rect answer.
468. The rule of law envisages the area of discretion to  be the minimum,
requiring only the application of known principles or guidelines to  ensure non-
arbitrariness, but to that limited extent, discretion is a pragmatic need. Conferring
discretion upon high functionaries and, whenever feasible, introducing the element
of plurality by requiring a  collective decision, are further checks against
arbitrariness. This is how idealism and pragmatism are reconciled and integrated,
to make the system. workable in a satisfactory manner. Entrustment of the task
of appointment of superior judges to high constitutional functionaries; the
greatest significance attached to the view of the Chief Justice of India, who is
best equipped to assess the true worth of the candidates for adjudging  their
suitability; the opinion of the Chief Justice of India being the collective opinion
formed after taking into account the views of some of his  colleagues; 
and the
executive being permitted to pr event an appointment considered to be unsuitable,
for str ong r easons disclosed to the Chief Justice of India. pr ovide the best

102
method, in the constitutional scheme. to  achieve the constitutional purpose
without confer ring absolute discr etion or veto upon  either. the judiciar y or  the
executive, much less in any individual, be he the Chief Justice of India or  the
Prime Minister .
[Emphasis Supplied]
(ii) It is clear from these two paragraphs. that the majority clearly recognized
a. That the consultation process is based on consensus;
b. That the Executive may itself be in possession of information relating to
in individual lawyer or a Judge, which may have a bearing on his
suitability for appointment;
c. That the Executive is one of the Consultees in the process of  appointment;
d. The object is to select the best men to constitute the higher judiciary;
e. This can only be achieved by consultation between the judiciary and the
executive;
f. Every relevant particular about the candidate must be duly weighed; and
g. Both the executive and the judiciary participate to sub serve the constitutional
objective.
If the Executive is also a Consultee and if appointment can only be made
as a result of consensus between all the Consultees then a negative opinion
from the Executive cannot be ignored or over-ridden. In fact, a negative
opinion can come from any Consultee and not just from the Executive
alone. This is important because the whole purpose behind the consultation
process, according to this Judgment, is to identify the best available candidate
for appointment.
(iii) It is true that in paragraph 468 it is also stated that the Executive is permitted to
prevent an appointment considered to be unsuitable for strong reasons disclosed to
the Chief Justice of India. The strong reasons referred to here have to be read in
conjunction with paragraph 462, which elaborates that the unsuitability in the
opinion of the Executive may be on account of possessing knowledge of some
personal trait that may render the candidate’s appointment unsuitable.
(iv) Significantly, neither para 462 nor para 468 discuss the question of “reiteration”.
Paragraphs 477 and 478 set out the norms which are “expected to  be observed”
by the functionaries to regulate the exercise of their discretionary powers in, the
matter of appointments. The conclusions are set out in paragraph 486.
(v) The relevant sub-paragraphs are sub-para (7) of the Norms and sub-para (5) of the
Conclusions, both of which provide that if a recommendation is, after consideration
of the reasons disclosed by the ‘Executive, unanimously re-iterated by the Chief
Justice and the other Judges along with reasons, “then that appointment as a
matter of healthy convention ought to be made” [Sub-para (5) of the Conclusions
uses the words “should be made” ]. In my opinion, this does NOT show that the
judgment intended that a re-iterated recommendation of the that Chief Justice is
absolutely binding. On the contrary, if one has regard to the stated constitutional
objective, i.e., to clear the best available candidate, then the interpretation that a re-
iterted recommendation is mandatory and binding would go against this objective.

103
4. The real difficulty seems to stem from the Advisory Opinion of the Supreme, Court in
Special Reference No. 1 of 1998 , decided on 28 th October, 1998 and reported in (1998)
7 SCC 739:
(i) In the first place, it must be noted that the questions referred to the Supreme Court
for its consideration were 9 in number and read as follows:
(1) Whether the expression ‘consultation with the Chief Justice of India’ in
Articles 217(1) and 222(1)  requires consultation with a plurality of Judges in the
formation of the opinion of the Chief Justice of India or does the sole
individual opinion of the Chief Justice of India constitute consultation within
the meaning of the said articles;
(2) Whether the transfer of Judges is judicially reviewable in the light of the
observation of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment that ‘such transfer
is not justifiable on any ground’ and its further observation that limited judicial
review is available in matters of transfer and the extent and scope of judicial
review;
(3) Whether Article 124(2) as interpreted in the said judgment requires the Chief
Justice of India to consult only the two senior-most Judges or whether there
should be wider consultation according to past practice;
(4) Whether the Chief Justice of India is entitled to act solely in his individual
capacity, without consultation with other Judges of the Supreme Court in respect
of all materials and information conveyed by the Government of India for non-
appointment of a Judge recommended for appointment;
(5) Whether the requirement of consultation by the Chief Justice of India with
his colleagues, who are likely to be conversant with the affairs of the High
Court concerned refers to only those Judges who have that High Court as a
parent High Court and excludes Judges who had occupied the office of a Judge
or Chief Justice of that Court on transfer from their parent or any other court;
(6) Whether in  the light of the legitimate expectations of senior Judges of the
High Court in regard to their appointment to the Supreme Court referred to in
the said judgment, the ‘strong cogent reason’ required to justify the departure
from the order of the seniority has to be recorded in  respect of each such senior
Judge, who is overlooked, while making recommendation of a  Judge junior to
him or her;
(7) Whether the Government is not entitled to require that the opinions of the
other consulted Judges be in writing in accordance with the aforesaid Supreme
Court judgment and that the same be transmitted to the Government of India
by the Chief Justice of India along with his views;
(8) Whether the Chief Justice of India is not obliged to comply with the norms
and the requirement of the consultation process in making his recommendation
to the Government of India;
(9) Whether any recommendations made by the .Chief Justice of India without
complying with the norms and consultation process are binding upon the
Government of India?

104
(ii) All the 9 questions are concerned with the nature and manner of the consultation
required between the Chief Justice and tile other Judges. None of these questions
deals with the issue whether the reiterated recommendation of the Chief Justice and
other Judges is binding or not.
(iii) Despite this,  the Advisory Opinion travels far beyond the reference and deals with
the issue (in paragraph 23) of non-appointment of a person recommended on the
ground of unsuitability. It is important to note that in this paragraph what is quoted
is only from paragraph 478 of the SC Advocates-on-Record Association case
(dealing with the Norms which are “expected to be observed”). The Advisory
Opinion does not even refer to the paragraphs 462 and 468 which I have referred
to above. Yet, the Opinion in paragraph 23 states that “It is only if it
(recommendation) is unanimously reiterated that the appointment must be made”.
This must be read in perspective.
(iv) In my opinion this observation does not reflect the correct position. Firstly, it is
not in conformity with the majority decision, which I have analysed above. The
words “must be made” carry a connotation that is contrary to the words “should
be made” or “ought to be made” (as a healthy convention) as used in the majority
decision. Secondly, this issue was not a part of the questions referred to the
Supreme Court travels and beyond the reference. Thirdly, in my respectful opinion,
this is not a correct reading of the majority decision.
5. For these reasons, I am of the opinion that paragraph 3.5 of the Memorandum of
Procedure for appointment of Chief-Justice of India and the Judges of the Supreme
Court and para 6 and para 15.1 of the Memorandum of Procedure for appointment and
Transfer of Chief Justices and Judges of High Courts do not correctly reflect the
position in law. These have to be revised accordingly to reflect the correct legal position,
i.e., the Executive as an important Consultee in the consultation process, has the
constitutional obligation and a right to prevent an unsuitable person from being appointed.
Goolam E. Vahanvati
Attorney General for India
N
EW D ELHI
11 January, 2010

105
105
G. E. V AHANVATI
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR INDIA
SECRET/CONFIDENTIAL
20.1.2010
Dear Mrs. Prasad,
With reference to the meeting with the Hon’ble Law Minister yesterday, I am sending
you herewith the proposed changes ‘in Paragraph 3.5 of the Memorandum of the
Procedure for Appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and Para 15.1 of the
Memorandum relating to the Procedure for appointment of Judges of the High Court.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
(G. E. Vahanvati)
Mrs. B. Prasad
Secretary
Department of Justice
Jaisalmer House
N
EW D ELHI-110011
Encls: as above.
OFF : 26, SUPREME COURT, NEW DELHI-110 001, TEL. : 23383254 FAX : 23782101
RES: 10 MOTILAL NEHRU MARG, NEW DELHI - 110 011, TEL. : 23018122
E-MAIL : goolam@vahanvati.net


106
PROPOSED CHANGES
1. Instead of the existing para 3.5, the following should be inserted:
“After receipt of the names for appointment, the Union Minister for Law and
Justice shall cause independent enquiries to be made and shall put up the file to
the Prime Minister. If the Prime Minister is of the opinion that a particular
appointment should not be made, the file will be sent back to the Chief Justice
for reconsideration. If the Chief Justice and the Collegium unanimously reiterate
the proposal, the Prime Minister shall ordinarily advise the President in the matter
of appointment, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing, he is satisfied that
such an appointment should not be made.”
2. In para 15.1 of the High Court Judges Memorandum, delete the last six lines, namely,
commencing with the words “However, where it is considered expedient... in the matter
of appointment” and substitute the same with the following:
“On receipt of the names from the CJI, the file shall be placed before the Prime
Minister. If the Prime Minister is of the opinion that a particular appointment
should not be made, the file will be sent back to the Chief Justice for reconsideration.
If the Chief Justice and the Collegium unanimously reiterate the proposal, the
Prime Minister shall ordinarily advise the President in the matter of appointment,
unless for reasons to be recorded in writing, he is satisfied that such an
appointment should not be made.”

107
107
G. E. V AHANVATI
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR INDIA
17.1.2010
Dear Mrs. Prasad,
This refers to my conversation with you regarding the opinion already given in relation
to Memorandum of Procedure for Appointment of Judges. I am sending herewith an
Additional Opinion in relation to whether the opinion rendered under Article 143(1) is
binding as law declared by the Supreme Court.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
(G. E. Vahanvati)
Mrs. B. Prasad
Secretary
Department of Justice
N
EW D ELHI-110011
Encls: as above.
OFF : 26, SUPREME COURT, NEW DELHI-110 001, TEL. : 23383254 FAX : 23782101
RES: 10 MOTILAL NEHRU MARG, NEW DELHI - 110 011, TEL. : 23018122
E-MAIL : goolam@vahanvati.net


108
108
G. E. V AHANV ATI
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR INDIA
ADDITIONAL OPINION
Re: Memorandum of Procedure for Appointment of Chief Justice and the Judges of the
Supreme Court and the High Courts
1. I have already rendered my opinion on 11 th of January, 2010 in relation to the Memorandum
of Procedure for Appointment of Chief Justice and the Judges of the Supreme Court and
the High Courts in light of the Constitution Bench Judgment in Supreme Court Advocates-
on-Record Association vs. UOI  (1993) 4 SCC 441 and the Advisory Opinion in Special
Reference No.1 of 1998, Re:, (1998) 7 SCC 739.
2. This opinion deals with the further question as to whether an opinion rendered under
Article 143(1) of the Constitution of India is binding as law declared under Article 141
of the Constitution. In my opinion, the position of law in relation to Advisory Opinion
under A1iicle 143(1) is as follows:
(A) In the first place it is well settled that the Supreme Court is not bound to give an
opinion if a reference is received by it. See the decision in Special Reference
No. 1 of 1964 (1965) 1 SCR p. 413.
(B) In the case of The Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society vs. State of Gujarat
(1974) 1 SCC 717, the Supreme Court had occasion to refer to the opinion given
by it earlier in the Presidential Reference in relation to the Kerala Education
Bill, 1957. In para 51of the judgment, it is clearly recorded that though the opinion
is not binding on the Court in a subsequent matter, it is entitled to agree to it.
(C) This position was considered by a Bench of 7 Judges in re: the Special Courts
Bill, 1978 reported in (1979) 1 SCC 380 (para 104). Para 104 shows:
(i) that the Court did not go into whether the opinion rendered under Article
143 (1) is binding as law declared under Article 141 of the Constitution but
said that this will have to be considered later.
(ii) Reference was made to the cases of the Estate Duty Bill, the UP Legislative
Assembly case. the St. Xavier’s College Society case and the Judgment of
OFF : 26, SUPREME COURT, NEW DELHI-110 001, TEL. : 23383254 FAX : 23782101
RES: 10 MOTILAL NEHRU MARG, NEW DELHI - 110 011, TEL. : 23018122
E-MAIL : goolam@vahanvati.net

109
the Privy Council in Attorney General for Ontario vs. Attorney General for
Canada to the effect that Advisory Opinions  do not have the binding force
of law . In fact, the Privy Council has held that the opinion expressed by the
Court in its Advisory Jurisdiction will have no more effect than the opinions
of Law Officers.
(iii) Having noted this, the Court felt that the opinion will be binding in the courts
in the country. In any case, all that it did was to reiterate the view in the
St. Xavier’s College Society case that such opinions would be entitled to
great weight.
(iv) Finally, the learned Judges quoted the opinion of Mr. H.M. Seervai in his
Book Constitutional Law of India that the Advisory Opinion given by the
Supreme Court has high persuasive authority  but it is not law declared by
in within the meaning of Article 141.
3. Apart from this, in my opinion, there is no question of the opinion being binding in
relation to issues which were not the subject matter of the reference. I have already
analysed at length the aspect ( viz. that the opinion travels beyond the questions asked)
in my earlier opinion, to which this is the Supplementary.
(G. E. VAHANV ATI)
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR INDIA
N
EW D ELHI;
DATED: 17.1.2010


110
APPENDIX
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY THE COMMITTEE
110
Report
No.
1
Subject of the Report
2
Date of
Presentation
4
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Right to
Information Bill, 2004.
Report on the Andhra Pradesh
Legislative Council Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Bill, 2004.
Report on the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other
Backward Classes (Reservation
in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2004 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2004.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
24.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 24.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
20.04.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.04.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
13.05.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 13.05.2005.
Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 29
th  June, 2005 and
forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha on 29
th June, 2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.07.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.07.2005.
Date of
Adoption
3
23.08.2004
-do-
16.03.2005
22.03.2005
11.04.2005
-do-
10.05.2005
07.06.2005
Session
No.
5
203
203
204
204
204
204
204
204

111
12 4 35
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
28.07.2005
02.08.2005
02.08.2005
23.08.2005
27.10.2005
17.05.2006
-do-
02.08.2006
09.11.2006
27.02.2007
08.05.2007
Report on the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Bill,
2003.
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2005.
Report on the National Tax
Tribunal Bill, 2004.
Report on the Contempt of
Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004
Report on the Prevention of
Child Marriage Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Representation of
the People (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Electoral Reforms
(Disqualification of persons from
contesting elections on framing
of charges against them for
certain offences)
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
22.05.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 22.05.2006.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
05.12.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 05.12.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
15.03.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 15.03.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007.
205
205
205
205
206
207
207
208
208
208
209

112
12 4 35
20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
29th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006, Ministry of Law and
Justice (Department of Justice).
Report on the Gram Nyayalayas
Bill, 2007, Ministry of Law and
Justice, Legislative Department.
Report on the Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training)
Report on Working of Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and
Training)
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on Action Taken Replies
on Law’s Delays : Arrears in
Courts (85
th Report of Home
Affairs)
Report on The Supreme Court
(Number of Judges) Amendment
Bill, 2008
Report on Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism
08.05.2007
01.08.2007
29.08.2007
06.09.2007
04.03.2008
24.04.2008
-do-
-do-
01.08.2008
21.10.2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.08.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.08.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
07.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
11.03.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 11.03.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008.
-do-
-do-
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2008.Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha on 22
nd October, 2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
209
210
210
210
213
213
213
213
214
214

113
12 4 35
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
Report on Constraints Being
Faced by Kendriya Bhandar
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 25
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 26
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2008
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008.
Report on the “Action Taken
Replies of the Government
on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the
29
th Report of the Committee on
“Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism”
Report on “The Constitution
(One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2008”.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 24th Report on
“Working of Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI)”
21.10.2008
16.12.2008
16.12.2008
16.02.2009
16.02.2009
14.12.2009
14.12.2009
03.03.2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.03.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.03.2010.
214
214
214
215
215
218
218
219

114
12 4 35
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on The Personal Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 23
rd Report of
the Committee on “Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground”.
Report on Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 30th Report of
the Committee on “Constraints
Being Faced by Kendriya Bhandar”.
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 38
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Report on The Constitution (One
Hundred and Fourteenth
Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Public Interest
Disclosure and Protection to
Persons Making the Disclosures
Bill, 2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
1.03.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 1.03.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 09.06.2011.Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha on
11.08.2011 and Lok Sabha on 10.08.11.
38
th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
44th
45th
46th
27.04.2010
-do-
29.07.2010
-do-
16.11.2010
-do-
07.12.2010
02.02.2011
11.05.2011
219
219
220
220
221
221
221
222
223

115
12 4 35
Report on the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010
Report on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
The Administrators-General
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
The Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on The Right of Citizens
for Time Bound Delivery of Goods
and Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Bill, 2011
Report on The Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2012.
Report on The Registration of
Births and Deaths (Amendment)
Bill, 2012
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 51
st Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
47
th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
25.08.2011
07.12.2011
24.01.2012
26.03.2012
15.05.2012
-do-
23.08.2012
11.12.2012
22.02.2013
13.03.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 02.02.2012. Laid to
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
20.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.03.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.05.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
28.08.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
27.02.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 27.02.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013.
223
224
224
225
225
225
226
227
228
228

116
12 4 35
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 52
nd Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice
Report on Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
The Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Bill, 2013
Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions.
Report on the “Electoral
Reforms-Code of Conduct for
Political Parties and Anti
Defection Law”
Report on the “S tatus of Women
Government Employees, Service
Conditions, Protection against
exploitation, Incentives and other
related Issues”
Report on the Rajasthan
Legislative Council Bill, 2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
25.04.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.04.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
2.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 2.05.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
3.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 3.05.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013
57
th
58th
59th
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
13.03.2013
23.04.2013
29.04.2013
02.04.2013
19.08.2013
29.08.2013
27.11.2013
228
228
228
228
229
229
230

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.