 
DEPAARTMENT-
PERSO
ACTIO
OF THE
P
(
 (La
          P
  
-RELATED
ONNEL, PU
Rajy
Decemb
ONE HUN
ON TAKEN
E COMMIT
PERTAININ
(MI
(Presented t
aid on the Ta
PARLIA
        RAJ
D PARLIAM
UBLIC GRIE
ya Sabha Se
er, 2022 / A
NDRED TW
N ON ONE H
TTEE ON D
NG TO THE 
INISTRY O
o the Rajya 
able of the L
 
MENT O
JYA SAB
 
 
MENTARY
EVANCES
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecretariat, N
Agrahayana,
 
 
WENTY-TH
ON 
HUNDRED
DEMANDS 
 
DEPARTM
OF LAW & J
 
Sabha on 8th
Lok Sabha on
 
 
OF INDIA
BHA 
 STANDIN
, LAW AND
 
New Delhi 
, 1944 (Saka
HIRD REPO
 SIXTEENT
FOR GRAN
MENT OF JU
JUSTICE) 
h December,
n 8th Decemb
A 
G COMMI
D JUSTICE
a) 
ORT 
TH REPOR
NTS (2022-
USTICE 
 2022) 
ber, 2022) 
TTEE ON 
E 
REPOR
12
RT 
-23) 
    RT NO. 
23 
      

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
 
 

3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 4                 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                      5               
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                              6             
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                      8              
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                   10                
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                   15             
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                  20                           
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS    
(IV)  CHAPTER IV                               32 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT 
BEEN RECEIVED 
 
5.          RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                  34           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    

4 
 
                                             COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. *Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Vandana Kumar Additional Secretary
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
__________________________ 
* Nominated in place of Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary w.e.f. 16.11.2022 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standi ng 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, hav ing been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf , do hereby 
present this One Hundred Twenty Third Report (123 rd) on Action Taken on One 
Hundred Sixteenth (116 th) Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2022-23) pertaining to the Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice). 
2. The 116 th Report of the Department-re lated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and  Justice was 
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 24th March, 
2022.  
3. The Department of Justice, of the Ministry of Law & Justice furnished 
their Action Taken Replies on the 116 th Report of the Committee on 13 th June, 
2022. The Committee considered the draft 123rd Report and adopted the same in 
its meeting held on 5th December, 2022. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observati ons and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
Dt. 5th December, 2022 SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                      Law and Justice 
 

6 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ADR Alternative Dispute Resolution 
A&N  Andaman & Nicobar 
ASO Assistant Section Officer 
BE Budget Estimates 
CJI Chief Justice of India 
CIS Case Information System 
CSOs Civil Society Organizations 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
DISHA Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Jus tice In India 
DLSA District Legal Services Authorities 
DoJ Department of Justice 
DoPT Department of Personnel & Training 
FTSCs Fast Track Special Courts 
FY Financial Year 
ICT Information Communication and Technology 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MLAs Members of Legislative Assembly 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MMP Mission Mode Project 
MPs Members of Parliament 
NALSA National Legal Services Authority 
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau 
NEJ&K North East and Jammu & Kashmir 
NJA National Judicial Academy 
NJAC National Judicial Academic Council 
NJDG National Judicial Data Grid 
PA Personal Assistant 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
POCSO Protection of Children from Sexual Offences 
RE Revised Estimates 
RG Registrar General 
SC Scheduled Castes 
SCI Supreme Court of India 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
SCLSC Supreme Court Legal Services Committee 
SJAs State Judicial Academies 
SLSA State Legal Services Authorities 
SNA Single Nodal Agency 
SMS Short Message Service 
SO Section Officer 
ST Scheduled Tribes 
TLSC Taluk Legal Services Committees 
UDC Upper Division Clerk 
UoI Union of India 
US Under Secretary 
UTs Union Territories  
WAN Wide Area Network 

8 
 
     R E P O R T  
 This Action Taken Report of the  Committee deals with the actio n taken 
by the Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice) on the  
recommendations / observations of the Department-related Parlia mentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Jus tice in its 
One Hundred Sixteenth (116 th) Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) 
pertaining to the Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Just ice), which was 
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok S abha on the 24th 
March, 2022.  
2. The Committee had made 19 r ecommendations/observations in it s 116th 
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized 
under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies 
have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations ( 3) which have been accepted 
by the Department, i.e. in respect of paras 3.17, 3.32 and 3.40 of 
the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the 
Department has accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations ( 5) which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue in view of  the replies given by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.6, 2.7, 2.15, 2.20 and 3 .15 
of the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the explanations  
advanced by the Department and does not wish to pursue those 
as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations (9) in respect of which 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. 
with regard to paras 2.12, 2.18, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.23, 3.24, 3. 33 
and 3.34 of the Report. The Committee does not accept the 
reasons given by the Department and reiterates the same. 
Chapter - IV: Recommendations/observations ( 2) in respect of which final 
replies of the Department have not been received, i.e. in respe ct 
of paras 2.23 and 3.2 of the Report, the Committee has not 
received replies.  
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish poi nted and 
detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further 
Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in this report. 

9 
 
4. The details of the ATR have b een discussed in the respective  Chapters in 
the succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report 
(i.e. of 116 th Report) have been mentioned at the end of each 
recommendation/observation.   
--- 

10 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.0 The Committee appreciates the concept of DISHA scheme that endeavors to address 
the legal needs of the people and to empower them with knowledg e of their rights, 
entitlements and different redress al mechanism. However, the co mmittee observes that, on 
the face of it, many components of  the DISHA scheme appears to be the same as that of 
NALSA. The Committee accordingly, recommends that all programme s under the scheme 
before being implemented be thoroughly analysed to ensure optim al utilization and non-
duplication of resources. (3.17) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1 Article 39 A under the Directive Principle of State Policy (DPSP) Part IV of the 
Indian Constitution obligates the State to provide equal opport unities for securing justice and 
free legal aid either though legislation or scheme or any other  way. In securing this equal 
opportunity to justice wherein no citizen is neither denied nor  deprived to access justice due 
to economic or any other disability, Government of India introd uced a scheme titled 
“Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Justice (DISHA)” in 2021. 
 
1.2 In addition, the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 mandate s Department of Justice 
(DoJ) to carry out functions under “Legal Aid to Poor and Acces s to Justice”.  In taking this 
forward DoJ has been implementing various programmes on access to justice since 2009 in a 
phased manner, in collaboration with United Nations Development  Programme (UNDP). 
During these phases the programme focused on improving institut ional capacities of key 
justice service providers enabling them to effectively serve th e poor and disadvantaged 
particularly women, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to ad dress the barriers they face 
in social, economic and political domains. On the other hand, i t focused on directly 
empowering the poor and the disadvantaged men and women to seek  and demand justice 
services. To have a more meaningful and holistic impact, DoJ pa rtnered with national, state 
and local justice institutions including the judiciary, legal services authorities (at the state and 
district level) developing legal and representational capacities of the CSOs and their networks 
working at the local level to improve access to justice for vulnerable groups. Major focus was 
on developing an affordable and replicable model of legal aid a nd empowerment that could 
be scaled up using government resources. 
 
1.3 Based on the success and learning of the DoJ – UNDP A2J pro ject, DoJ initiated 
implementation of A2J project in Jammu & Kashmir and the North Eastern States 
(hereinafter NEJK) in 2012. Aiming to address legal needs of th e marginalized and support 
justice delivery and legal service institutions, DoJ successful ly implemented 38 projects 

11 
 
through innovative models and practices including partnership w ith State Legal Service 
Authorities, State Institute of Rural Developments, Government Departments, CSOs, 
Academic Institutions etc. This a pproach has enabled DoJ in nar rowing down the gap 
between formal and traditional justice delivery system. 
 
1.4 Subsequently in 2017, DoJ launched three key legal aid and empowerment 
programmes under Access to Justice which included Tele Law (mai nstreaming legal aid at 
grassroots through technology); Nyaya Bandhu (promoting Pro bon o legal services) and 
Nyaya Mitra (facilitating reduction of pendency of 10+ year old cases). 
 
1.5 All these programmes made a gradual headway in achieving th e intended results. 
Subsequently, an evaluation study was conducted in 2020 through  National Council of 
Applied Economic Research (NCAER) that recommended for scaling up these programmes 
at an all India level. This resulted in formulation of a compre hensive, holistic, integrated and 
systemic solution on access to justice scheme titled “Designing  Innovative Solutions for 
Holistic Access to Justice in India” (DISHA). The recitals of the Scheme aims to supplements 
and complements the mandate given under the Constitutional prov isions, but also abides by 
the statutory requirement of Legal Services Authority Act, 1987  giving impetus to the 
implementation of SDG-16 in order to ensure Access to Justice f or All in the country. DoJ is 
implementing DISHA with a total outlay of Rs.250 crore for a pe riod of 2021-2026. The 
approach of DISHA includes: - 
 
i. Strengthening of Pre-litigation advice and consultation at the grassroots–  
 
 This approach is being implemented through leveraging indigeno us technological 
tools and platforms that have presence in the village or at gra m panchayat level. 
This approach is being carried forward through DoJ’s programme called Tele-Law: 
Reaching the Unreached, where in people are empowered to seek p re –litigation 
and advice and consultation through Panel Lawyers via tele/vide o conferencing 
facilities available at the Common Service Centres situated in the villages or 
through Mobile App. NALSA has presence only till the Taluk level.  
 
ii. Pan India Dispensation framework for Pro Bono Delivery of Legal Services-  
 
 This approach is being executed through Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono ) Legal 
Services Programme where in DoJ has four pronged strategies for  unlocking the 
Pro bono potential in the country. This includes creating a dat abase of probono 
lawyers, facilitating direct connect between the beneficiary an d Pro Bono Lawyer 
though mobile / web based application and following up through an online 
monitoring mechanism; embedding culture of pro bono in Law Scho ols through 
Pro Bono Club Scheme and engaging with CSOs and Law firms inclu ding 
NALSA to build a consensus for a comprehensive policy on Pro Bo no in the 
country.  
 
iii. Address pendency of 15 yearlong pending cases at the District Courts- 
 

12 
 
 To address pendency, DoJ started the Nyaya Mitra programme whe re in retired 
judge or a senior advocate has to be engaged in consultation wi th the Registrar 
General (RG) to assist in identifying gaps and effective ways t o dispose of long 
pending cases. The District courts with highest and lowest pend ency have been 
identified through the NJDG portal. Offer letter to 20 Nyaya Mi tra in 20 Districts 
in 9 States have been issued for who will work for a period of two years. There is 
no similar programme in NALSA.  
 
iv. Pan India Legal Literacy and Legal Awareness Programme-  
 
 DoJ has developed a working paper wherein five pronged strateg y is being 
promoted to build a pan India legal literacy and legal awarenes s programmes 
which includes- integration of legal literacy in and building c apacities of the 
frontline functionaries, across various ministries and departme nts, developing e-
legal literacy library, identifying indicators to assess and me asure the impact of 
legal literacy and awareness programme on the masses. 
 
v. Use of Definite Information, Education and Communication and In formation 
Communication and Technology (ICT) tools to embed the desired s ocial and 
behaviour changes to increase legal empowerment.  
 
1.6 In view of the above, it is submitted that the DISHA Scheme  is a Central Sector 
Scheme that is propounded to meet the needs, changes and concer ns of the present times and 
has been formalized to supplement and complement the delivery o f legal services in the 
country. DoJ concurrently assess the need and feasibility of th e approaches/ programmes 
before intervention and ensures optimum utilization and non-dup lication of resources. 
Embedding within each project is mandatory monitoring and evalu ation mechanism for any 
mid-course correction thereby to curate more new models/approac hes for scale up and 
replication by Legal Service Institutions or other bodies worki ng to strengthen the legal aid 
system in the country.  
 
Further Observation 
 
1.7 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1.8 The Committee appreciates the efforts of NALSA, especially during the last few 
years, for doing exceedingly well in providing Legal Services a nd spreading legal awareness 
about their entitlements to the poor and vulnerable sections of  the country. NALSA had 
declared 2021 as the year of Lok Adalats and in which a record number of cases were 
disposed off. It had also launched a 44 days campaign on 2 nd October, 2021 to enhance their 
outreach of legal services to all 6.7 Lakh villages and 4100 pl us municipal town across the 
country. The NALSA also launched a mobile app and a web portal for giving an online push 
to the legal services they are offering to the people. The Comm ittee lauds such efforts of the 
NALSA and hopes that such efforts would continue in future with even more vigour. (3.32) 

13 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.9 The Department of Justice conveys gratitude expressed by NA LSA for appreciation in 
its endeavor in providing legal services, spreading legal aware ness in particular and also 
virtual propagation (online push) through NALSA Mobile App & We b Portal. NALSA has 
assured that it would continue to make efforts with more vigour  and will try to excel in the 
field. 
 
Further Observation 
 
1.10 Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.11 The National Judicial Academy, Bhopal has the advantage of  having a quality faculty, 
infrastructure and location.  However, the Committee feels that  the institution has remained 
underutilized and there is a tremendous scope for        enhanc ing its mandate and to make it 
an institution of eminence.  Accordingly, the Committee recomme nds the Academy to 
prepare a road map for enhancing the scope of its mandate and t o seek higher allocation 
accordingly. (3.40) 
Action Taken 
 
1.12 The Academy has been established and designed to cater to the enhancement of 
judicial skills to achieve excellence amongst High Court Judges and Judicial Officers through 
the country.  This module is successfully continuing since the inauguration of the Academy 
in 2002 and its activities have also expanded thereafter as ove r and above, Judges from 
foreign nations are regularly trained in special programmes tha t are conducted on weekdays 
so as not to disturb the weekend programmes for domestic Judges .NJA is conducting training 
programmes of Judicial Officers from Bangladesh, Maldives, Nepa l ,  S r i  L a n k a ,  M y a n m a r ,  
etc. 
 
1.13 The Academy was compelled during the pandemic to switch ov er to online mode, but 
despite the odds, the sessions of the various programmes were s cheduled and executed 
successfully with substantial participation of Judges and Judicial Officers. 
 
1.14 Apart from regular programmes that are conducted on Saturd ays and Sundays, since 
Judges and Judicial Officers are c onveniently available at week ends only, the Academy also 
runs parallel programmes at times simultaneously to accommodate  the topics as decided by 
the National Judicial Academic Council. 
 
1.15 Some special programmes are designed for officials and per sonnel involved in the 
adjudicatory process in the administration like for Income-Tax Commissioners and other 
Senior Officials, Public Prosecutors, Senior Officials of the C ustoms & Excise Department, 
Legal Services Authorities, Central Administrative Tribunal Off icials, etc.  This is ever 
increasing as for e.g. in the current year, the Academy is about to host a 4-day programme for 

14 
 
Senior Officials of the Governor’s Secretariat to acquaint them  about the constitutional and 
other statutory duties of a Governor under the Constitution. 
 
1.16 Consequently, with the given infrastructure and available resources, the Academy 
continues in its endeavour to enhance the skills of Judges, Judicial Officers and other officials 
to the best of its capacity with a vision to encompass all stak eholders connected with judicial 
governance. 
 
1.17 The Academy additionally has been able to conduct programm es for its participants in 
collaboration with foreign instit utions like the Federal Judici al Centre-Washington, CEELI-
Prague, SIFoCC-UK, Singapore Inte rnational Arbitration Centre, etc. ensuring the 
availability of a substantial number of renowned personalities of international fame enriching 
the quality of discourses at the Academy. 
 
1.18 For further supplementing the activities of the Academy, t he same would be discussed 
at the NJAC meeting to visualize more benefits for the audience  and participants at the 
Academy. 
 
Further Observation 
 
1.19 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
--- 
 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN 
BY THE MINISTRY 
OVER ALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 The Committee observes that the Department has been able to  spend only about 55% 
of the overall funds earmarked for RE 2021-22 and about 45% of the funds are still left with 
to be spent in the remaining two months of the financial year. In this connection it may be 
stated that as per the instructions issued by the MoF, expendit ure in the last quarter has to be 
restricted to 33% ceiling and last month (March) expenditure to  15% ceiling. Thus 
performance of the Department in terms of utilization of funds leaves much to be desired. A 
focused planning and close monitoring of utilization of funds i s required on the part of the 
Department. As restrictions imposed on expenditure due to COVID  a r e  w a n i n g ,  t h e  
Department should meet the quarterly expenditure targets set by the MoF. (2.6) 
 
2.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department sh ould identify the 
bottlenecks responsible for not being able to maintain the pace  of utilization required as per 
the instructions of the MoF and take remedial measures to impro ve its performance in 
utilization of funds in future.  (2.7) 
 
Action Taken  
2.2 In the financial year 2021-22, against allocation of Rs.770 .44 crore for the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) on development of judicial infrastructur e in district and 
subordinate courts, the expenditure was Rs. 684.14 crore (89%),  involving a saving of 
Rs.86.30 crore or 11% of allocated amount. The reasons for low expenditure are as under: 
 
(i)         The COVID 19 pandemic affected the construction activities adversely. 
 
(ii)        Introduction of revised Public Financial Management  System (PFMS) procedure for 
release of funds to the CSS in terms of Ministry of Finance’s o rders dated 23.03.2021 
which entails wide range of activities on the part of the State s/UTs  to migrate to the 
new system which includes changes in interface, modification in  s o f t w a r e  
applications, pilot testing, opening of separate budget heads/l ines for routing the 
Central and State share of funds for which a separate dedicated  account is required. In 
this dedicated account the unspent balance available with the S tate (both Central and 
State share) along with interest thereon is required to be depo sited, after withdrawing 
it from different accounts where this fund was lying. This requires involvement of line 
Department of the State, their Finance Department, the High Cou rts, Legislatures and 
banking institutions in the States. All the States have not bee n able to make the 
necessary changes as mandated by the new PFMS system.   

16 
 
(iii)      Further, as per the n ew guidelines, the release can be made to a State, only if funds 
upto 75% of the last release made earlier have been utilized by  the State. On account 
of COVID pandemic, the construction activities were also advers ely affected, as a 
r e s u l t  o f  w h i c h  s o m e  s t a t e s  a r e  n o t  a b l e  t o  g i v e  t h e  U t i l i z a t i on Certificate for the 
releases made earlier.   
 
2.3 Thus on account of unspent balance and non-transition to th e revised PFMS procedure, 
the release of funds was at a slower pace. However, through tra inings on PFMS and regular 
review meetings through video conferencing the States/UTs are b eing sensitized, so that all 
the States comply with PFMS procedures and funds can get releas ed and utilized timely in 
the current financial year 2022-23.  
 
Further observation 
2.4 The Committee takes note of the reply. However, the Departm ent of Justice is 
expected to persuade all the States to boost up their construct ion activities as the effects 
of COVID have almost waned, so as the States could submit their  utilization certificate 
for releasing fresh funds under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS).  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5 “e-Courts Mission Mode Project is an important Scheme of th e Department aimed at 
improving access to justice using technology. The Committee is appreciative of the fact that 
Phase II of the project has performed exceedingly well. However , for the present financial 
year, the Committee is surprised and disappointed to note that half of the allocation under the 
scheme has remained unspent. Further, as it was well known in a dvance that Phase II was 
scheduled to end on 31.03.2022, in spite of this, the Departmen t failed to proactively prepare 
and get necessary approvals for Phase-III of the project. This has led to almost no allocation 
being made for the scheme for the BE 2022-23, except for a noti onal allocation of Rs. 1.00 
crore. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to g et necessary approvals for 
Phase III on priority and approach the MoF for further allocati on on priority, at an 
appropriate stage.” (2.15) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6 The total budget allocation for the eCourts Project Phase-I I in RE 2021-22 was Rs. 
98.82 crore. The initial delay in the expenditure flow was due to delay in finalization of the 
works program and project proposals by the eCommittee of the Su preme Court which is 
chaired by Hon’ble Judge of the Supreme Court.  By 31
st March, 2022, Rs.98.30 crore which 
is 99.47 % of the allocation has been released. 
 
2.7 The vision document of eCourts Project Phase-III has alread y been prepared by the 
eCommittee, Supreme Court of India and was circulated in public domain for their comments. 
More than 1700 comments were received which have been incorpora ted in the revised vision 
document. Further, drafts versions of Detailed Project Report ( DPR) of the eCourts Project 
Phase-III have been prepared. The final version of the draft DP R is being prepared by 
eCommittee, Supreme Court of India. All efforts are being made out to complete to DPR of 
eCourts Project Phase-III early and the Department of Justice is in almost day to day touch of 

17 
 
the eCommitte for this purpose. As soon as the DPR is received from eCommittee, process of 
necessary approval from Ministry of Finance and Cabinet, will be started. 
 
Further Observation  
 
2.8 The Committee takes note of the reply. However, the Committ ee is concerned 
about no amount being spent for the FY 2022-23 for want of nece ssary approvals. With 
a big push for an e-court system for the whole country, e-Court s Mission Mode Project 
of the Department assumes greater importance. Accordingly, the DoJ is expected to 
expedite all the necessary appr ovals for implementing the Phase  -  I I I  o f  t h e  e C o u r t s  
Project.  
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
2.9 In the year 2021-22 the BE of Rs. 11.00 crores was signific antly enhanced to Rs. 
34.25 crores. However, till 31.01.2022, the NJA was able to spe nd less than half of the funds 
allocated under RE. The BE for 2022-23 was got reduced to Rs. 2 0.00 crores. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends the NJA to be more proficien t in expenditure of funds 
allocated to them. The Academy should identify the bottlenecks responsible for not being 
able to utilize the allocated funds and take remedial measures to improve its performance in 
utilization of funds in future. (2.20) 
Action Taken 
 
2.10 The National Judicial Acade mic Council (NJAC) in its meeti ng held on 31.07.2021 
approved the academic calendar for the academic year 2021-22 to  conduct academic 
programmes by online mode due to pandemic COVID-19. 
 
2.11 Accordingly, the academic programs of the Academy are bein g conducted via online 
mode only and no physical service was started during financial year 2021-22, resulting 
unspent amount around of Rs.6.00 crore under the heads i.e. Cat ering Expenses, 
Housekeeping Expenses, Travelling Expenses-Academic programmes,  Transportation 
Expenses, Participant Bags, PA & Sound system, Video & Photogra phy, Preparation of 
Reading Materials, Laundry Services, Yoga Teacher Fee, Regional  Programmes Expenses, 
Cable charges, Misc. Guest House Expenses, Medical Service & Ex penses, HVAC System 
etc. was not incurred. 
 
2.12 Further, during the financial year 2021-22, lockdown in th e Bhopal city was imposed 
for few months by the local administration due to second wave o f COVID-19 pandemic, 
hence, the repair & maintenance activities of the Academy were adversely affected. 
 
2.13 The Funds of Rs.20.00 crore allocated in favour of Nationa l Judicial Academy for 
2022-23 would be utilized by the Academy for conducting academic programs for 2022-23 as 
per the academic calendar to be approved by the National Judicial Academic Council (NJAC) 
of the Academy in the ensuing meeting and for day to day operat ion and repair & 
maintenance activities of the Academy. 

18 
 
 
Further observation  
 
2.14 The Committee takes note of the reply. However, the Academ y needs to be more 
realistic in terms of making projections to the MoF, based on t he expenditure made 
previously.   
 
POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2.15 The Gram Nyayalayas were envisaged to make justice deliver y more accessible and 
affordable for the people at the grassroots. However, even after more than 12 years of coming 
into force the Gram Nyayalayas are yet to take off in the country. Only 15 states have notified 
them and about half of those are yet to be operationalized. Thi s is in spite of the fact that 
financial assistance is being given to States, by the Centre, to operationalize them. The apathy 
of States and challenges enumerated above by the Department has  made this institution 
almost defunct. The Committee therefore, recommends the Departm ent to ponder seriously 
over continuation of this scheme anymore. The funds under this may be diverted to some 
other new scheme(s) or any existing scheme, which is working well. (3.15) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.16 It is submitted that setting up of Gram Nyayalaya is the p rimary responsibility of the 
State Government in consultation with the respective High Courts. However, setting up of the 
Gram Nyayalayas is not mandatory on their part as per the Gram Nyayalayas Act.  These 
Gram Nyayalayas aim to provide justice to the rural poor at the ir doorsteps.  The Central 
Government as a hand holding exercise provides financial assistance to the State Government 
@ Rs.27.60 lakh per Gram Nyayalaya [Rs.18 lakh (Rs.10 lakh for office building + Rs.5 lakh 
for vehicle +Rs.3 lakh for furnishing the office) and upto Rs.3 .2 lakh per year for three years 
after its operationalization]. Thus, the total central assistan ce given to a Gram Nyayalaya in 
its entire life is Rs.27.60 lakh only. After three years of its  operation, it survives on State 
grants only. 
 
2.17 As per the data uploaded on the Gram Nyayalaya portal, 43, 914 cases (1,424 civil and 
42,490 criminal) were disposed in 258 functional Gram Nyayalaya s from December 2020 to 
February 2022 (@around 135 cases p er year). Despite various iss ues hampering the growth 
of these Gram Nyayalayas, in some States, wherever the Gram Nya yalayas are operational, 
their functioning is reasonably efficient. 
 
2.18 To improve the functioning of the Gram Nyayalayas, it has been decided that central 
funding will be provided not at the time of notification but on ly on operationalisation of the 
Gram Nyayalaya. Further, 3
rd party evaluation of the scheme of the scheme is also to be don e 
after a year of the extension of the scheme, which will also be got done shortly. 
 

19 
 
2.19 The following challenges have been found out in operationa lization and implementing 
of  GramNyayalayas in implementing States: 
 
(i)         It is not mandatory on the part of State Government s to set up Gram 
Nyayalayas; 
(ii)        There is a need to widen the jurisdiction of the Gr am Nyayalayas to avoid 
pendency of the cases to reduce workload in the Municipal courts; 
(iii)      There is a need to provide basic infrastructure, ICT  facilities and CIS system 
for efficient conduct of Mobile Courts for the Gram Nyayalayas; 
(iv)       The creation of Nyayadhikari post and filling up of vacancies of 
independent  Nyayadhikari  is the key to success of the Gram Nyayalayas; 
(v)        Mobile courts are functional only in some states; 
(vi)       Non-availability of public prosecutors, notaries and  other facilities and lack of 
interest shown by advocates for working in the Gram Nyayalayas is another 
challenge; 
(vii)      Training of the Gram Nyayadhikari is needed to make him aware of legal 
procedural requirements; 
(viii)     There is need to give wide publicity about date and place of holding of mobile 
courts and adequate security for Mobile Courts is also needed; 
(ix)       Overlapping jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas with regular courts;  
(x)        Shortage of First Class Judicial Magistrates to man the Gram Nyayalayas; and 
(xi)       Reluctance of police and other state functionaries to appear before them.   
 
2.20 The proposal for extension of the scheme was placed before  the Government. The 
Gram Nyayalaya Scheme has been extended for five more years bey ond 31.03.2021 i.e. up to 
31.03.2026, without any change in the funding pattern , with budgetary outlay of Rs.50.00 
crore, subject to the following conditions: 
 
(i)       The funds for the Gram Nyayalayas will henceforth be released only after they 
have been notified as well as made operational along with the a ppointment of 
Nyayadhikaris and reported on the Gram Nyayalayas Portal of the  Department 
of Justice.   
(ii)      A review of the performance of Gram Nyayalayas will b e done after one year to 
assess its efficacy as an instit ution in providing speedy and a ffordable justice to 
the rural marginalized and decide on its future.  
 
Further Observation 
 
2.21 In view of the reply furnished above by the DoJ, the Commi ttee does not wish to 
pursue the matter further for the time being. 
 
--- 
 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEP T THE REASONS GIVEN BY 
THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS 
OVER ALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 The development of judicial infrastructure at District and Subordinate level has not 
kept pace with ever increasing case load instituted every year.  In this scenario this Scheme 
assumes much importance. However, the Committee has noticed tha t this Scheme is already 
plagues with many challenges like non-receipt of utilization ce rtificates from states, slump in 
construction activities during COVID 19 etc. Apart from this, t he new PFMS and other 
additional requirements of the Ministry of Finance have further  created hurdles in release of 
funds to States under this Scheme. Due to this, about half of t he funds remained unspent 
during the present financial year. The Committee therefore reco mmends that the new PFMS 
and other additional requirements for release of funds under th is Scheme may be relaxed by 
the Ministry of Finance for the financial year 2022-23.  (2.12) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.1 In the financial year 2021-22, against allocation of Rs.770 .44 crore for the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) on development of judicial infrastructur e in district and 
subordinate courts, the expenditu r e  w a s  R s . 6 8 4 . 1 4  c r o r e  ( 8 9 % )  involving a saving of 
Rs.86.30 crore or 11% of allocated amount. 
 
3.2 In the financial year 2021-22, having regard to the problem s faced by the States/UTs 
in transiting to the new PFMS system, the matter was taken with  Ministry of Finance to 
exempt the two schemes of the Department of Justice viz CSS for  Judicial Infrastructure and 
CSS for setting up of Fast Track Special Courts, from the purvi ew of Ministry of Finance’s 
OM dated 23.03.2021 till 31.03.2022.  However, this was not agr eed to by the Ministry of 
Finance communicated vide their OM dated 04.01.2022. It was men tioned that relaxation, 
with reference to any particular clause, if any, may be taken u p with them along with 
appropriate justification for the same. Earlier Ministry of Fin ance had given relaxation in 
completion of some activities till December 2021 vide their OM dated 30.09.2021.  It was 
accordingly requested that the relaxations given vide this OM d ated 30.09.2021 may be 
extended upto 31.03.2022 for the two schemes of DoJ, which was ultimately agreed to by the 
Ministry of Finance vide their OM dated 09.02.2022. Through trainings on PFMS and regular 
review meetings through video conferencing the States/UTs are b eing sensitized, so that all 
the States comply with PFMS procedures and funds can get releas ed and utilized timely in 
the current financial year 2022-23. 
 
3.3 As a number of States are still grappling with the revised PFMS procedure, 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, that t he new PFMS and other 

21 
 
additional requirements for release of funds under this Scheme may be relaxed by the 
Ministry of Finance for the financial year 2022-23, are welcomed. 
 
Further observation 
 
3.4 As the DoJ has admitted that the States are still grappling  with the revised 
PFMS procedure which may again lead to non-utilization of funds  sanctioned to such 
States, the Committee fails to understand why the MoF is so unr elenting in pushing 
PFMS conditionalities on the States; that too when States in pa st few years have not be 
a b l e  t o  s p e n t  f u l l y  t h e  f u n d s  a l l o c a t e d  t o  t h e m  d u e  t o  C O V I D .  Accordingly, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation and directs the DoJ to again approach the 
MoF with proper justification, for relaxing the new PFMS and ot her additional 
requirements for release of funds under this Scheme for at-least a year.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.5 In this regard, the Committee observes that the majority of  the Indian population is 
eligible for legal aid. However, as per 'India Justice Report, 2019' published by the Tata 
Trusts, per capita free legal aid spend in India is just 0.75 p a i s e  p e r  a n n u m  ( i n  2 0 1 7 - 1 8 ) ,  
which is perhaps amongst lowest in the world. Though funding le gal services authorities is 
also the responsibility of States, there is a dire need to sign ificantly enhance expenditure on 
this front. Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends that  Grant-in-aid to NALSA 
should be substantially increased and for BE 2022-23 they shoul d be provided with the 
amount projected by them to the MoF i.e. Rs. 300 crores, in ord er to carry out activities 
planned by them for the year 2022-23. (2.18) 
     
Action Taken 
 
3.6 Projected demand of Rs.300 crore of National Legal Services  Authority (NALSA) 
was further conveyed by Department of Justice to the Ministry o f Finance against which 
Rs.170 crore under BE has been allocated for the year 2022-23. Based on the resources 
available and other relevant factors, allocation of funds is de cided by Ministry of Finance 
after making an objective assessment of the needs and requireme nts projected by the 
Department. It is submitted that during the financial year 2021 -22, BE allocation of Rs.100 
crore was increased to Rs.145 crore at RE stage. Department of Justice will strongly convey 
requirement of Rs.300 crore as Grant-in-aid to NALSA during 2022-23 at RE stage. 
 
Further observation  
 
3.7 The legal aid movement in India is far from being fully dev eloped. Only recently 
the Chief Justice of India has opined that Legal Aid is a negle c t e d  a s p e c t  o f  l a w .  I n  
terms of expenditure also, our spending per head on legal aid i s perhaps amongst the 
lowest in the world. Thus, in this background the Committee had  emphasised the need 
to significantly enhance our spending on the legal aid to fulfi l the mandate of access to 
justice for all. The NALSA in their deposition before the Commi ttee had informed that 
against the budgetary requirements of Rs. 421 crores for the FY  2022-23, they had 

22 
 
made a projection of Rs. 300 crores, out of which they have rec eived an allocation of Rs. 
170 crores only. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its reco mmendation in this 
regard for providing NALSA sufficient funds for fulfilling its statutory mandate.  
 
POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.8 The Committee observes that  the judicial system of the coun try is plagued with 
perennial problems of vacancy and pendency, especially at the H igh Court's level and there is 
no end in sight for these problems. Both the problems are inter woven in a way that vacancies 
have a natural fall out on pendency of cases. The figures regar ding vacancies and pendency 
are staggering. One has to acknowledge that the existing proces s is not working and it 
overwhelms us completely, it needs to be re-engineered. (3.8)  
3.9 The Committee fails to understand that even if the date of vacancy of a particular post 
becomes known the day a Judge assumes charge, then why such a h uge delay in first sending 
recommendations by the collegium and then its processing by the  Government. The 
Committee has also observed a recent phenomenon that because of  delays in appointments, 
many lawyers have started saying no to such appointments. No respectable lawyer is prepared 
to wait ad infinitum and thus there have been spate of refusals  by them. The Committee in its 
87th Report on inordinate delay in filling up of vacancies in t he Supreme Court and High 
Courts have observed/recommended the following:  
 
".... The Committee expresses its deep sense of disappointment and anguish that 
the timelines laid in the Second Judges Case and the MoP are not being adhered 
to and are violated with impunity wh ich is leading to extraordinary and 
unacceptable delay in filling up of the vacancies. The Committee recommends that 
an institutional mechanism should be evolved , so that retirement of a particular 
Judge and appointment against the resultant vacancy is simultaneously 
completed. Such a mechanism will be in the interest of the judicial administration 
and its efficacy. For this to happen the timelines for completion of various stages 
of appointment process in all Constitutional Courts should not only be firmly laid 
in the Memorandum of Procedure but also needs to be scrupulously adhered to by 
all Constitutional authorities." (3.9) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10 
 As per the existing Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges of High 
Courts, the Chief Justice of the High Court is required to init iate the proposal for 
filling up of vacancies of a Judge in a High Court six months p rior to the occurrence 
of vacancies.  Government appoints only those persons as Judges  of High Courts who 
are recommended by Supreme Court Collegium (SCC). The primary o nus of filling 
up vacancies in the High Court lies with the High Court Collegium. 
 

23 
 
 As on 26.05.2022, against the sanctioned strength of 1104 Judge s in the High Courts, 
711 Judges are in position, leaving 393 vacancies of Judges to be filled. Against 393 
vacancies, 190 proposals are at various stages of processing be tween the Government 
and the Supreme Court Collegium. Recommendations from High Cour t Collegiums 
are yet to be received in respect of 203 vacancies in High Courts. 
 
 During the year 2021, 09 Judges were appointed in the Supreme C ourt, 11 Chief 
Justices, 120 fresh Judges were appointed and 63 Additional Jud ges were made 
permanent across various High Courts. Also in the year 2022, up  to 26.05.2022, 02 
Judges have been appointed in the Supreme Court, 01 Chief Justi ce, 53 Judges were 
appointed in the High Courts and 13 Additional Judges of the Hi gh Courts were made 
permanent across various High Courts. 
 
 Filling up of vacancies in the High Courts is a continuous, int egrated and 
collaborative process between the Executive and the Judiciary. It requires consultation 
and approval from various constitutional authorities both at st ate and central level. 
Hence, the time for filling up of vacancies of the Judges in the higher Judiciary cannot 
b e  i n d i c a t e d .  W h i l e  e v e r y  e f f o r t  i s  m a d e  t o  f i l l  u p  t h e  e x i s t i ng vacancies 
expeditiously, vacancies of Judges in High Courts do keep on ar ising on account of 
retirement, resignation or elevation of Judges and also due to increase in the strength 
of Judges.  
 
3.11 As per the existing Memorandum of Procedure for appointmen t of Judges of High 
Courts, the Chief Justice of the High Court is required to init iate the proposal for filling up of 
vacancies of a Judge in a High Court six months prior to the oc currence of vacancies.  
Government appoints only those persons as Judges of High Courts  who are recommended by 
Supreme Court Collegium (SCC). The primary onus of filling up v acancies in the High Court 
lies with the High Court Collegium. 
 
 As on 26.05.2022, against the sanctioned strength of 1104 Judge s in the High Courts, 
711 Judges are in position, leaving 393 vacancies of Judges to be filled. Against 393 
vacancies, 190 proposals are at various stages of processing be tween the Government 
and the Supreme Court Collegium. Recommendations from High Cour t Collegiums 
are yet to be received in respect of 203 vacancies in High Courts. 
 
 In the year 2021, 251 recommendations were made by the High Cou rt Collegium. So 
far (as on 26.05.2022) out of these 251 recommendations,  
148 appointments have been made in the various High Courts and 74 names were not 
recommended by the Supreme Court Collegium and accordingly remi tted to 
concerned High Courts. This amounts to 30% rejection at the lev el of Supreme Court 
Collegium. Out of the remaining 29 proposals are at various sta ges of processing 
between the Government and the Supreme Court Collegium. 
 
 Filling up of vacancies in the High Courts is a continuous, int egrated and 
collaborative process between the Executive and the Judiciary. It requires consultation 
and approval from various constitutional authorities both at st ate and central level. 

24 
 
Hence, the time for filling up of vacancies of the Judges in the higher Judiciary cannot 
b e  i n d i c a t e d .  W h i l e  e v e r y  e f f o r t  i s  m a d e  t o  f i l l  u p  t h e  e x i s t i ng vacancies 
expeditiously, vacancies of Judges in High Courts do keep on ar ising on account of 
retirement, resignation or elevation of Judges and also due to increase in the strength 
of Judges.  
 
Further observation 
 
3.12 The Committee is not in the agreement with the comments of  the DoJ that "the 
time for filling up of vacancies of the Judges in the higher Ju diciary cannot be 
indicated". The timeline has been drawn in the 2 nd J u d g e s  C a s e  a n d  a l s o  i n  t h e  
Memorandum of Procedure (MOP) regarding appointment of Judges. But regrettably, 
those time lines are not adhere to by both, the Judiciary and t he Executive, which is 
leading to delay in filling up of the vacancies. As per the dat a provided by the 
Government, as on 31.12.2021, there are 3 HCs (Telangana, Patna  and Delhi) where 
vacancies are more than 50% and 10 HCs where vacancies are more  than 40% of their 
respective sanctioned strength. These all are large states, whe re judge to population 
ratio is already skewed and such level of vacancies is a matter  of deep concern. 
Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommendations in th i s  r e g a r d .  T h e  
Government and the Judiciary should come up with some out of bo x thinking to deal 
with this perennial problem of vacancies in the HCs.  
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
3.13 Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommendation a s referred above and also 
recommends that the entire process of appointment of Judges, particularly at the High Courts, 
should be relooked into. A workable and efficient process, incl uding a proactive timeline 
should be drawn and scrupulously adhered to, by synergizing the  efforts of the Judiciary and 
the Government. (3.10) 
Action Taken 
3.14 
 In order to make the Collegium system of appointments of Judges  of the Supreme 
Court and High Courts more broa d-based, transparent, accountabl e and bringing 
objectivity in the system, the Government brought into force the Constitution (Ninety-
Ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 and the National Judicial Appointmen ts Commission 
Act, 2014 w.e.f. 13.04.2015. However, both the Acts were challe nged in the Supreme 
Court. The Supreme Court vide Judgment dated 16.10.2015 declare d both the Acts as 
unconstitutional and void. The Collegium system as existing pri or to the enforcement 
of the Constitution (Ninety-Ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 was decl ared to be 
operative. Subsequently, the Supreme Court vide order dated 16. 12.2015 directed the 
Government to finalize the exis ting MoP by supplementing it in consultation with the 
Supreme Court Collegium taking into consideration eligibility c riteria, transparency, 
establishment of secretariat and mechanism to deal with complaints.  
 

25 
 
 The Government of India after due deliberations, proposed chang es in the existing 
MoP and the draft MoP’s were sent to the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India vide letter 
dated 22.03.2016. The response of the Chief Justice of India th ereon was received on 
25.05.2016 and 01.07.2016. The views of the Government were con veyed to the 
Chief Justice of India on 03.08.2016. The inputs on the MoP of the Supreme Court 
Collegium was received from Chief Justice of India vide letter dated 13.03.2017. 
 
 In another judgment dated 4.7.2017 of Supreme Court in a “suo m oto” contempt 
proceeding against a Judge of the Calcutta High Court, the Supr eme Court has 
underlined the need to revisit the process of selection and app ointment of Judges to 
the Constitutional Courts. The G overnment of India has conveyed  the need to make 
improvement on the draft MoP to the Secretary General of the Su preme Court vide 
letter dated 11.07.2017. The MoP is under finalization by the G overnment in 
consultation with the Supreme Court Collegium. 
 
Further Observation  
3.15 The Committee is surprised to note that the Supreme Court and the Government 
have failed to reach at a consensus on revision of the Memorand um of Procedure (MOP) 
for appointment of Judges to the constitutional courts, though the same is under 
consideration of both for about seven years now. The Committee expects the 
Government and the Judiciary to finalize the revised MOP, which  is more efficient and 
transparent, in terms of the Supreme Courts observation cited above.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.16 Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs) were meant to bring down  substantially the 
pendency of cases related to heinous crimes like rape and POCSO  Act at the district and 
subordinate court levels. However after assessing the performan ce of these courts in the past 
two decades the Committee observes that these courts remained ' Fast' in namesake only. 
About 1.84 Lakh cases are presently pending in these FTSCs and as per NCRB data even the 
cases disposed by the FTSCs took anywhere between one to 10 yea rs for their disposal. Lack 
of Judges, rigorous procedures and frequent adjournments are so me of the main reasons for 
dysfunctionality of the fast track courts.  (3.23) 
 
3.17 The Committee, therefore, recommends that in addition to e stablishment of more 
FTSCs the Department should also study and suggest how systemic  improvement may be 
brought about to make the fast track courts truly faster. The C ommittee further recommends 
the Department to explore the best practices in other countries where FTCs are functional and 
have been able to dispose of cases in a time bound manner and t o bring about the required 
changes in our system to make it more efficient. (3.24) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.18 In pursuance of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2018, the Department of Justice is 
implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Fast Track Special  Courts since October 
2019 for expeditious disposal of rape and POCSO Act cases. 

26 
 
 
3.19 The scheme embarked to establish 1023 Fast Track Special C ourts including 389 
exclusive POCSO Courts in 31 Stat es/UTs for the speedy disposal  and removal of pendency 
of rape and POCSO Act cases. The scheme was initially for a per iod of one year spreading 
over two Financial Years.  
 
3.20 A Third Part Party Evaluation was conducted by the Nationa l Productivity Council in 
2020 which recommended the continuation of the scheme along wit h the following 
recommendations for achieving the overall effectiveness of the FTSCs. These includes:  
 
a. Strengthening of the investigatio n agencies, Forensic Science L aboratories, and 
Victim Compensation Schemes.  
b. Ensuring timely submissions of DNA reports, depute the appropri ate number of 
Public Prosecutors, appropriate number of Vulnerable Witness De position Centres 
(VWCDs) and ensuring child-frien dly response for deposition of testimonies of the 
witnesses.  
c. Regular furnishing of data by t he FTSCs on the online portal of  the Department of 
Justice. 
 
3.21 The recommendations of the NPC were sent to the Law Secret ary of States/UTs, 
Registrar Generals of High Courts and other concerned Ministries for their compliance. 
 
3.22 With respect to best practices followed by other countries ,  i t  h a s  b e e n  f o u n d  t h a t  
Ghana introduced a qualitative standard for speed in the legal system, through the use of 
computers for efficient case management and speedy disposal of c a s e s .  A  t i m e  p e r i o d  
requirement was placed on the disposal of these cases by specif ying that they would have to 
b e  d i s p o s e d  o f  w i t h i n  6  m o n t h s .  A u s t r a l i a  h a s  h a d  a  f a s t  t r a c k  court system in place since 
2006 for deciding commercial and intellectual property disputes. The fast track courts aim for 
the delivery of judgment within 6 weeks of trial through the ab olition of pleadings, 
determination of interlocutory applications on the papers, and restricted discovery. The 
United Kingdom, in Part 28 of its Code of Civil Procedure, outl ines a fast track process that 
can be followed by the regular Courts. The procedure to be foll owed here emphasises the 
arrangements to be made prior to the trial itself, such as sett ing a timetable and listing out the 
evidence that will be submitted. The timetable is to ensure tha t the case is disposed of in a 
timely and efficient manner. Each country has their own set of fast track procedures and 
systems, however, the procedure and systems of the countries ca nnot be adopted in totality as 
Fast Track Courts in other jurisdictions are for civil cases an d FTSCs in India deals with 
criminal cases. 
 
3.23 However, this department has recommended a disposal plan f o r  t h e  F T S C s  t o  b e  
followed. Each FTSC is expected to dispose of, 41-42 cases in e ach quarter and at least 165 
cases in a year in order to remove the pendency. As on 31.03.20 22, 722 FTSCs including 406 
e-POCSO have been made functional in 28 States/UTs which have d isposed of more than 
87,100 cases since their inception. 
 
 

27 
 
Further Observation 
 
3.24 The Committee takes note of the reply. There is a need to revamp the FTSCs in 
accordance with the recommendations of the 'Third Part Party Ev aluation' referred 
above and the disposal plan for the FTSCs suggested by the Depa rtment. These reforms 
should be implemented and monitored on continuous basis in orde r to make these 
Courts truly 'fast track'.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.25 NALSA has recently completed 25 years of its establishment , accordingly, it is also 
the right time to ponder over reforms which are required in NAL SA and legal aid movement 
in India. Majority of Indians are eligible to receive legal aid , but the number of people 
actually receiving legal aid is a miniscule percentage of those  entitled. In the previous 
chapter, the Committee has already recommended a significant in crease in NALSA's budget 
and expects NALSA to make best use of it in performing its assigned mandate. (3.33) 
Action Taken 
 
3.26 It has been informed by NALSA that although majority of In dians are eligible to 
receive legal aid, only minuscule percentage of those entitled are actually availing the 
services provided by Legal Services Authorities, since a large number of categories are 
eligible even without application of means test. 
 
3.27 It has been further informed by NALSA that the National Me et of SLSAs is proposed 
to be organized shortly, wherein Hon’ble  Executive Chairperson s  o f  S t a t e  L e g a l  S e r v i c e s  
Authorities and Ld. Member Secretaries of State Legal Services Authorities will also 
participate with Central Authority i.e. NALSA, and will discuss  the issues pertaining to court 
based legal services i.e. Strengthening Front Offices as One St op Centre , Free Legal Aid, 
Advice, Counselling, Legal Aid Defence Counsel System, Legal As sistance at Pre-Arrest, 
Arrest and Remand Stages, Legal Aid To Prisoners, Pro Bono Lega l Services etc. will be 
deliberated and the strategy and methodology will be prepared. 
 
3.28 Strengthening Legal Services Institutions at grassroot lev el always remains the 
priority area and NALSA is focusing on several measures includi ng but not limited to 
following:  
 
1. People Centric Approach
: Work on “Beneficiary (Litigant) First Approach”, which 
w i l l  p l a c e  t h e  l i t i g a n t  a t  t h e  c e n t r e  o f  l e g a l  s e r v i c e  p r o v i s i on. NALSA will ensure 
increased monitoring and evaluation of legal services, in order  t o  e n s u r e  t h a t  m o r e  
effective and competent services are provided to meet the expec tations of legal aid 
beneficiary. 
 
2. One Nation-One DLSA : NALSA has already issued Regulations and SOPs for Pan 
India uniformity but still it is felt that more clearer and ela borative business rules are 
required for grassroot level district authority thus Uniform ru le of business in all 
District Legal Services Authorities (DLSAs) is need of the hour  a n d  N A L S A  i s  

28 
 
working over the same. Improvised processes to be incorporated to increase the 
outreach and legal literacy initiatives, for increasing vibrancy for legal services. 
 
3. Use of Digital Platform : Use of AI and digital platform from top to bottom for 
deliverable services as well as for monitoring quality of servi ce will be put in place 
during current year. An ODR platform for Pre-Institution Mediat ion (PIM) in 
commercial matters and also for all other Mediations in court a nnexed ADR/ 
Mediation centres of Legal services institutions will be launch ed soon, which will be 
first Online dispute resolution (ODR) platform in Government se ctor. We have 
already facilitated online filing of application for commercial  mediation through 
NALSA mobile App and portal in 10 languages. NALSA is already i n deliberations 
with NIC for a robust monitoring platform for accountability and efficiency.  
 
 In the period of turbulence caused by the COVID pandemic, Lega l Services 
Authorities appropriately responded by creatively adapting to t he new normal and 
successfully moved the conventional Lok Adalat to the virtual p latform enabling 
doorstep delivery of justice to common man. 
 
4. Incremental Expansion of Legal Aid Defence Counsel System:
 After successfully 
running the pilot project of Legal Aid Defence Counsel System (LADCS) at 13 places 
in 13 States, the Committee, constituted by the Central Authority has recommended to 
adopt full time lawyers engagement system for providing qualita tive and competent 
legal services to poor, marginalised and needy after comparing with counsel 
assignment system (Panel Lawyers scheme) at DLSA level. This sy stem is in line 
with Public defender system and will be fully operationalized i n  c u r r e n t  y e a r  i n  
following manner: 
 
i. 250 places (HQ- as per selection & availability of space) lates t by 15
th 
August 2022, 
ii. 250 more places (HQ) latest by 9th November 2022, 
iii. Remaining 200 District/ Judicial HQs by 26th January 2023. 
 
 At Outline or Taluka or sub-divisional places, which are not s eat of Principal District 
& Session Judge, existing Panel Lawyer (Counsel assignment) sys tem will continue 
with modified scheme.  
 
5. NALSA’s Early Access to Justice & Effective Legal Aid for inmat es:
 Effective 
implementation of NALSA's Early Access to Justice at Pre-Arrest , Arrest and 
Remand stage across the country. Further NALSA will conduct reg ular campaigns on 
mission mode basis for timely release of jail inmates. NALSA wi ll conduct regular 
campaigns on mission mode basis for timely release of jail inma tes. Increased focus 
on provision of legal services within the Juvenile Justice Mechanism. 
 
6. Integrity Code for Panel Lawyers:  As far as harassment of beneficiaries and demand 
of fee by panel lawyers is concerned, NALSA is already consider ing issuance of 
integrity code for legal aid lawyers. Even in upcoming SOPs pro visions for timely 

29 
 
interaction and filing timeline is also proposed. This Integrit y code for panel lawyers, 
in legal aid matters, will ensure adherence with professional standards and ethics. 
 
7. More vibrancy in Lok Adalat:  NALSA is committed to deliver prompt and 
inexpensive justice to the citizens and it has decided to lay m ore emphasis on 
contribution of National Lok Adal at in effectively reducing the  number of pending 
cases through Alternative Dispute Mechanisms. Lok Adalats are one of the most 
effective and successful Alternative Disputes Resolution mechan ism. The Lok Adalat 
has jurisdiction to take up any civil matters and all criminal compoundable matters 
which is either pending before any court or which has yet not b een brought to the 
court. In the year 2021, a total number of 1.27 crore cases hav e been settled in 4 
National Lok Adalat and out of which 55 Lakhs cases were alread y pending before 
the Courts of the country. It is proposed to further strengthen the Lok Adalats. 
 
3.29 However, there are certain challenges for NALSA, in streng thening the Legal 
Services Institutions at grassroots level and some of them are: -   
 
1. Strengthening of Legal Services Institutions at Grassroot level :
 There are 673 Legal 
Services Institutions at the District level. Section 9 (3) of t h e  L e g a l  S e r v i c e s  
Authorities Act, 1987 provides that the State Authority, in con sultation with the 
Chairman of the District Authority, appoint a person belonging to the State Judicial 
Service not lower in the rank than that of a subordinate Judge or Civil Judge as 
Secretary of the District Authority. Section 9 (5) of the Legal  Services Authorities 
Act, 1987 provides that the District Authority may appoint such  number of officers 
and other employees as may be prescribed by the State Governmen t in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of High Court for the efficient discharge of its functions. 
 
 Section 9 (7) of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 prov ides that the 
administrative expenses of every District Authority, including the salaries, allowances 
and pensions payable to the Secretary, officers and other emplo yees of the District 
Authority shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of the  State. Out of 673 
District Legal Services Authorities, in 102 DLSAs, part time Se cretaries have been 
posted/appointed. The posts of the Secretary in all the DLSAs n eed to be created by 
the State Government and full time Secretaries have to be appoi nted in the remaining 
DLSAs. More over fix tenure is required for the Secretary, DLSAs.  
 
2. Inadequate support for State and District Legal Services Author ities by the State/UTs 
Governments: There is lack of staff and infrastructure in the State Legal Services 
Authorities and District Legal Services Authorities. Therefore,  to discharge the 
functions of the SLSAs and DLSAs, sufficient human resources ar e required to be 
deputed in the Legal Services Institutions. It is the statutory  duty of the State and UT 
Governments to create the necessary posts for the SLSA and DLSA s and to provide 
funds for administrative expenses  of the Legal Services Institu tions in the State for 
creation of proper infrastructure. It is submitted that barring  few States, most of the 
States/UTs are not supporting State/Legal Services Authorities with proper structural 
organisation framework. 

30 
 
 
3. Inadequate funds for victim compensation and non-adoption of NA LSA VCS for 
women survivors :      U n d e r  s e c t i o n  357-A of Cr PC, the operation of the Victim 
Compensation scheme is with the Legal Services Authorities and states have framed 
their schemes in pursuant to the provision. In case of Nipun Sa xena vs UOI, on the 
directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court, NALSA has prepared a victi m compensation 
scheme in 2018 for women survivors which is available on NALSA’ s website 
(enclosed for ready reference). This scheme is applicable to th e POCSO victims as 
well because there is no separate scheme for POCSO victims. There are two issues:- 
 
a. Adequate fund is not provided for victim compensation, so large  number of 
victims are not paid. 
b. A good number of states have not adopted NALSA Model Scheme, so  the victims 
are not getting adequate compensation. 
Further Observation 
3.30 The Central and State Governments are duty bound constitut ionally, legally and 
morally to ensure "access to justice for all". However, the ser iousness and attention 
from the various stakeholders of the legal aid movement is rath er missing. None other 
than the CJI has opined that the legal aid services are neglect ed in our country. So it is 
high time to pay adequate attention and seriousness to the lega l aid movement in India 
it deserves. State/UT Governments are equal partners in extending the legal aid services 
t o  t h e  e l i g i b l e  p o p u l a t i o n .  A s  i n f o r m e d  b y  N A L S A  t h e  i n f r a s t r u cture and manpower 
requirements at the grassroots levels are awfully inadequate. T hus the DoJ and NALSA 
are expected to have an effective consultation with the SLSAs a nd State/UT 
Governments and to impress upon them to provide all necessary i nfrastructure and 
manpower in order to provide a decent quality of legal aid to the people at grassroots.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.31 The Committee observes that the majority of the funds for NALSA are utilized for 
administrative services, rather than providing legal aid. Also,  p a n e l  l a w y e r s  a r e  n o t  b e i n g  
adequately compensated and their remuneration has remained stag nant for long. This affects 
the quality of legal aid service provided to the clients. This also often leads to lawyers found 
harassing beneficiaries or demanding ‘fees’ from them. The Comm ittee accordingly, 
recommends NALSA to compensate lawyers adequately, so that they  are able to sustain 
themselves and remain motivated in their job. On other hand, a robust system of monitoring 
the efficacy and accountability of legal aid services provided to the beneficiaries should also 
be put in place by NALSA. (3.34)  
Action Taken 
 
3.32 It is submitted that after observation of the Hon’ble Comm ittee regarding utilization 
of majority of funds for administrative services, a set of guid elines for spending funds have 
been issued by NALSA after obtaining with the approval of Hon’b le Executive Chairman, 
NALSA. 
 

31 
 
3.33 Regarding remuneration and adequate compensation to Panel Lawyers, it is submitted 
that after the resolution in Chief Justices and Chief Ministers  Conference – 2016, the 
State/UTs have taken note of the same and most of the States ar e paying as per 
recommendations of NALSA. In the year 2019, monthly remuneratio n (Retainer fee) of 
retainer lawyers have been increased across the country. Further, this issue will be taken up in 
the National Meet proposed to be organized shortly. 
 
Further Observation 
 
3.34 It is an undeniable fact tha t a majority of the people who are entitled to free legal 
aid see it as an option only when they cannot afford a private lawyer. The reason behind 
this is the lack of trust on the Legal Aid Counsels (LACs). The  q u a l i t y  o f  l e g a l  
representation and lack of commitment of the LACs towards the b eneficiary's case is a 
matter of concern. Quite often the LACs are meagerly paid and they are engaged on ad-
hoc basis. Thus there is a dire need to provide adequate remune ration to them and to 
revise it on regular basis. Further, appointing them on full ti me basis will certainly 
going to improve the level of commitment amongst the LACs. 
 
--- 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN 
RECEIVED 
OVER ALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
4.0 The Committee further notes that the audit inspection repor t for the year 2018-19 was 
submitted by the DG Audit, Central Expenditure to the Supreme C ourt Registry in January, 
2020, with a request to furnish replies to the audit objections  raised within 4 weeks.  The 
audit objections pertain to vari ous financial transactions carr ied out by the Registry during 
the year 2018-19. It was also observed that some of the audit objections pertaining to the year 
2017-18 were not settled. Even after more than 2 years, the rep lies of the Registry were not 
furnished to the DG Audit. However, after being enquired on this issue by the Committee, the 
Registry finally furnished the replies to the DG Audit on 10.03 .2022. As auditing is not just a 
requirement under the law, it is also in the own financial inte rest of the organization and not 
replying to audit objections makes the whole process of auditin g a cosmetic and futile 
exercise. Accordingly, the Registry is expected to take audit r eports with due seriousness and 
ensure that replies to all future audit reports are furnished t o the concerned authority within 
the stipulated time period. (2.23) 
 
Further observation 
 
4.1 As no reply from the Supreme Court Registry is received on this 
recommendation, the DoJ should impress upon the Supreme Court R egistry to furnish 
an ATR on this for placing the same before the Committee for its consideration.  
 
POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.2 The Committee notes that even after 12 years of its separat ion from the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and becoming an independent Department, the Depart ment of Justice is still 
dependent on the MHA for all its man power requirements. The va cancies in the Department 
are particularly staggering at the middle and operating level o f SO, ASO (50% vacancy), 
UDC (100% vacancy), PA (100% vacancy) and Steno (100% vacancy).   It is surprising that 
the DoPT is posting officers of the rank of US and above direct ly to the Department, but 
other officials are posted by the MHA. There is hardly any just ification for this type of 
cumbersome arrangement being followed in the case of the Depart ment of Justice, where it is 
being given a step-motherly treatment in this matter. The Depar tment of Justice has been 
mandated with a significant role in appointment of judges, acce ss to justice and justice 
delivery. Accordingly, it should be provided with sufficient re sources and manpower to fulfil 
its mandate. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Depa rtment of Justice should be 
given full autonomy in case of personnel management and all cad re controlling authorities, 
including DoPT, should post all encadred posts directly to the Department of Justice. The 
Department of Justice is directed to bring this recommendation o f  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  t o  t h e  
notice of DoPT and MHA. (3.2) 
 

33 
 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.3 The  recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee have been brought  i n t o  t h e  
notice of Department of Personne l and Training (DoPT), the noda l Department for filling up 
the vacancies in the Departments/Ministries of the Government and Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA), the cadre controlling authority in respect of the staff posted to the Department of 
Justice vide O.M No.15011/93/2018-Jus(AU) dated 10.05.2022 requ esting to provide the 
A c t i o n  R e p o r t  ( A T R )  i n  t h e  m a t t e r .   I n  t h i s  r e g a r d ,  a  D . O .  N o . 15011/166/2018-Jus (AU) 
dated 10.05.2022 of the Additional Secretary (A&A) has also bee n sent to the Joint Secretary 
(Admn.), Ministry of Home Affairs.  Further, a Reminder has bee n issued to the DoPT and 
MHA vide O.M of even number dated 30.05.2022 requesting to prov ide the Action Report 
(ATR) in the matter so that the consolidated Action Report (ATR ) of the Department of 
Justice may be submitted to the DRPSC.  
 
Further observation 
 
4.4 The DoJ should impress upon the MHA and DoPT to furnish ATR  on the above 
recommendation for placing the same before the Committee for its consideration.  
 
--- 
 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MINUTES 

35 
 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 10:30 A.M. on 05.12.2 022 in 
Committee Room No. 4, Block-A, P arliament House Annexe Ext. Bui lding, 
New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi -  Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(iv) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(v) Shri P. Wilson 
 Lok Sabha  
(vi) Smt. Veena Devi 
(vii) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(viii) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(ix) Shri Malook Nagar 
(x) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xi) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meet ing of the 
Committee. He apprised them that  the Committee will first consi der and adopt 
two reports and thereafter *    *    *. 
3. The Committee, then, conside red and unanimously adopted the 122
nd 
Report on Action taken Report on 112 th Report on Demand for Grants (2022-
23) pertaining to the Department of Personnel & Training; and 1 23rd Report on 

36 
 
Action Taken Report on 116th Report on Demand for Grants (2022- 23) 
pertaining to the Department of Justice. 
4. *      *     * 
5. The meeting adjourned at 11.00 AM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN  
5
th December, 2022                                                                         DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
 