Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
FIFTY NINTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd May, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd May, 2013)  
The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Bill, 2013
 
 
REPORT NO. 
59


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

51
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
FIFTY NINTH REPORT
The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd May, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd May, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-117

ACRONYMS
SC – Scheduled Caste
ST – Scheduled Tribe
UT – Union Territory
w.e.f. – with effect from
WP – Writ Petition

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—5
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 6
5. M INUTES OF D ISSENT RECEIVED FROM S HRI S UKHENDU S EKHAR R OY, M.P. (RS) ........... 7—10
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 1 1—19
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 21 —50
I. The Readjustment of Representation  of Scheduled  Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Bill, 2013 ..................................... 23—31
II. The Readjustment of Representation  of Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled Tribes
in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Ordinance, 2013 ......................... 32—36
III. The Gazette of India Extra  Ordinary Part III-Section-4 No-90 Dated 1 st April,
2013 .............................................................................................................................. 3 7—38
IV . State and UT-wise Total Population,  Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Population and their Percentage of the Total Population as per 2001 Census ....... 39—40
V . Comments of the Legislative Department on the views/suggestions contained
in Memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on the Provisions
of the Bill to the Committee ...................................................................................... 41—46
VI. Allocation of Seats in House of People on the basis of Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Orders of 1976 & 2008 ................ 47—48
VII. Allocation of Seats in Legislative Assemblies on the Basis of Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies Orders of 1976 & 2008 ................. 49—50

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Jesudas Seelam
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
6. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
9. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
10. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
13. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
16. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
17. Shri Pinaki Misra
18. Shri S. Semmalai
19. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
20. Shrimati Meena Singh
21. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
22. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
23. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
24. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
@25. Vacant
26. Vacant
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
@ V acancy caused due to induction of Shrimati Chandresh Kumari in the Council of Minister w.e.f. 28 th October, 2011.

SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal,  Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo,  Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Fifty Ninth Report on the Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Bill, 2013.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
26th February, 2013  and pending therein, to this Committee on the 18 th March, 2013 for examination
and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communiqué
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, a press communiqué was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies, in response
to which twenty one memoranda containing suggestions were received, from various organizations /
 individuals/experts.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of
Law and Justice on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on 5
th April, 2013 and had in-house
discussion on the various issues of the subject matter of the Bill in its meeting held on 12 th April, 2013.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it :–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Legislative Department thereon;
(iii) The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002;
(iv) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008;
(v) Supreme Court Judgment on Writ Petition (Civil) No. 540 of 2011, Virendra Pratap and
Another vs. Union of India and others;
(vi) State-wise lists of castes as well as population figures of Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes included under lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by
virtue of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002;
and
(vii) The Constitution of India.
♣ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 49638) dated the 10 th May, 2012.

6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 29 th April, 2013. Shri Sukhendu
Sekhar Roy, M.P. (RS) and Member of the Committee submitted a note of dissent opposing the
adoption of the Report which has been appropriately appended in the Report.
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 29 th, 2013 Departmemt-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Readjustment of Representations of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Bill, 2013 ( Annexure-I ) is an Ordinance replacing
legislation introduced on the 26th February, 2013 in the Council of States. The Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the Bill outlines the basic objectives of the proposed legislation/Ordinance
and is reproduced below:–
“Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution provide for reservation of seats for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes respectively in the House of the People and in the Legislative
Assemblies of the States, in proportion to their population. Articles 82 and 170 of the
Constitution provide for readjustment of seats after each Census. Accordingly, the seats for the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies
of the States have been readjusted as per Census 2001.
A Writ Petition (Civil) No. 540 of 2011, Virendra Pratap and another vs. Union of India and
others was filed in the Supreme Court contending that by virtue of the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002 (No.10 of 2003), several castes, which had
not been included in the list of Scheduled Tribes, were included as Scheduled Tribes and
despite such inclusion their representation in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Order, 2008 was not done. The Supreme Court vide its judgment dated the
10th January, 2012 directed the Election Commission of India to consider the case of the
Scheduled Tribes which had been included in the list of the Scheduled Tribes by virtue of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002 (No. 10 of 2003) and
to take appropriate steps for their representation in the House of the People as well as in the
State Legislative Assembly. Pursuant thereto, the Election Commission desired that a legislation
may be enacted specifically empowering the Election Commission to carry out re-adjustment of
seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the light of the revised population
figures of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as may be ascertained and estimated
by the Census Commissioner with reference to 1st March, 2001, after taking into account the
population figures of the castes and tribes which have been declared as the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes after publication of 2001 Census.
After the Census of 2001 and up to 31st May, 2012, several castes and tribes have been
included in and excluded from the lists of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by eleven
Parliamentary Amendment Acts. Thus, there was an urgent need to review and restore the
statutory rights of those castes and tribes so included and excluded all over the country.
As the Parliament was not in session and immediate steps were required to be taken to
implement the aforesaid Judgment of the Supreme Court, the President was pleased to
promulgate the Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Ordinance, 2013 on the 30th January, 2013. The
Ordinance inter alia provided as follows—
(i) the Census Commissioner to ascertain and estimate the varied population figures of
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the States as on the last Census held
in 2001 and to notify the same in the Gazette of India;
(ii) the Election Commission to make necessary amendments in the Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008 for the purpose of giving proper
representation to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in Lok Sabha and

2
Legislative Assemblies of the States by readjustment of Parliamentary and Legislative
Assemblies territorial Constituencies;
(iii) the Election Commission of India to cause publication of amendments made in the
existing Delimitation Order and dates of its operation;
(iv) the Election Commission to make necessary correction of the errors in the said
Delimitation Order and also to make necessary alterations therein, pursuant to any change
in boundaries and name of any district or territorial division.”
2. An Ordinance, namely, the Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Ordinance, 2013 was promulgated by Hon’ble
President of India on the 30th January, 2013 ( Annexure-II) which is liable to be repealed upon the
enactment of the proposed Legislation in terms of its Clause 10. The Committee takes note of the
Order of Supreme Court in the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 540 of 2011 in the matter of Virendra Pratap
and another vs. Union of India and others wherein the Election Commission of India has been directed
to take appropriate steps for representation of Scheduled Tribes in the Lower House in Parliament as
well as in the State Assembly in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution for due
representation of Scheduled Tribes population in the State of Uttar Pradesh. Following the judgement
of Supreme Court, the Election Commission of India had expressed its inability to Government to
carry out the Orders of the Supreme Court as it did not have the power to do so under existing laws.
Accordingly, the Election Commission requested the Government to enact necessary legislation to
enable it to carry out the directions of Supreme Court. The Government while examining the
judgement of Supreme Court noted that the judgement was only applicable in respect of the State of
Uttar Pradesh whereas several castes and tribes have been included and/or excluded from the list of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under Articles 341 and 342 of Constitution respectively, in
almost all the States across the country through several amendments effected to Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribe Orders after the 2001 census. The Committee has been apprised that as many as
eleven amendments after 2001 census till 31st May, 2012 have been passed which need to be
accounted for necessitating readjustment of seats meant for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in the Lower House of Parliament and the State Legislature Assemblies. The necessity of proposed
legislation is essentially to enable the Registrar General of India to estimate and ascertain the varied
population figures of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to the 2001 census and to
empower the Election Commission of India to carry out readjustment of Parliamentary and Assembly
seats on the basis of revised population figures of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
3. Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Election Commission to carry out amendments as may be
necessary in the Delimitation Order, 2008 by readjustment of territorial constituencies of States and
UTs for Lok Sabha and the Legislative Assemblies having regard to Articles 81, 170, 330 and 332 of
the Constitution and Section 8 of Delimitation Act, 2002. These amendments when done, would be
deemed to have taken place in First and Second Schedules to the Representation of the People
Act, 1950 which reflects allocation of seats in the House of People and Legislative Assemblies. In
order to carry out readjustment of Parliamentary Constituencies the Registrar of General and Census
Commission of India would provide revised figure of population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes up to 31st May, 2012 to the Election Commission of India for the purpose. The date of
commencement of the Act would be from the date of Promulgation of the Ordinance i.e. 30th January,
2013 in terms of Clause 1 of the Bill. The Provisions of Bill would be applicable retrospectively
because the Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India has already started ascertaining the
figure of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes during the period following 2001 Census till 31st
May, 2012, starting with the State of Uttar Pradesh. The Registrar General of India have already
notified total population figure of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and percentage of their
population with reference to the total population of the State of Uttar Pradesh as on 1st April, 2013

3
in Gazette of India ( Annexure-III). It is noted from the figures that the percentage of Scheduled
Tribe population is 0.4 per cent of the State population and this has no representation in the
Parliamentary as well as Assembly Constituencies of that State. After the enactment of this legislation,
the Election Commission is supposed to carry out necessary alterations in the Delimitation Order, 2008
to give due representation to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to total population
figure in the Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies of States and Union Territories.
4. The Bill empowers the Election Commission to carry out readjustment of Parliamentary and
Assembly Constituencies on the basis of revised Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes percentage
vis-a-vis the total population of State/UT. However, the Secretary, Legislative Department during his
deposition before the Committee referred to the precedent of 1976 when readjustment of Parliamentary
and Assembly Constituencies took place following inclusion/exclusion of certain Castes and Tribes in
the list under Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Order (Amendment) Act, 1976.
5. The Secretariat issued a press communiqué inviting writing suggestions from the Members of
public on 25th March, 2013. The written memoranda numbering 21 received from the public,
including some public representatives, were forwarded to the Legislative Department of Government
of India for their comments. A Statement showing the issues raised in these Memoranda/representations
and the comments of the Legislative Department thereon is enclosed (Annexure-IV).
6. The Secretary, Legislative Department, Government of India in his disposition before the
Committee on 5th April, 2013 apprised the Committee that Hon’ble High Court of Bombay at Goa in
its judgement dated the 11th February, 2013 on Writ Petition No. 230/2007 regarding Goa State
Scheduled Tribes Action Committee Vs. State of Goa and others had directed the Election Commission
of India to decide the representation of Scheduled Tribes in the Lower House of Parliament and State
Legislative Assemblies within a period of eight months. The Bombay High Court while pronouncing
the aforesaid judgement made reference to the Supreme Court judgement in Virendra Pratap case.
7.  The Committee notes that as per the Constitution of India, readjustment and delimitation of
constituencies both Parliamentary and Assembly are to be done after every decennial census in terms
of Articles 82 and 170 of Constitution. The Delimitation Commission was constituted four times in the
past in the history of independent India, i.e., in 1952, 1962, 1972 and 2002. The delimitation initiated
in 2002 was done without changing the overall seats of Parliamentary Constituencies and Assembly
Constituencies of different States and it got completed in 2008. However, the delimitation carried out
in 2008 did not take into account the variation in the population of SC/ST during the period following
1st March, 2001. A Statement giving the State/UT wise population as per 2001 census and the
representation (% wise) of SC/ST therein is enclosed (Annexure-V).
8. The population figures in respect of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are under revision
by the office of Registrar General of India and would be available to public at the end of this year
as reported by the Registrar General of India to the Committee on the 5th of April, 2013. The
Committee was informed that the population figure of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
percentage terms with reference to the total population figure had increased from 14.6 per cent in
1971 census to 16.2 per cent in 2001 Census. Similarly, the population figure of Scheduled Tribes
had increased from 6.9 per cent in 1971 Census to 8.2 per cent in 2001 census. The overall increase
of population figure of SC and ST in 2001 Census has led the Delimitation Commission to increase
the seats for Scheduled Castes in Lok Sabha from 79 to 84 and for Scheduled Tribes from 41 to 47.
9. Statements giving statistics of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies, including these
reserved for SC/ST on the basis of the delimitation exercises of 1976 and 2008 are enclosed
(Annexures-VI & VII) .
10. The Secretary in his deposition apprised the Committee that the Bill is not meant for
delimitation of Constituencies but it has a limited mandate of giving representation to Scheduled Castes

4
and Scheduled Tribes in view of constitutional provisions enshrined under Articles 330 and 332 of
Constitution. The legislation will enable the Office of Registrar General to ascertain an estimate the
varied population figure of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with reference to 2001 census
where after the Election Commission of India would be carrying out necessary alteration in the
Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008. To the query of the Committee
whether the readjustment of the constituencies can be reviewed, the Secretary submitted that the
Delimitation Commission which was constituted in 2002 has become functus officio after 2008.
Therefore, the Election Commission of India and State Election Commissions which were part of the
Delimitation Commission would be entrusted the task of readjustment of seats of Parliament and
Assembly Constituencies after the enactment of this legislation. Another query was raised whether
readjustment of seats Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies would lead to limited delimitation of
reserved constituencies or its adjoining constituencies, the Secretary submitted that there may be
limited change of boundary of Parliamentary or Assembly Constituencies and also change in boundary
and name of any district or territorial division in order to give effect to readjustment of seats under
the Bill.
11. Some Members, during the course of the deliberations of the Bill, pointed out that the
exercise for the Election Commission would turn out to be a major one. However, in Committee’s
view, this exercise is limited to provide for the readjustment of representation of Parliamentary
and Assembly constituencies in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion in or
exclusion of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes by the Parliamentary Acts after
the 2001 Census and upto 31st May, 2012 broadly on the lines of the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (108 of 1976). This exercise would only result
in increase or decrease of a few reserved seats of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It
will neither change the number of constituencies nor will it be a delimitation exercise.
12. Further, Members also wanted to know as to why the task could not be entrusted to
the Delimitation Commission. In this connection, the Committee observes that the Delimitation
Commission constituted under the Delimitation Commission ceased to exist w.e.f. 1st June,
2008 on completion of its task of delimitating the constituencies throughout the country. Thus,
entrusting this task to the Delimitation Commission would require constituting the Commission
afresh.  The Delimitation Commission is meant to delimit the constituencies throughout the
country which is a mammoth exercise. The present task of readjustment of representation of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies is only
a limited exercise. Therefore, any fresh Delimitation Commission does not seem to be
appropriate. Under similar circumstances in the year 1976 this exercise was entrusted to the
Election Commission of India under the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (108 of 1976).
13. There was another query raised by some Members that the judgement, based on which
the present Bill has been drafted, pertained to Uttar Pradesh only. That being the case, it was
not proper to cover other parts of the country to have delimitation done throughout the
country with regard to SC/ST communities. The Committee, however, notes that limiting the
present delimitation exercise to the Uttar Pradesh only would be violative of right to equality.
Once a judgement is pronounced on any particular issue then principle laid down in it has to
be uniformly applied to all States. There is an identical Writ Petition, namely, W.P. No. 230
of 2007 filed before the Hon’ble High Court of Bombay at Goa wherein reservation of seats
for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of Goa was sought. The Hon’ble High
Court in its judgement dated the 4th February, 2013 has directed the Election Commission that
the representation of the petitioner seeking reservation of the Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly of Goa may be decided as expeditiously as possible and in any case within
a period of eight months. Therefore, this exercise has to be done in all the States.

5
14. In principle, the Committee agrees to the provisions of the Bill. The Bill seeks to
recognize the rights of the persons belonging to SC/ST communities in the matter of their
representation in the Parliament and the State Assemblies in terms of the provisions of the
Constitution and the legislation on the subject. However, the Committee desires that the
Election Commission of India and other related Agencies should take all care to give effect
to the provisions of the Bill in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Bill.
15. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed.

6
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. Some Members, during the course of the deliberations of the Bill, pointed out that the
exercise for the Election Commission would turn out to be a major one. However, in Committee’s
view, this exercise is limited to provide for the readjustment of representation of Parliamentary
and Assembly constituencies in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion in or
exclusion of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes by the Parliamentary Acts after
the 2001 Census and upto 31st May, 2012 broadly on the lines of the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (108 of 1976). This exercise would only result
in increase or decrease of a few reserved seats of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It
will neither change the number of constituencies nor will it be a delimitation exercise.
[Para 11]
2. Further, Members also wanted to know as to why the task could not be entrusted to
the Delimitation Commission. In this connection, the Committee observes that the Delimitation
Commission constituted under the Delimitation Commission ceased to exist w.e.f. 1st June,
2008 on completion of its task of delimitating the constituencies throughout the country. Thus,
entrusting this task to the Delimitation Commission would require constituting the Commission
afresh. The Delimitation Commission is meant to delimit the constituencies throughout the
country which is a mammoth exercise. The present task of readjustment of representation of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies is only
a limited exercise. Therefore, any fresh Delimitation Commission does not seem to be
appropriate. Under similar circumstances in the year 1976 this exercise was entrusted to the
Election Commission of India under the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (108 of 1976). [Para 12]
3. There was another query raised by some Members that the judgement, based on which
the present Bill has been drafted, pertained to Uttar Pradesh only. That being the case, it was
not proper to cover other parts of the country to have delimitation done throughout the
country with regard to SC/ST communities. The Committee, however, notes that limiting the
present delimitation exercise to the Uttar Pradesh only would be violative of right to equality.
Once a judgement is pronounced on any particular issue then principle laid down in it has to
be uniformly applied to all States. There is an identical Writ Petition, namely, W.P. No. 230
of 2007 filed before the Hon’ble High Court of Bombay at Goa wherein reservation of seats
for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of Goa was sought. The Hon’ble High
Court in its judgement dated the 4th February, 2013 has directed the Election Commission that
the representation of the petitioner seeking reservation of the Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly of Goa may be decided as expeditiously as possible and in any case within
a period of eight months. Therefore, this exercise has to be done in all the States. [Para 13]
4. In principle, the Committee agrees to the provisions of the Bill. The Bill seeks to
recognize the rights of the persons belonging to SC/ST communities in the matter of their
representation in the Parliament and the State Assemblies in terms of the provisions of the
Constitution and the legislation on the subject. However, the Committee desires that the
Election Commission of India and other related Agencies should take all care to give effect
to the provisions of the Bill in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Bill. [Para 14]
5. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed. [Para 15]
6

7
MINUTES OF DISSENT

MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY – SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR ROY, M.P.
(RAJYA SABHA)
Please refer to the verbatim records of the proceedings of the meetings of the Committee held
on 5th and 12th April, 2013 in the above-mentioned subject and the points raised/submissions made
by the Hon’ble Members on the Bill referred to above. In the last meeting, i.e. on 12th April, 2013
the members were given to understand that many meetings would further be held and views of experts
would be sought for in the matter, as would be evident from the last few lines at page 29 of the said
recordings. However, it is not known whether any expert view was obtained in the matter as no copy
of the expert view, if any, has been circulated among the members, it is, therefore, not understood
what prompted the Chairman to convene today’s meeting for “adoption” of a draft report without
having further discussions and obtaining expert view in the matter as assured in the last meeting.
Without prejudice to what have been stated hereinabove but fully relying upon them and in
exercise of my right to dissent, I oppose adoption of the Draft Report on the following, amongst
other, grounds:
1. The Draft Report (hereinafter called ‘DR’) which refers to Article 170 of the Constitution
for readjustment of the seats for SC & ST is the guiding factor for any such readjustment.
However, no power for readjustment of seats after each census has been vested to the
Election Commission of India under Article 324 of the Constitution and/or any other
statute/rules governing such readjustment. On the contrary Article 82 inter alia  stipulates
that territorial constituencies shall be readjusted “by such authority and in such manner
as Parliament may by law determine”. In pursuance of Article 82 of the Constitution,
Parliament has since passed The Delimitation Act, 2002 (Act 33 of 2002) for constitution
of Delimitation Commission and empowering it for readjustment of the allocation of seats
in the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies in the State and “for matter
connected therewith”. Section 8 of the Delimitation Commission inter alia  envisages that
the Commission shall, having regard to the provision of 81, 170, 330 and 332, shall
determine the number of seats to be reserved for SC/ST and publish its orders to that
effect after considering all objections and suggestions and holding public sittings at such
place of places in each State as it thinks fit. Therefore, the powers of readjustment of
seats, which forms part of delimitation falls within the jurisdiction of the Delimitation
Commission, which cannot be taken away or usurped by any other authority, not to speak
of the Election Commission of India.
The Judgment referred to in the DR under reference has no applicability in the present
case inasmuch as the said judgment was exclusively meant for disposing of that particular
case before the Court and the ratio of judgment is per incuriam and not per curiam. That
the Government Promulgated an Ordinance on 30th January, 2013 as, according to the
D.R., the Parliament was not in session and the immediate steps were required to be
taken to implement the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court, such reasons must be
considered as concocted, baseless and unacceptable in as such as the Supreme judgment
was passed in 2011 and the Ordinance was promulgated in January, 2013. In between the
period there had been a series of Parliament sessions and the Government did not initiate
any action for about 2 years because the Government was also aware that the aforesaid
judgment was not meant for readjustment of SC/ST seats all over the country. Moreover,
it was not mentioned by the Government/Election Commission that it was the Delimitation
9

10
Commission under the Delimitation Act which is empowered to make the readjustments,
and not the Election Commission of India or for that matter any other authority. The
Judgment of the Bombay High Court 4.2.13 is also limited only to the Petitioner(s)
concerned and does not ask for countrywide readjustment of the seats for SC/ST.
Had the Government good and clear intention for taking legal steps for readjustment
of representation of SC/ST the following measures ought to have been effected in the
meantime.
(a) Directing the Census Commissioner to ascertain and estimate the varied
population figures of SC/ST (Election Commission deposed before the
committee saying that it was not known when the figures would be made
available by the Census Commission – a complete uncertainty prevails in the
respect).
(b) Reconstituting the Delimitation Commission under Sec. 3 of the Delimitation
Act 2002 and causing a notice to be published to that effect.
(c) All figures of SC/ST ought to have been published and views of respective
States and such other representative bodies/organizations of the SC/ST should
have been taken and considered by holding public sitting too.
(d) Directing the Delimitation Commission to reconstitute to cause publication of
amendment of SC/ST seats within a definite Time.
In the DR, a reference has been drawn citing a precedent whereby the Election Commission
was authorized for readjustment of seats in 1976. However, bad precedent does not hold good to
subserve the greater interest of the SC/ST communities, particularly of an era ante, notoriously known
as Emergency Period when even the fundamental rights of the citizens and freedom of Press were
abridged/taken away and the citizens were compelled to abide by all draconian measures and mandates
issued at the whims and fancies of the ruling party Government.
In fine, it appears from each and every line of the proposed Bill that it seeks to empower the
Election Commission of India to usrupt all the existing powers of the Delimitation Commission, for
the purpose of the present Bill, although Article 324 of the Constitution of India envisages inter alia
that “the superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral roll and all elections to
Parliament and State Legislature………shall be vested in the Commission (election commission)”.
Therefore, without reconstituting the Delimitation Commission but preparing the present Bill instead,
the Government seeks to take away the powers of the Delimitation Commission and to give all such
powers to Election Commission for collateral and/or oblique purposes which is out and out unconstitutional
and not acceptable both in the context and form of the proposed Bill.
In view of what have been stated hereinabove, I vehemently oppose the adoption of the Draft
Report and/or endorsement of the proposed Bill to its hilt and suggest for more deliberations on the
subject after taking views of the constitutional experts and the views of all concerned States/Union
Territories.
Sd/-
(SUKHENDU SEKHAR ROY)
Member, Rajya Sabha

11
MINUTES

13
RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 5 th April, 2013, in Committee Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
3. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
4. Shri Shailendra Kumar
5. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
6. Shri S. Semmalai
7. Shri S.D. Shariq
8. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
9. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. * * *
V. * * *
VI. * * *
VII. * * *
VIII. * * *
*** Relates to some other matter.

14
IX. Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary
2. Shri J.S. Mathur, Addl. Secy.
3. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Addl. Secy.
X. * * *
XI. * * *
XII. * * *
A. Presentation by Organisations/Agencies attached to the Ministry of Law and Justice:
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
(The Committee adjourned for lunch at 1.25 
P.M. and re-assembled at 2.30 P.M.)
10. The Chairman welcomed all the Members of the Committee and representatives of Departments
under the Ministry of Law and Justice to the meeting. He then requested Secretary, Legislative
Department to place his views and also make a presentation on The Readjustment and Representation
of SC/ST in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Bill, 2013 followed by another presentation on
budgetary allocations, major initiatives, etc. of his Department in relation to Demands for Grants
(2013-14).
B. The Readjustment and Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Bill, 2013.
11. The Secretary, Legislative Department made a power-point presentation on the Readjustment
and Representation of SC and ST in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Bill, 2013. While
responding to the queries related to the Bill raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee,
he stated that this was only an enabling legislation, enabling the Census Commissioner to rework out
the figure of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which has been included or excluded by the
various Acts of Parliament passed after 2001 and up to 31st May 2012. He stressed further that
because of change in the figure of population of SC & ST, constituencies need to be declared as a
reserved for which the Election Commissioner needs to given power to declare constituencies as
reserved constituencies based upon the revised population of SC & ST. This legislation will empower
the Census Commissioner as well as the Election Commissioner to give effect to the provisions of
Article 330 and Article 332 of the Constitution. The Registrar General and Census Commissions of
India explained to the Committee that population figure of SC & ST of the State of Uttar Pradesh with
reference to Census of 2011 had been notified and the all India figures of SC & ST would be
completed by December 2013. Thereafter, Hon’ble Members sought clarifications on various issues
*** Relates to some other matter.

15
arising out of the presentations which were responded to by the officers of Legislative Department
Witness.
C. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Ministry of Law and Justice.
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
(The witnesses then withdrew)
16. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
17. The Committee adjourned at 4.51 
P.M. to meet again on 23 rd April, 2013 to take up the adoption
of the draft Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
*** Relates to some other matter.

16
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 12 th April, 2013, in  Committee Room, “C”, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
7. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
8. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
9. Shri Pinaki Misra
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
12. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. The Chairman in his opening observation mentioned that Memoranda received from various
individuals in response to the press communiqué of the Secretariat had been circulated to the
Members. While touching upon the provisions of the Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Parlimanent and Assembly Constituencies Bill, 2013,  he mentioned that
16

17
between 2001 Census and May, 2012 many castes and tribes have been included or excluded by
Government. The Delimitation Commission which completed its work in 2008 did not take into
account these castes and tribes for giving representation in Lok Sabha and Assembly Constituencies
due to the fact that these figures had not been reflected in the decennial census of 2001. Citing the
example of State of Goa, the Chairman mentioned that three tribes which were recognised  in the State
of Goa as ST were yet to be given representation in the Assembly of Goa. The Chairman then
requested Members to express their views/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.
3. Following were the major views/suggestions expressed by the Members of the Committee:–
• In Principle, the objective of the legislation, i.e., to give representation to the SC/ST (on
the basis of updated status) in the Parliamentary/Assembly constituencies is acceptable
• Readjustment is a part of delimitation. While going for readjustment, limited delimitation
of constituencies might be required. This function should not be vested with the Election
Commission of India as it is not the primary function of Election Commission under
Article 324 of the Constitution whereas delimitation is explicitly under Article 327 of
Constitution.
• During 2002 and May 2013 as many as 550 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes were
included and 74 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes excluded through 11 notifications
of the Government. It is a stupendous task for the Election Commission to give representation
to these castes/tribes in the Parliament and Assembly Constituencies. This job should have
ideally been entrusted  to the Delimitation Commission.
• The Supreme Court’s decision on the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 540 of 2011 in Virender
Pratap and another Vs. Union of India and others, mentioned in the Statement of Objects
and Reasons appended to the Bill,  is not a judgment of the Apex court. Rather it is an
order of general kind passed by that Court on the eve of 2012 Assembly election of the
State of Uttar Pradesh and is limited to the prayer in writ petition and giving representation
to Scheduled Tribe in a particular State.  But, the proposed legislation is attempting to give
representation to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled T ribes in Lok Sabha and Assembly
Constituencies in the whole country. The Government took the route of ordinance almost
after one year to enact a law to give right to Election Commission to readjust the
constituencies which is constitutionally not the mandate of that body.
• The exercise of promulgation of ordinance and introduction of Bill replacing that ordinance
is an attempt on the part of the Government to appropriate the power of delimitation of
constituencies of Lok Sabha and State Assemblies in the name of giving representation to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes through the Election Commission of India.
• An anomalous situation was pointed out where one of the castes in State of the UP was
declared as Scheduled Caste as well as Scheduled Tribe. While giving representation to
these castes, the Delimitation Commission headed by a judicial officer can adjudicate the
matter but this cannot not done by the Election Commission on the basis of majority of
votes.
• The Delimitation Act, 2002 has not been repealed but the Delimitation Commission has
become functus officio  after 2008 as a result of which the Election Commission is being
vested with the power once conferred upon the Delimitation Commission through the

18
proposed legislation which is improper. The better course of action is that the Delimitation
Commission which is an adjudicative body can be revived to carry out readjustment of
seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as well as limited delimitation/readjustment
of seats as an effect thereto.
• Since the matter involves the readjustment of seats of Legislative Assemblies of State and
Union Territories the State and Union Territories should be consulted in the matter before
passing this legislation.
4.     A verbatim record of the Meeting was kept.
5.     The Meeting adjourned at 3.58 
P.M. to meet on Tuesday, 23 rd April, 2013.

19
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 29 th April, 2013, in Committee Room ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Jesudas Seelam
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Shri S. Semmalai
8. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
11. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. The Committee briefly discussed the issues and adopted the draft Fifty-ninth Report of the
Committee on The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Bill, 2013 with some modifications. The Committee decided
to present the Report to Parliament on Thursday, the 2
nd May, 2013. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy,  a
Member of the Committee submitted a note of dissent opposing the adoption of the Report. The
Committee agreed to appropriately append the same in the Report.
3. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Sanjiv Kumar to present its
report to Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar  and in his absence, Shri S. Semmalai to lay the
Report on the Table of Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 2
nd May, 2013.
4.     A verbatim record of meeting was kept.
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
19

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
(Vide para 1 of the Report)
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
06 Feb., 2013
Bill No. XII of 2013
THE READJUSTMENT OF REPRESENTATION OF SCHEDULED
CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES IN PARLIAMENTARY AND
ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for the readjustment of seats in the House of the People
and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States and for the
readjustment of territorial constituencies therefor, insofar as
such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion in or exclusion
from the lists of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Act, 2013.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th
day of January, 2013.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Census Commissioner” means the Census
Commissioner appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 4 of
the Census Act, 1948;
23
Short title and
and commence-
ment.
37 of 1948.
Definitions.

24
(b) “Commission” means the Election Commission referred
to in article 324 of the Constitution;
(c) “Delimitation Act” means the Delimitation Act, 2002;
(d) “Delimitation Order” means the Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008;
(e) “last census” means the census held in India in 2001;
(f) “Scheduled Castes Orders” means the Constitution
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, the Constitution (Dadra
and Nagar Haveli) Scheduled Castes Order, 1962 and the
Constitution (Puducherry) Scheduled Castes Order, 1964, made
by the President under article 341 of the Constitution;
(g) “Scheduled Tribes Orders” means the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967 and the
Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978, made by
the President under article 342 of the Constitution;
(h) “State” includes a Union territory having a Legislative
Assembly but does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
3. ( 1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act,
the population as at the last census, of the Scheduled Castes or, as the
case may be, of the Scheduled Tribes, in each State shall be ascertained
or estimated by the Census Commissioner.
(2) Where by reason of the amendments made in the Scheduled
Castes Orders and the Scheduled Tribes Orders after the last census
and up to the 31st May, 2012, the population of the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes as at the last census is varied in a State, the
Census Commissioner shall ascertain or estimate as on the 1st day of
March, 2001, the population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes so varied, and also ascertain or estimate the proportion of such
population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, respectively,
to the total population of the State in the last census.
(3) The population figures ascertained or estimated under sub-
section ( 2) shall be notified by the Census Commissioner in the
Gazette of India.
(4) The population figures so notified shall be taken to be the
relevant population figures as ascertained or estimated at the last
census and shall supersede any figures previously published; and the
figures so notified shall be final and shall not be called in question in
any court.
4. (1) After the population figures have been notified for any
State under section 3, the Commission shall make such amendments
as may be necessary in the Delimitation Order, having regard to the
provisions of articles 81, 170, 330 and 332 of the Constitution, of
section 8 of the Delimitation Act, and of this Act, for the purpose of
Estimation of
population of
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.
Readjustment
of territorial
constituencies
by
Commission.
33 of 2002.

25
giving proper representation to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case
may be, to the Scheduled Tribes of that State, and the First Schedule
and the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People
Act, 1950 shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(2) In making any amendments in the Delimitation Order under
sub-section ( 1), the Commission shall, as far as may be necessary,
have regard to the provisions of clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 9 of the Delimitation Act.
(3) The Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals for the amendments in the Gazette
of India and the Official Gazette of the State concerned and
also in such other manner as it thinks fit;
(b) specify a date on or after which such proposals will
be further considered by it;
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may
have been received by it before the date so specified and for
such consideration hold one or more public sittings at such
place or places in each State as it thinks fit; and
(d) thereafter make necessary amendments in the
Delimitation Order.
5. (1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the
Commission shall determine its own procedure and shall have all the
powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;
(b) requiring the production of any document; and
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or
office.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to require any person
to furnish any information on such points or matters as, in the opinion
of the Commission, may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter
under the consideration of the Commission.
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for
the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
Explanation.— For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of
witnesses, the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall
be the limits of the territory of India.
6. ( 1) The Commission shall cause the amendments made by it
in the Delimitation Order to be published in the Gazette of India and
in the Official Gazettes of the States concerned.
Publication of
amendments
and their
dates of
operation.
43 of 1950.
Procedure and
powers of
Commission.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.

26
(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such
amendment shall have the force of law and shall not be called in
question in any court.
(3) As soon as may be after such publication in the Gazette of
India, every such amendment shall be laid before the House of the
People and the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 5), the readjustment
of seats and territorial constituencies in the House of the People or in
the Legislative Assembly of a State necessitated by any amendments
made by the Commission in the Delimitation Order and provided for
in that Order as so amended shall apply in relation to every election
to the House or, as the case may be, to the Assembly, held after the
publication of such amendments in the Gazette of India and shall so
apply in supersession of the provisions relating to representation contained
in the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
(5) Nothing contained in the foregoing sub-sections shall affect
the representation in the House of the People or in the Legislative
Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the House or of the
Assembly, as the case may be, existing on the date of publication of
the amendments made by the Commission in the Gazette of India.
7. (1) The Commission may, from time to time, by notification
in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State
concerned,—
(a) correct any printing mistake in the Delimitation Order
as amended under this Act, or any error occurring therein from
any inadvertent slip or omission; and
(b) where the boundaries or the name of any district or
any territorial division mentioned in the said Order are or is
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for bringing the Order up-to-date.
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is issued, before the House of the People and the
Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.
8. All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement
of this Act by the Census Commissioner for the ascertainment or
estimation of population of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, or by the Commission for the purpose of readjustment of seats
and territorial constituencies shall, insofar as they are in conformity
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken
under these provisions as if such provisions were in force at the time
such things were done or such steps were taken.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Certain other
powers of
Commission.
V alidation of
acts done
previous to
the
commencement
of Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
43 of 1950.

27
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as
soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
10. (1) The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies
Ordinance, 2013 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Ord. 2 of
2013.
Repeal and
savings.

28
28
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution provide for reservation
of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes respectively
in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the
States, in proportion to their population. Articles 82 and 170 of the
Constitution provide for readjustment of seats after each Census.
Accordingly, the seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States
have been readjusted as per Census 2001.
2. A Writ Petition (Civil) No. 540 of 2011, Virendra Pratap and
another vs. Union of India and others was filed in the Supreme Court
contending that by virtue of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002 (No.10 of 2003), several castes,
which had not been included in the list of Scheduled Tribes, were
included as Scheduled Tribes and despite such inclusion their
representation in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Order, 2008 was not done. The Supreme Court vide its
judgment dated the 10th January, 2012 directed the Election Commission
of India to consider the case of the Scheduled Tribes which had been
included in the list of the Scheduled Tribes by virtue of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002 (No. 10
of 2003) and to take appropriate steps for their representation in the
House of the People as well as in the State Legislative Assembly.
Pursuant thereto, the Election Commission desired that a legislation
may be enacted specifically empowering the Election Commission to
carry out re-adjustment of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in the light of the revised population figures of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as may be ascertained and estimated
by the Census Commissioner with reference to 1st March, 2001, after
taking into account the population figures of the castes and tribes
which have been declared as the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes after publication of 2001 Census.
3. After the Census of 2001 and up to 31st May, 2012, several
castes and tribes have been included in and excluded from the lists of
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by eleven Parliamentary
Amendment Acts. Thus, there was an urgent need to review and
restore the statutory rights of those castes and tribes so included and
excluded all over the country.
4. As the Parliament was not in session and immediate steps
were required to be taken to implement the aforesaid Judgment of the
Supreme Court, the President was pleased to promulgate the
Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Ordinance, 2013

29
on the 30th January, 2013. The Ordinance inter alia provided as
follows—
(i) the Census Commissioner to ascertain and estimate
the varied population figures of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in the States as on the last Census held in 2001 and to notify
the same in the Gazette of India;
(ii) the Election Commission to make necessary amendments in
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order,
2008 for the purpose of giving proper representation to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in Lo k Sabha and Legislative Assemblies
of the States by readjustment of Parliamentary and Legislative Assemblies
territorial constituencies;
(iii) the Election Commission of India to cause publication of
amendments made in the existing Delimitation Order and dates of its
operation;
(iv) the Election Commission to make necessary correction of
the errors in the said Delimitation Order and also to make necessary
alterations therein, pursuant to any change in boundaries and name of
any district or territorial division.
5. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
N
EW D ELHI; ASHWANI KUMAR
The 14th February, 2013

30
30
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 7 of the Bill confers powers upon the
Election Commission to make, by notification, correction of printing
mistake or any error in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Order, 2008 and also to make necessary amendments
therein, pursuant to any change in boundaries and name of any district
or territorial division.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 9 of the Bill confers powers upon
the Central Government to issue orders to remove any difficulty which
may arise to give effect to the provisions of the proposed enactment
within a period of two years.
3. The notification issued by the Election Commission shall be
laid, as soon as, it is issued, before each House of Parliament and
before the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned. The order
made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as, it is issued,
before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which the notification may be
issued or the order may be made are matters of procedure and
administrative detail. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore,
of a normal character.

31
31
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the readjustment of seats in the House of the People and in the
Legislative Assemblies of the States and for the readjustment of territorial
constituencies therefor, insofar as such readjustment is necessitated by
inclusion in or exclusion from the lists of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
(Shri Ashwani Kumar, Minister of Law and Justice )

32
ANNEXURE-II
(Vide para 2 of the Report)
32
vlk/kj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M     1
PART-II — Section 1
çkf/dkj ls çdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 7] ubZ fnYyh] cq/okj] tuojh 30] 2013@ek?k 10] 1934 ('kd)
No. 7] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 30, 2013/MAGHA 10, 1934 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filled as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi,  the 30th January, 2013/Magha 10, 1934 (Saka)
THE READJUSTMENT OF REPRESENTATION OF SCHEDULED
CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES IN PARLIAMENTARY AND
ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES BILL, 2013
No. 3 OF 2013
Promulgated by the President in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India.
An Ordinance to provide for the readjustment of seats in the
House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States
and for the readjustment of territorial constituencies therefor, insofar
as such readjestment is necessitated by the inclusion in or exclusion
from the lists of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
jftLVªh la- Mh-,y-&(,u)04@0007@2003&12 REGISTERED NO. DL-(N)04/0007/2003-12

33
WHEREAS Parliament is not in Session and the President is
satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to
take immediate action;
N
OW, T HEREFORE , in exercise of the powers conferred by
clause (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, the President is pleased
to promulgate the following Ordinance:—
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Ordinance, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Census Commissions” means the Census
Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4 of
the Census Act, 1948;
(b) “Commission” means the Election Commission referred
to in article 324 of the Constitution;
(c) “Delimitation Act” means the Delimitation Act, 2002;
(d) “Delimitation Order” means the Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008;
(e) “last census” means the census held in India in 2001;
(f) “Scheduled Castes Orders” means the Constitution
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, the Constitution (Dadra
and Nagar Haveli) Scheduled Castes Order, 1962 and the
Constitution (Puducherry) Scheduled Castes Order, 1964, made
by the President under article 341 of the Constitution;
(g) “Scheduled Tribes Orders” means the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967 and the
Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978, made by
the President under article 342 of the Constitution;
(h) “State” includes a Union territory having a Legislative
Assembly but does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
3. ( 1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this
Ordinance, the population as at the last census, of the Scheduled
Castes or, as the case may be, of the Scheduled Tribes, in each State
shall be ascertained or estimated by the Census Commissioner.
(2) Where by reason of the amendments made in the Scheduled
Castes Orders and the Scheduled Tribes Orders after the last census
and upto 31st May, 2012, the population of the Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes as at the last census is varied in a State, the
Census Commissioner shall ascertain or estimate as on the 1st day of
Short title and
commencement.
37 of 1948.
Definition.
33 of 2002.
Estimation of
population of
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.

34
March, 2001, the population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes so varied, and also ascertain or estimate the proportion of such
population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, respectively,
to the total population of the State in the last census.
(3) The population figures ascertained or estimated under sub-
section ( 2) shall be notified by the Census Commissioner in the
Gazette of India.
(4) The population figures so notified shall be taken to be the
relevant population figures as ascertained or estimated at the last
census and shall supersede any figures previously published; and the
figures so notified shall be final and shall not be called in question in
any court.
4. (1) After the population figures have been notified for any
State under section 3, the Commission shall make such amendments
as may be necessary in the Delimitation Order, having regard to the
provisions of articles 81, 170, 330 and 332 of the Constitution, of
section 8 of the Delimitation Act, and of this Ordinance, for the
purpose of giving proper representation to the Scheduled Castes or, as
the case may be, to the Scheduled Tribes of that State, and the First
Schedule and the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People
Act, 1950 shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(2) In making any amendments in the Delimitation Order under
sub-section ( 1), the Commission shall, as far as may be necessary,
have regard to the provisions of clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 9 of the Delimitation Act.
(3) The Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals for the amendments in the Gazette
of India and the Official Gazette of the State concerned and
also in such other manner as it thinks fit;
(b) specify a date on or after which such proposals will
be further considered by it;
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may
have been received by it before the date so specified and for
such consideration hold one or more public sittings at such
place or places in each State as it thinks fit; and
(d) thereafter make necessary amendments in the
Delimitation Order.
5. (1) In the discharge of its functions under this Ordinance,
the Commission shall determine its own procedure and shall have all
the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;
(b) requiring the production of any document; and
Readjustment
of territorial
constituencies
by
Commission.
43 of 1950.
Procedure and
powers of
Commission. 5 of 1908.

35
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or
office.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to require any person
to furnish any information on such points or matters as, in the opinion
of the Commission, may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter
under the consideration of the Commission.
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for
the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
Explanation.— For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of
witnesses, the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall
be the limits of the territory of India.
6. ( 1) The Commission shall cause the amendments made by it
in the Delimitation Order to be published in the Gazette of India and
in the Official Gazettes of the States concerned.
(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such
amendment shall have the force of law and shall not be called in
question in any court.
(3) As soon as may be after such publication in the Gazette of
India, every such amendment shall be laid before the House of the
People and the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 5), the readjustment
of seats and territorial constituencies in the House of the People or in
the Legislative Assembly of a State necessitated by any amendments
made by the Commission in the Delimitation Order and provided for
in that Order as so amended shall apply in relation to every election
to the House or, as the case may be, to the Assembly, held after the
publication of such amendments in the Gazette of India and shall so
apply in supersession of the provisions relating to representation contained
in the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
(5) Nothing contained in the foregoing sub-sections shall affect
the representation in the House of the People or in the Legislative
Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the House or of the
Assembly, as the case may be, existing on the date of publication of
the amendments made by the Commission in the Gazette of India.
7. (1) The Commission may, from time to time, by notification
in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State
concerned,—
(a) correct any printing mistake in the Delimitation Order
as amended under this Ordinance, or any error occurring therein
from any inadvertent slip or omission; and
(b) where the boundaries or the name of any district or
any territorial division mentioned in the said Order are or is
2 of 1974.
Publication of
amendments
and their
dates of
operation.
43 of 1950.
Certain other
powers of
Commission.

36
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for bringing the Order up-to-date.
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is issued, before the House of the People and the
Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.
8. All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement
of this Ordinance by the Census Commissioner for the ascertainment
or estimation of population of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, or by the Commission for the purpose of readjustment of seats
and territorial constituencies shall, insofar as they are in conformity
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken
under these provisions as if such provisions were in force at the time
such things were done or such steps were taken.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Ordinance, the Central Government may, by order published in
the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Ordinance, as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
(2) Every order made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as
soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE,
President.
P.K. MALHOTRA,
Secy. to the Government of India.
V alidation of
acts done
previous to
the
commence-
ment
of Ordinance.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

37
ANNEXURE-III
(Vide para 3 of the Report)
vlk/kj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx III — [k.M     4
PART III — Section 4
çkf/dkj ls çdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 90] ubZ fnYyh] lkseokj] vçSy 1] 2013@pS=k 11] 1935
No. 90] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, APRIL 1, 2013/CHAITRA 11, 1935
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
(Office of the Registrar General, India)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi,  the 22nd March, 2013
No.8/1/2013-SS(UP).— In pursuance of sub-section (3) of section 3 of the Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies
Ordinance, 2013 (Ord. No. 2 of 13), the Census Commissioner hereby notifies the population figures
mentioned in column 3, 4 and 5 of the Table below (as asscertained and determined under sub-
section (2) of the said section) as the population figures respectively of the total population, the
population of the Scheduled Castes, the population and the Scheduled Tribes at the Census held in
India in 2001 in the State of Uttar Pradesh and the proportion of the population of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes respectively to the total population of that State as are as mentioned
in columns 6 and 7 thereof.
37
jftLVªh la- Mh-,y-&33004@99 REGISTERED NO. DL-33004/99

38
TABLE
State S tate/Districts T otal Total Total Proportion
Code Population of Population Population of the
No. the State of of population
Scheduled Sheduled of SC/ST to
Castes T ribes the Total
Population
of the State
SC ST
12 3 4 5 6 7
09 Uttar Pradeesh 166197921 34590975 665365 20.8 0.4
Note:– SC and ST population figure of 2001 Census as per the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002 (Act No. 10 of 2003)
C. Chandramouli, Registrar General and
Census Commissioner of India
[ADVT III/4/Exty/201/12]

39
39
ANNEXURE-IV
(Vide para 5 of the Report)
State and UT-wise Total population, Scheduled Castes & Scheduled Tribes population and
their percentage of the Total population as per 2001 Census
States S tates and UTs Total Population Total Total Percentage of the
and of the State Population of Population of population of
UTs Scheduled Scheduled SC/ST to the Total
Code Castes Tribes Population of the
No. State/UTs
SC ST
12 3 4 5 6 7
00 India 1,02,86,10,328 16,66,35,700 8,43,26,240 16.20 8.20
01 Jammu & Kashmir 1,01,43,700 7,70,155 1 1,05,979 7.59 10.90
02 Himachal Pradesh 60,77,900 15,02,170 2,44,587 24.72 4.02
03 Punjab 2,43,58,999 70,28,723 NST 28.85 –
04 Chandigarh 9,00,635 1,57,597 NST 17.50 –
05 Uttaranchal 84,89,349 15,17,186 2,56,129 17.87 3.02
06 Haryana 2,1 1,44,564 40,91,110 NST 19.35 –
07 Delhi 1,38,50,507 23,43,255 NST 16.92 –
08 Rajasthan 5,65,07,188 96,94,462 70,97,706 17.16 12.56
09 Uttar Pradesh 16,61,97,921 3,51,48,377 1,07,963 21.15 0.06
10 Bihar 8,29,98,509 1,30,48,608 7,58,351 15.72 0.91
11 Sikkim 8,40,851 27,165 1,11,405 5.02 20.60
12 Arunachal Pradesh 10,97,968 6,188 7,05,158 0.56 64.22
13 Nagaland 19,90,036 NSC 17,74,026 – 89.15
14 Manipur* 21,66,788 60,037 7,41,141 2.77 34.20
15 Mizoram 8,88,573 272 8,39,310 0.03 94.45
16 Tripura 31,99,203 5,55,724 9,93,426 17.37 31.05
17 Meghalaya 23,18,822 1 1,139 19,92,862 0.48 85.94
18 Assam 2,66,55,528 18,25,949 33,08,570 6.85 12.41
19 West Bengal 8,01,76,197 1,84,52,555 44,06,794 23.02 5.50
20 Jharkhand 2,69,45,829 31,89,320 70,87,068 1 1.84 25.30
21 Odisha 3,68,04,660 60,82,063 81,45,081 16.53 22.13

40
12 3 4 5 6 7
22 Chhattishgarh 2,08,33,803 24,18,722 66,16,596 1 1.61 31.76
23 Madhya Pradesh 6,03,48,023 91,55,177 1,22,33,474 15.17 20.27
24 Gujarat 5,06,71,017 35,92,715 74,81,160 7.09 14.76
25 Daman & Diu 1,58,204 4,838 13,997 3.06 8.85
26 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 2,20,490 4,104 1,37,225 1.86 62.24
27 Maharashtra 9,68,78,627 98,81,656 85,77,276 10.20 8.85
28 Andhra Pradesh 7,62,10,007 1,23,39,930 34,63,986 16.19 6.59
29 Karnataka 5,28,50,562 85,63,930 34,63,986 16.20 6.55
30 Goa 13,47,668 23,791 566 1.77 0.04
31 Lakshadweep 60,650 NSC 57,321 – 94.51
32 Kerala 3,18,41,374 31,23,941 3,64,189 9.81 1.14
33 Tamil Nadu 6,24,05,679 1,18,57,504 6,51,321 19.00 1.04
34 Puducherry 9,74,345 1,57,771 NST 16.19 –
35 Andaman & Nicobar 3,56,152 NSC 29,469 – 8.27
Islands
*Excludes figures of Paomata, Mao Maram and Purul sub-divisons of Senapati district of Manipur.
NSC- No notified SC
NST- No notified ST

41
ANNEXURE-V
(Vide para 7 of the Report)
Tabular Statement containing the gist of the suggestions and comments of the Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
41
Memo No. and Name of
the person who has
made it
1
Details in Brief
2
Comments of the Legislative
Department
3
1. Shri Gurdip Singh
Warwal, New Delhi
2. Shri Rattan Singh
Rana, New Delhi
3. Shri Ajaib Singh
Chahal, Amritsar
1. The population of SC and ST
included or excluded from 2002 to
2012 may be taken in to account while
readjusting their Parliamentary and
Assembly and Assembly constituency.
2. No election should be held unless
this exercise is completed.
3. Having regard to the percentage
reserved seats for SCs may be
increased in Punjab Legislative
Assembly.
4. Keeping in mind the large population
of SCs Ferozpore Parliamentary Seat
may be reserved for Sc.
5. Territorial areas of the Parliamentary
or Assembly constituencies need not
be disturbed.
It has been desired that the reservation
of ST seats in the House of the People
and in Legislative Assembly in the State
of Himachal Pradesh be provided by
including those caste and tribes
declared as STs after Census 2001.
Jandiala Guru Assembly Constituency
in the Punjab be de-reserved and
declared as General constituency.
1. The Bill already provides that the
castes and tribes included or excluded
as SC or ST after Census 2001 and
upto 31
st May, 2012 are to be taken
into consideration.
2. This proposal may not be accepted
as on completion of tenure of the
House, elections is to be held as early
as possible and the elections cannot
be held up for the sake of this
exercise.
3. This can be confirmed only after
the relevant figures are made available
by the Census Commissioner.
4. On the basis of the population figures
given by the Census Commissioner, the
Election Commission would take
necessary steps to reserve or de-reserve
the seats for SC/ST.
5. As per the proposed Bill, the
exercise will be done by the Election
Commission of India in the light of
the provisions of the Bill.
The provisions of the present Bill
adequately address the issue.
The matter may be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs are made available by the Census
Commissioner.

42
12 3
4. Dr. K.P. Singh,
Palwal
5. Shri Somi Keishing,
Manipur
6. Shri Manmohan
Samal, Ex MP (RS) and
others, Bhubaneswar
7. Shri Amit Kumar,
Bhopal
8. Shri Amar Singh,
S/o Shri Bechelal, New
Delhi
Faridabad Parliamentary constituency
and Palwal Assembly constituency may
be reserved for SCs.
While referring the population figures
of 2001 Census, he desired that
there should be an proportionate
representation to each of the
constituency thereby the valley districts
would entitled to get 35 seats and hill
districts would get 25 against the
present position of 40 and 20 seats
respectively.
They have desired to have a personal
hearing. They have raised certain
apprehension that the current exercise
would result in reserving
Bhandaripokhari Assembly in the State
of Odisha instead of present reserved
Dharnnagar Assembly Constituency.
1. He has requested that the Bill be
passed so that the people belonging to
SCs and STs get benefitted.
2. He has also requested that a caste
certificate issued by a particular state
Government be acceptable to all the
States and for all the purposes.
He has not made any suggestion.
The matter may be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs are made available by the Census
Commissioner.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs are made available by the Census
Commissioner. In this regard attention
is drawn to the fact that keeping in
view the serious problem in the State
of Manipur and on being satisfied
that a situation has arisen where unity
and integrity of India is likely to be
threatened and there is a serious threat
to peace and public order, a
Presidential Order dated 8
th February,
2008 has been issued under sub-
section (1) of section 10A of the
Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002)
for deferring the delimitation exercise
in the State of Manipur with
immediate effect and until further
orders.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs be made available by the Census
Commissioner.
1. Supported the Bill, no comments
required.
2. The suggestion is outside the scope
of the present Bill.
No comments required.

43
12 3
9. Dr. Girishbhai L.
Nalvaya, Gujarat
10. Dr. Vasudeo
Rajendra Deshprabhu,
Pernem, Goa
11. Dr. Nitin Raut,
Hon’ble Minister for
Employment Guarantee
Scheme & Water
Conservation, Govern-
ment of Maharashtra,
Mumbai
12. Shri M.L. Markson,
President, Naga People’s
Organization, Manipur.
He has requested for reservation of
two more seats for Scheduled Tribes
in the Lok Sabha from the State of
Gujarat by delimitation of Sabarkantha
and Banaskantha districts by giving
preference to the Scheduled Areas of
both the districts. He has also requested
that while doing readjustment the
administration of Scheduled areas may
be taken into consideration.
He desired that there should be
provision for rotation of reserved seats
in the State as is available in the case
of Panchayats and Municipalities.
He has stated that the population of
Nav-Baudha was not included in the
Scheduled Castes population in the
Census 2001 thereby resulting 10%
less population of SC. Therefore the
seats to the tune of the SC population
were not reserved under the
Delimitation Order, 2008. He has
requested that adequate representation
of SC and Nav-baudha as per their
actual population should be
incorporated during allotment of seats
in reserved categories.
Sought personal appearance before the
Hon’ble Committee. He has further
stated that the population enumeration
in Taubi, Parul and Paomata sub-
divisional blocks in Senapati district of
Manipur in the Census 2001 and
Census 2011 was cancelled on the
pretext of “abnormal growth” thereby
denying the rightful delimitation process
and electoral rights.
The matter may be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs are made available by the Census
Commissioner.
The suggestion is outside the scope
of the present Bill.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs are made available by the Census
Commissioner.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs are made available by the Census
Commissioner. In this regard attention
is drawn to the fact that keeping in
view the serious problem in the State
of Manipur and on being satisfied that
a situation has arisen where unity and
integrity of India is likely to be
threatened and there is a serious threat
to peace and public order, a
Presidential Order dated 8th February
2008 has been issued under sub-
section(1) of section 10A of the
Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002)
for deferring the delimitation exercise
in the State of Manipur with immediate
effect and until further orders.

44
12 3
He has alleged that the State
Government has arbitrarily revised the
population figures of Census 2001
which resulted in less number of Tribal
populations. It has been requested that
the population figures that was carried
out for 2001 Census was only taken
into consideration for effecting the
provisions of the present Bill and not
the revised population figures as stated
by the State Government.
He has requested that the Committee
should recommend the reservation of
Bijnor Assembly Constituency instead
of present Nagina Assembly
Constituency.
He has requested that the Census
Commissioner be approached to obtain
the record population of Gorkha
communities living in India, State-wise.
13. Shri L. Adani,
President, United Naga
Council, Manipur
14. Shri Yashvir Singh,
Hon’ble MP (Lok
Sabha), Bijnor, Uttar
Pradesh
15. Capt. (Retd.) P.J.
Thapa, President, HP
Gorkha Kalyan Smiti,
Bakloh, Distt. Chamba,
Himachal Pradesh
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs are made available by the Census
Commissioner. In this regard attention
is drawn to the fact that keeping in
view the serious problem in the State
of Manipur and on being satisfied that
a situation has arisen where unity and
integrity of India is likely to be
threatened and there is a serious threat
to peace and public order, a
Presidential Order dated 8
th February,
2008 has been issued under sub-
section(1) of section 10A of the
Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002)
for deferring the delimitation exercise
in the State of Manipur with immediate
effect and until further orders.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs be made available by the Census
Commissioner.
The suggestion is outside the scope
of the present Bill.

45
PART–I COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
Clause No. 4
Sl. Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. Organisation/
individual
12 3 4
Dr. Yogendra Singh,
Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh
Shri Sanjay Kumar,
Nagina, Uttar Pradesh
Shri Surendra Singh,
Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh
Shri Sukhram Singh,
Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh
Shri Kameshar Rabhi &
others, West Garo
Hills, Meghalaya
He has requested to amend the Delimitation Order 2008 regarding
District Bijnor (U.P.) for the purpose of giving due representation of
Scheduled Castes belonging to Bijnor Assembly Constituency in place
of Nagina Assembly.
He has requested that the Nazibabad Constituency of Janpad Bijnor
may be reserved for the Scheduled Castes/Tribes in place of the
reserved Nagina Constituency.
He has requested to amend the delimitation of the Badhapur Assembly
Consituency so that the Scheduled Castes/Tribes of the Badhapur
may represent properly.
He has requested to amend the delimitation of Janpad Bijnor so that
the Bijnor Consituency may be reserved for the Scheduled Castes/
Tribes in place of the reserved Nagina Constituency.
He has stated that before the delimitation village Paham and
Bamundanga fall under the 46-Phulbari Constituency but due to the
delimitation the said village come under Tikrikila Constituency. He
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs be made available by the Census
Commissioner.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs be made available by the Census
Commissioner.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs be made available by the Census
Commissioner.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
STs be made available by the Census
Commissioner.
The matter can be looked into by the
Election Commission only after the
relevant population figures of SCs and
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

46
12 3 4
has requested to make necessary amendement in the Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order 2008 for the purpose
of giving proper representation to the Schedule Caste and Schedule
Tribes in Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies of the State and for
inclusion of village Paham and Bamundanga in the 46-Phulbari
Constituency.
STs be made available by the Census
Commissioner.
PART–II OTHER ISSUES NOT COVERED BY THE BILL
Sl. Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. Organisation/
individual
16. Shri Om Bhati, Jaipur He has requested that the Caste Certificate to the Nayak caste in
Rajasthan may be issued by the Competent Authority so that they
may participate in the election and may represent in the Parliament
and Legislative Assembly.
The suggestion is outside the scope of
the present Bill.

47
47
ANNEXURE-VI
(Vide para 9 of the Report)
Allocation of Seats in House of People
Serial Number and
Name of the State/
Union Territory
Number of seats in the House as
constituted in 2004 on the basis of the
Delimitation of Parliamentary and
Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976 as
amended from time to time
Number of seats in the House as
subsequently constituted as per the
Delimitation of Parliamentary and
Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008
Total Reserved Reserved T otal Reserved Reserved
for the for the for the for the
Scheduled Scheduled Scheduled Scheduled
Castes Tribes Castes Tribes
12 3 4 5 6 7
I. States
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 6 2 42 7 3
2. Arunachal Pradesh 2 – – 2 – –
3. Assam 14 1 2 14 1 2
4. Bihar 40 7 – 40 6 –
5. Chhattisgarh 11 2 4 11 1 4
6. Goa 2 û – 2 – –
7. Gujarat 26 2 4 26 2 4
8. Haryana 10 2 – 10 2 –
9. Himachal Pradesh 4 1 – 4 1 –
10. Jammu and 6 – – 6 – –
Kashmir
11. Jharkhand 14 1 5 14 1 5
12. Karnataka 28 4 – 28 5 2
13. Kerala 20 2 – 20 2 –
14. Madhya Pradesh 29 4 5 29 4 6
15. Maharashtra 48 3 4 48 5 4
16. Manipur 2 – 1 2 – 1
17. Meghalaya 2 – – 2 – 2
18. Mizoram 1 – 1 1 – 1
19. Nagaland 1 – – 1 – –

48
12 3 4 5 6 7
20. Odisha 21 3 5 21 3 5
21. Punjab 13 3 – 13 4 –
22. Rajasthan 25 4 3 25 4 3
23. Sikkim 1 – – 1 – –
24. Tamil Nadu 39 7 – 39 7 –
25. Tripura 2 – 1 2 – 1
26. Uttarakhand 5 – – 5 1 –
27. Uttar Pradesh 80 18 – 80 17 –
28. West Bengal 42 8 2 42 10 2
II. Union Territories
1. Andaman and 1 – – 1 – –
Nicobar Islands
2. Chandigarh 1 – – 1 – –
3. Dadra and 1 – 1 1 – 1
Nagar Haveli
4. Delhi 7 1 – 7 1 –
5. Daman and Diu 1 – – 1 – –
6. Lakshadweep 1 – 1 1 – 1
7. Puducherry 1 – – 1 – –

49
49
ANNEXURE-VII
(Vide para 9 of the Report)
Allocation of Seats in the Legislative Assemblies
Serial Number and
Name of the State/
Union Territory
Number of seats in the House as
constituted on the basis of the Delimitation
of Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Order, 1976 as amended
from time to time
Number of seats in the House as
subsequently constituted as per the
Delimitation of Parliamentary and
Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008
Total Reserved Reserved T otal Reserved Reserved
for the for the for the for the
Scheduled Scheduled Scheduled Scheduled
Castes Tribes Castes Tribes
12 3 4 5 6 7
I. States
1. Andhra Pradesh 294 39 15 294 48 19
2. Arunachal Pradesh 60 – 59 60 – 59
3. Assam 126 8 16 126 8 16
4. Bihar 243 39 – 243 38 2
5. Chhattisgarh 90 10 34 90 10 29
6. Goa 40 1 – 40 1 –
7. Gujarat 182 13 26 182 13 27
8. Haryana 90 17 – 90 17 –
9. Himachal Pradesh 68 16 3 68 17 3
10. Jammu and 76 6 – – – –
Kashmir*
11. Jharkhand 81 9 28 81 9 28
12. Karnataka 224 33 2 224 36 15
13. Kerala 140 13 1 140 14 2
14. Madhya Pradesh 230 34 41 230 35 47
15. Maharashtra 288 18 22 288 29 25
16. Manipur 60 1 19 60 1 19
17. Meghalaya 80 – 55 60 – 55
18. Mizoram 40 – 39 40 – 39
19. Nagaland 60 – 59 60 – 59

50
12 3 4 5 6 7
20. Odisha 147 22 34 147 24 33
21. Punjab 117 29 – 117 34 –
22. Rajasthan 200 33 24 200 34 25
23. Sikkim 32** 2 12 32** 2 12
24. Tamil Nadu 234 42 3 234 44 2
25. Tripura 60 7 20 60 10 20
26. Uttarakhand 70 12 3 70 13 2
27. Uttar Pradesh 403 89 – 403 85 –
28. West Bengal 294 59 17 294 68 16
II. Union Territories
1. Delhi 70 13 – 70 12 –
2. Puducherry 30 5 – 30 5 –
*Under the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of
that State excluding the 24 seats earmarked for Pakistan-occupied territory is 87 out of which 7 seats
have been reserved for the Scheduled Castes in pursuance of the Jammu and Kashmir Representation
of the People Act, 1957.
**Reserved 1 seat for Sanghas, 2 seats for Scheduled Castes and 12 for the Sikkimese of Bhutia
Lepcha origin under section 7(1A) of the Representation of the People Act, 1959.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.