Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO. 
83
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  2016)16th March,
Action Taken Replies of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Seventy Sixth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
EIGHTY THIRD REPORT
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTY THIRD REPORT
Action taken Replies of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Seventy Sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 16th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 16th March, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 165


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(v)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-29
Chapter I – Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry ......................................................................................... 2-20
Chapter II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry ...... 21-25
Chapter III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Committee has
not accepted replies of the Ministry .................................................... 26-27
Chapter IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies of
the Ministry have not been recived ...................................................... 28-29
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV A TIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE —AT A G LANCE ............................ 30-31
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 33-36

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Adv. Sharad Bansode
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
16. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary
17. Adv. Joice George
18. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
19. Shri Santosh Kumar
20. Shri Bhagwant Mann
21. Shri Anoop Mishra
22. Shri B.V . Nayak
23. Shri Vincent H. Pala
24. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri M. Udhayakumar
29. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
30. Dr. Anshul Verma
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Eighty-third Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Seventy-sixth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th
April, 2015.
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action Taken Replies on
the Seventy-sixth Report of the Committee on 20th May, 2015, 9th June, 2015 and 28th July, 2015. The
Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 14th March, 2016.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
14 March, 2016 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel Public Grievances,
Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
AA : Appellate Authority
ADB : Asian Development Bank
AIG : American International Group
AIS : Automatic Identification System
AR&PG : Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances
ARC : Administrative Reforms Commission
CBI : Central Bureau of Investigation
CFSL : Central Forensic Science Laboratory
CGA : Controller General of Accounts
C&AG : Comptroller and Auditor General of India
CGAR : Core Group on Administrative Reforms
CGHS : Central Government Health Scheme
CGLE : Combined Graduate Level Examination
CIC : Central Information Commission
CoS : Committee of Secretaries
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
CSS : Central Secretariat Service
CVC : Central Vigilance Commission
CVO : Chief Vigilance Officer
DARPG : Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
DA VP : Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
DGS&D : Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals
DFFT : Domestic Funding of Foreign Training
DFID : Department for International Development
DIG : Deputy Inspector General
DoPT : Department of Personnel & Training
(iv)

DPC : Departmental Promotion Committee
DSPE : Delhi Special Police Establishment
EASY : Empanelment and Appraisal System
FAO : Food and Agriculture Organisation
GFR : General Financial Rule
GoM : Group of Ministers
IAS : Indian Administrative Service
IFD : Integrated Finance Division
IFS : Indian Forest Service
ILO : International Labour Organization
IPS : Indian Police Service
ISG : Indian School of Government
LBSNAA : Lal Bhadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
LDCE : Limited Departmental Competitive Examination
MC&LT : Ministry of Communication & Information Technology
MEA : Ministry of External Affairs
MGNREGA : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
NCGG : National Centre for Good Governance
NeGP-HR : National e-Governance Plan-Human Resource
NGO : Non-Government Organisation
NIA : National Investigation Agency
NIC : National Informatics Centre
NICSI : National Informatics Centre Services Incorporated
NLSIU : National Law School of India University
NIAR : National Institute of Administrative Research
OBC : Other Backward Classes
OECD : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OMR : Optical Mark Recognition
(v)

PAO : Pay & Accounts Office
PPP : Public Private Partnership
RTI : Right to Information
SAU : Scientific Aid Units
SIU : Staff Inspection Unit
SC : Schedule Castes
SPIO : State Public Information Officer
SSC : Staff Selection Commission
ST : Schedule Tribes
TAFSU : Technical and Forensic Support Units
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
UNDP : United Nations Development Programme
UNPAN : United Nations Public Administration Network
UNICEF : United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
WHO : World Health Organisation
(vi)

1
1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its 78
th Report on the Demands for
Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on the 28th April, 2015.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned Report, vide,  their
communications dated 20th  May, 2015,  9th June, 2015 and 28th July, 2016. These replies have been categorised
as follows :
Chapter – I : The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry i.e., in
respect of paras 1.2., 2.4., 3.3., 4.2., 5.2., 6.2., 7.2., 8.2., 9.2., 10.3., 11.2., 12.5., 13.2., 14.5.15.2.,16.2.,
17.2., 18.2., 19.2., 20.2., 21.4., 22.3., 23.7., 24.2., 25.3., 26.2., 28.3., 29.3., 30.6., 31.2. and 32.2.of the
Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted these recommendations.
Chapter – II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies given by the Ministry i.e.,  in respect of paras 33.2., 34.3., 35.3., 36.2., 37.2., 38.3.,
39.5., 40.2., 41.2., 42.3., 43.2., and 44.3.  of the Report. The Committee is convinced with the explanations
advanced by the Ministry and does not wish to pursue them as of now.
Chapter – III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted
replies given by the Ministry i.e., with regard to paras 45.3., 46.2., of the Report. The Committee expresses
its concern for not accepting the recommendations of the Committee dealt with in Chapter – III of this
Report and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.
Chapter – IV : The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry
have not been received i.e., with regard to paras 47.2., 48.2. and 49.2.of the Report, the Committee observes
that the Ministry has furnished evasive or interim replies in response to these recommendations. The Committee
desires that the Ministry should furnish action taken notes in respect of the recommendations dealt with in
Chapter – IV of this report.
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 76
th Report, the ATRs furnished by the
Ministry and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been dealt with in the succeeding
Chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE MINISTRY
Reduced allocation made to the Ministry
Recommendation/Observation
1.0. The Committee takes note of the shortfall in allocation of ` 228.55 crores ( ` 70.84 crores on the
Plan side and ` 157.71 crores on the Non-Plan side) made to the Ministry. The Committee hopes that such
reduced allocation will not adversely affect the implementation of important schemes/projects of the Ministry
and, if so required, funds may be made available at the RE (2015-16) stage so that important schemes of the
Department do not suffer for want of requisite funds. (Para 2.16)
Action Taken Reply
1.1. As against the projected requirement of ` 1382.30 crore, the Ministry received ` 1153.90 crores for
BE 2015-16 leading to a shortfall. Even though the original allocation is much lesser than the projected
requirements, the additional requirements, if any, will be projected to Ministry of Finance at RE Stage, after
ensuring optimum utilization of given allocation, to ensure that important schemes of the Department do not
suffer for want of funds.
Committee’s further observation
1.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Under-utilization of the allocations made during the last three years
Recommendation/Observation
2.0 The Committee is of the view that non-utilization of the allocated amount indicates slow pace of
decision making and lack of proper monitoring of various programmes/schemes of the Department. The
Committee recommends that the Department should take necessary steps including effective monitoring to
ensure full and optimal utilization of allocated funds. (Para 2.22)
Action Taken Reply
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT)
2.1. The percentage of utilization of funds as per RE for the last three years are as under
Y ear 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Percentage 98.47% 98.79% 98.23%
2

3
The Ministry has been able to utilize most of the funds made available to it.  The Budget under various
schemes is constantly monitored and efforts are made for the optimum utilization of the funds by chalking
out realistic implementation plans for various schemes. Quarterly expenditure of Plan targets are drawn and
circulated amongst concerned Divisions/Organizations and the same is also reviewed/monitored every week
at the highest level. Meetings with implementation agencies like CPWD, DA VP etc., are also held whenever
felt necessary. All Concerned officers are reminded regularly to ensure the optimum utilization of allocated
funds.
Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances
2.2. The utilization of plan funds during the financial year 2014-15 was 100%. The Department had held
monthly review meetings for implementation of the Scheme of Modernisation of Government Offices with
the beneficiary Ministries/Departments and the executive agencies of CPWD. As regards Plan funds earmarked
for fostering good governance, the two regional Conference on best practices, e-governance and Civil
Services Day was organized on time and successfully and funds utilized. The activities of publication of
books on best practices and documentary films on best practices were also done timely.
2.3. As regards non-plan, it is stated that the utilization of funds was 98%. This was on an account of
savings under the salary Head and medical Head remaining unutilized on 31.03.2015. Some non-plan funds
like relating to OTA, Publication and Contribution were surrendered well in advance.
Committee’s further observation
2.4. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
3.0. The Committee also expresses concern on the reduced allocations made for crucial Schemes like
Propagation of Right to Information Act and Plan Scheme for Administrative Reforms. The Committee
hopes that the Department would not allow these schemes to suffer for want of adequate funds by optimum
utilization of allocated funds and, if required, by obtaining additional funds form Ministry of Finance for
these schemes at RE stage.  (Para 2.23)
Action Taken Reply
Department of Personnel and Training
3.1. Committee’s recommendations have been noted for compliance. Though the reduced allocation is a
concern for important Plan Schemes like ‘Propagation of RTI Act and Scheme for Administrative Reforms’,
the additional requirements, if any, will be projected to Ministry of Finance at the RE stage so that these
major Schemes do not suffer for want of funds.
Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances
3.2. The Subject of Right to Information Act concerns the Department of Personnel and Training and
hence they would be in a better position to comment. The DAR&PG had requested for allocation of funds
of ` 28 crores under the plan head was during the year 2015-16. Against this the allocation made to this
Department under Plan Head was only ` 16.11 crores. Based in this allocation, internal earmarking of funds

4
for the various components of the Plan Scheme has been done. The Department will project additional
requirement of funds at RE State 2015-16.
Committee’s further observation
3.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEMAND NO. 74
Recommendation/Observation
4.0. The Committee appreciates the utilization trend of the allocations made by the Ministry to CVC since
the time it has been allocated funds under a separate grant. (Para 2.28)
Action Taken Reply
4.1. The Committee’s Observations have been noted.
Committee’s further observation
4.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEMAND NO. 80
Recommendation/Observation
5.0. The Committee appreciates the utilization of the funds allocated to UPSC. (Para 2.33)
Action Taken Reply
5.1. The Committee’s Observations have been noted.
Committee’s further observation
5.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
6.0. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Department to encourage e-governance in
Government and hopes that the initiatives will result in a more responsive and transparent governance. The
Committee recommends that the results of such initiatives be reviewed periodically so that further
improvements as may be necessary, be made and optimum results obtained. (Para 3.2)
Action Taken Reply
6.1. Noted for DOP&T.
Committee’s further observation
6.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.

5
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING
Competency Dictionary for Civil Services
Recommendation/Observation
7.0. The Committee takes note of the initiative and hopes that its implementation would help improve the
productivity and efficiency of government officers. If implemented properly it may also help in bridging the
competency gaps of individual civil servants. (Para 3.16)
Action Taken Reply
7.1. Noted.
Committee’s further observation
7.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Lal Bahadur Shastri  National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA)
Recommendation/Observation
8.0. The Committee feels that the use of MOOC should be increased so that more officers could benefit
from such courses. (Para 3.20)
Action Taken Reply
8.1. Noted.
Committee’s further observation
8.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Recommendation/Observation
9.0. The Committee notes with concern that funds have not been provided to CBI to liquidate its committed
liabilities. It is not proper for a Government organization not to discharge its committed liabilitites and
therefore the Committee recommends that ` 50 crores be allocated to CBI at RE stage to enable it to liquidate
its committed liabilities. (Para 4.2)
Action Taken Reply
9.1. There is an increase of  `34.77 crores (7.89%) in CFY 2015-16 over BE 2014-15. The percentage
increase under relevant heads is given in the table below:-
Heads BE 2014-15 BE 2015-16 %age increase
PP&SS 12 crore 14 crore 16.67%
Minor Works 4.36 crore 5.36 crore 22.94%

6
DTE 15.3 crore 16.17 crore 5.69%
FTE 1.2 crore 1.2 crore 0
OE 19 crore 20.9 crore 10%
9.2. The Committee has recommended allotment of additional funds of  `50 crores in RE to liquidate
committed liabilities. The same has been noted and necessary demands will be projected while sending RE
2015-16.
Committee’s further observation
9.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Initiatives being taken for Modernisation
Recommendation/Observation
10.0. The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by CBI and in view of the diverse nature of cases
being handled by the organization is of the view that there should be no compromise on their plans for
modernization. (Para 4.7)
Action Taken Reply
10.1. Concerted efforts are being made to modernize CBI by improving infrastructure facilities and updating
technological inputs. A number of plan schemes namely e-Governance of CBI, TAFSU, Modernization of
Training Centres, Comprehensive Modernization of CBI branches/offices, Comprehensive Modernization
and Purchase of land/construction of office/residence buildings and construction of office complex at
Mumbai are at various stage of implementation. Against an allocation of  ` 63.39 cr. under RE 2014-15
(Plan), an amount of  ` 62.74 cr. (99% of RE) was spent, which is 74.5% higher than the amount spent
during the previous financial year. This has resulted in improvement of infrastructure facilities like office
automation work of CBI Office Complex at Mumbai and purchase of IT equipments under e-Governance
scheme besides a new scheme for ‘Advanced Certified Course for CBI officers’. Further, a sum of
`85.07 cr. has been allocated in this Financial Year 2015-16 for Plan Schemes.
Committee’s further observation
10.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
Complaints: Receipts, Status, Disposals
Recommendation/Observation
11.0. The Committee takes note of the penalties sanctioned by the CVC. (Para 4.13)
Action Taken Reply
11.1. Noted.

7
Committee’s further observation
11.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Chief Vigilance Officers
Recommendation/Observation
12.0. The Committee takes note of the high number of pending cases with the CVOs. The Committee
feels disciplinary proceedings should be concluded in a time-bound manner preferably within a year of
issuance of charge-sheet and all cases of disciplinary proceedings extending beyond the period so stipulated
should be closely monitored to ensure quick finalization of such cases. (Para 4.15)
Action Taken Reply
12.1. Continuous efforts are being made to reduce pendencies with the CVOs and to reduce the same.
Action in this regard includes periodic meetings with CVOs, writing reminders and D.O. letters. Committee’s
advice is noted for compliance by CVC.
Committee’s further observation
12.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Chief Technical Examiner’s Organisation
Recommendation/Observation
13.0. The Committee commends the work of the CTEO which helped in the saving of resources and
recommends that avenues may be explored on how the CTEO can be provided with the desired manpower
as soon as possible. The nature of graft and corruption is becoming highly complex and appropriate analysis
can only be carried out with the help of professionals with experience and expertise in the area. The DoPT
must look into the matter expeditiously and ensure that the organization is well staffed. Sufficient Budgetary
allocations should be made to ensure that the organization can attract the right personnel and is able to create
required support infrastructure to investigate complaints. The organization may also explore the possibility
of taking professionals on deputations or on contract. (Para 4.20)
Action Taken Reply
13.1. The proposals with regard to the upgradation of the posts of Chief Technical Examiners and Technical
Examiners are under consideration in the Commission.  Further, in view of existing vacancies of ATEs/JTEs
and for the future vacancies, circulars are being issued. Officers to man CTE organization are taken on
deputation to bring in expertise as suggested by the Committee. It is  also stated that in the last few CTE
Review meetings, the Commission is insisting on imparting training to the technical staff for enhancing their
skills in relevant fields and exposure to new areas  for which the Commission would consider to sharethe
training programmes received from various training organisations, DoP&T etc. with CTEO.
Committee’s further observation
13.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.

8
New Initiatives Proposed by the Commission
Recommendation/Observation
14.0. The Committee takes note of the new initiatives and appreciates the efforts of the Commission in
improving preventive vigilance in organizations. The Committee believes that preventive vigilance must be a
priority area for the Commission which is likely to have positive impact on the performance index of the
organization. (Para 4.24)
Action Taken Reply
14.1. The Committee has appreciated the new initiative of the Commission. Committee’s observation on
preventive vigilance is noted for compliance.
Committee’s further observation
14.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL  ADMINISTRATIVE  TRIBUNAL
Recommendation/Observation
15.0. The Committee has taken note of the vacancy position and notes the efforts made for filling up
vacancies. It also notes that the disposal rate of the Tribunal is lower than rate of institution of cases thereby
leading to increased pendency. Tribunals are meant for providing speedy and inexpensive justice to the
public servants. The high pendency runs contrary to the legislative intent of the CAT Act, 1985. The Committee
recommends that the Tribunal must take steps to reduce pendency.  Vacancies in Tribunal are also responsible
for this state of pendency in Tribunal and therefore the Committee recommends that the Department should
make every possible effort to expeditiously fill the vacant posts in the Tribunal. (Para 4.28)
Action Taken Reply
15.1. The main factor for pendency of cases is due to extension of jurisdiction of the Tribunal as thousands
of cases have been received on transfer from various Hon’ble High Courts to the Tribunal. As regards old
case, the main reason for pendency is due to the fact that most of the cases have been either remanded back
by the various Hon’ble High Courts or appeals in similar matters are pending in High Courts. In some case
where Special Leave Petitions are pending in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India such cases also remained
pending for disposal in the Tribunal.
15.2. There were 12 vacancies for the year 2014. Order for appointment in respect of all have already
been issued after getting the approval of ACC. Selection of the anticipated vacancies occurring during 2015
is also under process and two meeting of the Selection Committee have already been held in this regard.
Meeting for final selection is going to be held shortly.
15.3. The Government has taken various initiatives to reduce the pendency of cases. In addition to filling
up of vacancies, the following steps have been taken which inter-alia include:-
(a)  Monitoring of monthly disposal rate of each Bench and taking up the matter from time to time
with CAT for monitoring of the same to ensure speedy disposal of pending cases.

9
(b) The Hon’ble Chairman, CAT has been advising the respective Benches from time to time to
reduce the pendency of old cases by listing the same in Daily Cause List with a note that “no
adjournment will be allowed”. The oulaying Benches have been directed to constitute Special
Benches in the afternoon session if need be. The Hon’ble Chairman keeps on impressing upon
all the Benches to strive hard to dispose of all pending cases by writing D.O. letters to the
Hon’ble Head of Department of the Benches.
(c) The Department has also requested all the Ministries/Department to instruct the Government
Counsels engaged in the cases to expedite filing of rejoinder/reply within the allocated time.
Committee’s further observation
15.4. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Status of Infrastructure and Initiatives taken by the Tribunal to Improve Efficiency
Recommendation/Observation
16.0. The Committee while taking note of the above initiatives, is of the view that computerization of
various Benches of CAT must be completed as soon as possible and cases pending for over three years
taken on priority basis and disposed off at the earliest. The Committee recommends that adequate financial
resources must be made available to the CAT Benches so that the computerization and other initiatives taken
by it do not suffer for want of adequate funds. (Para 4.33)
Action Taken Reply
16.1. A provision of for  ` 1.94 crore has been made under sub-head Information and Technology for
CAT during the current financial year. Matter has also been taken up with Department of Electronics
and Information Technology (DEITY) for funding Assistance of  `  6.05 crore for a pilot Project
“Computerization of CAT implementation of Case Management System (CMS), in CAT under the scheme
on “Good Governance and Best Practices” run by DEITY . DEITY has sanctioned an amount of
` 397.04 lakh so far on sharing basis. This Department has requested DEITY to fund the pilot Project
entirely.
16.2. The Hon’ble Chairman, CAT has been advising the respective Benches form time to time to reduce
the pendency of old cases by listing the same in Daily Cause List with a note that “no adjournment will be
allowed”. The outlaying Benches have been directed to constitute Special Benches in the afternoon session
if need be.
Committee’s further observation
16.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
Submission of RTI Returns

10
Recommendation/Observation
17.0. The Committee takes serious note of tendency to evade filing of returns by public authorities to
the Commission. The Department should ensure 100% compliance with all statutory regulations of the
RTI Act including Section 25 (2) which mandates filing Annual Returns by Public Authorities.
(Para 4.38)
17.1. The DoPT must take up the matter with all Ministries/Departments and ensure that all public authorities
file returns with CVC as mandated by the RTI Act. There can be no justification for flouting the rules by
Government Departments. The Committee is pained to find Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions in the top ten list of Defaulters. The Ministry is the nodal Ministry with respect to implementation
of the RTI Act and therefore must lead by example. (Para 4.39)
Action Taken Reply
17.2. Cabinet Secretary brought to the notice of the Department of Personnel that many Ministries
/ Departments have not submitted their quarterly return for 2012-13 to the CIC, which eventually
delay the preparation and submission of Central Information Commission’s Annual Report to the
Parliament.
17.3. Accordingly, DOPT vide O.M.No.8/1/2013-IR Dated 18th July,2013 impressed upon all Ministries
/ Departments to upload their quarterly return for the year 2012-13 on the web-based software “RTI Annual
Report Information System” available on the website of CIC and also to ensure submission of quarterly
return regularly in time in future.
17.4. The Annual Return in respect of Department of Personnel & Training for the year 2014-15 was
furnished to Central Information Commission on 27.5.2015.
Committee’s further observation
17.5. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Disposal of Cases by the Commission
Recommendation/Observation
18.0. The Committee takes serious note of the increased pendency with the Commission as its rate of
disposal is lower than the rate of institution of cases. The Commission was set up with a mandate to provide
speedy relief to the aggrieved parties. However, the current situation runs counter to this mandate.
(Para 4.43)
Action Taken Reply
18.1. The observation of the Committee has been conveyed for remedial action.
Committee’s further observation
18.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.

11
V acancies in the Commission
Recommendation/Observation
19.0. The Committee is not happy with the non-filling up of vacancies in the Commission. The Committee
desires that the DoPT should fill these vacant positions without any further delay. The vacancies are to a
large extent, responsible for the increasing pendency of cases in the Commission. (Para 4.45)
Action Taken Reply
19.1. Section 12(2) of the RTI Act, 2005 provides that the Central Information Commission consist of
one Chief Information Commission and such number of Information Commissioners not exceeding ten, as
may be deemed necessary.
19.2. In June, 2015, one Chief Information Commissioner and one Information Commissioner has been
appointed in CIC. At present there is one Chief Information Commissioner and seven Information
Commissioners in the CIC.
Committee’s further observation
19.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Plan Schemes of the Commission
Recommendation/Observation
20.0. The Committee is happy to note that the CIC shall have its own building in the near future and
requisite infrastructure to function smoothly. The Committee is happy to find that the Commission is fully
utilizing allocation made for construction of its building. The Committee also appreciates the e-Governance
initiative of the Commission and hopes that the system will further strengthen working of the Commission
and cut down delays in disposal of appeals/complaints. (Para 4.49)
Action Taken Reply
20.1. Noted.
Committee’s further observation
20.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
Civil Services Examination
Recommendation/Observation
21.0. The Committee takes note of the initiative taken by UPSC to ensure smooth conduct of the Civil
Services examination. The Committee has, however, noticed that the time taken to evaluate the answer
scripts of the Civil Services (Main) Examination has not reduced and there is often a lot of uncertainty
surrounding the date of declaration of the results of the Main examination. The Commission must make
efforts to reduce the time taken for evaluation of answer books of Main examination so that the recruitment
process could be completed in a shorter time span.  (Para 4.51)

12
Action Taken Reply
21.1. The Commission is committed to declare the results of various structured examinations conducted
by it on time. To achieve this objective, the Commission has been making concerted  efforts over  the  years
with some success. There has been a perceptible reduction  in  the  time  taken  for evaluation of  answer
scripts of Civil Services (Main) Examinations in the last two years. The time taken has reduced from 111
days in 2012 to 86 days in 2014, a reduction of 22.5 % despite the fact that the number of candidates
appearing in the Civil Services (Main) Examination has gone up from 14,176 in 2012 to 16,279 in 2014, an
increase of 14.8%. Despite the substantial reduction achieved in the time taken for evaluation of answer
scripts, the Commission is still committed to progressively compress the time schedules further to complete
the recruitment process at the earliest.
21.2. The Department agrees with the Commission.
Committee’s further observation
21.3. The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the efforts of the Commission.
Recruitment in other Organizations
Recommendation/Observation
22.0. The Committee appreciates the Constitutional mandate of the UPSC. However, it feels that a system
for recruitment needs to be made faster and less time consuming. The Commission may work with DoP&T
to evolve a suitable system for faster recruitment to posts in these organizations.  (Para 4.55)
Action Taken Reply
22.1. Continuous efforts are being made to improve the Online Recruitment Application (ORA) system as
well as scrutiny tools. Introduction of Single Window System (SWS) has resulted in a significant reduction
in the overall time taken in the Recruitment cases. The proposals for direct recruitment/Requisitions of CBI,
CVC and CIC are received through DoP&T only. The Commission is open to consider the suggestions for
effecting any further reduction in time taken for processing the Recruitment cases.
22.2. The Department agrees with the Commission.
Committee’s further observation
22.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Initiatives Taken by the UPSC
Recommendation/Observation
23.0. The Committee takes note of the initiatives of the Commission and feels that the wider application of
Information Technology in the examination process must be carried out only after studying its implications
on the students from rural/ tribal backgrounds. It should be ensured that candidates from far flung rural and
tribal areas are not put to in any disadvantageous position in recruitment examinations conducted by the
Commission. (Para 4.57)

13
Action Taken Reply
23.1. The Information Technology initiatives for receiving Online applications in the Commission’s office
was taken up in the year 2011.
23.2. In the year 2011, the applications were received both in the form of paper application i.e. Off-line
applications as well as Online applications. It was observed that the number of applicants from far flung
areas were 13,904 for Civil Services Examination, 2011 as against 11,906 in the year 2010 when only the
Off-line mode was available.
23.3. Based on the above experience, it was decided to go ahead with Online mode only. Since 2012, the
Commission has been receiving applications only through the Online mode. In respect of Civil Services
(Preliminary) Examination, it has been found that the candidates applying from far flung areas have been
consistently increasing by the year thereby indicating that such candidates are not put to any disadvantageous
position in the recruitment examinations conducted by the Commission. Applicants  received from far flung
areas:
Exam. Year No. of applicants
CS (Prelim.) 2010 1 1906
CS (Prelim.) 201 1 13904
CS (Prelim.) 2012 14987
CS (Prelim.) 2013 21125
CS (Prelim.) 2014 22215
23.4. Concerted efforts are made by the Commission to protect the interests of all the sections of society
including students from far flung rural and tribal areas. The applicants can submit their applications online,
round the clock and even on holidays, thus ending the time barrier. In respect of Direct Recruitment cases,
the candidates are informed about the Recruitment Tests and are called for Interviews through e-mails,
which has eliminated postal delays. The candidates can also communicate with the Commission through
emails.
23.5. The Department agrees with the Commission.
Committee’s further observation
23.6. The Committee takes note of the reply.
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION
Conduct of Examinations
Recommendation/Observation
24.0. The Committee takes note of the fact that the number of candidates applying each year for the
various examinations has increased considerably and the Commission is doing a commendable job in
conducting these exams in a fair and transparent manner. (Para 4.61)

14
Action Taken Reply
24.1. Noted.
Committee’s further observation
24.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
25.0. The Committee feels that the time-frames as stated by the Commission needs to be further reduced
as most of the examinations conducted by the Commission are of an objective nature, there is scope for
reducing the time taken for declaration of results. The Commission must seriously consider the use of an
online exam for the conduct of these exams so that the time taken for of these exams gets reduced. However,
while conducting such examinations, it should be ensured that the candidates from rural areas/economically
weaker sections (EWS) are not put to any disadvantage in such online exams. (Para 4.63)
Action Taken Reply
25.1. Noted.
Committee’s further observation
25.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Departmental enquiries against CBI officials
Recommendation/Observation
26.0. The Committee takes serious view of the matter. The cases against erring CBI officials must be
fast-tracked and disposed off as early as possible. Emphasis must be laid on cases which are pending for
more than two years. The CVC must ensure that departmental proceedings in all such cases are expeditiously
completed. (Para 4.22)
Action Taken Reply
26.1. Noted.
Committee’s further observation
26.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL  ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
Recommendation/Observation
27.0. The Committee further notes that the Tribunal system was originally envisaged as an alternative in
order to reduce the burden on the courts. The Committee desires that  the Tribunal should undertake a study
in order to determine the percentage of cases in which appeal has been filed in the High Courts in last five
years and examine if steps can be taken to reduce appeals to High Courts. (Para 4.29)

15
Action Taken Reply
27.1. The Central Administrative Tribunal was set up on 1.11.1985. Since then up to 31st December, 2014,
a total number of 6,81,969 cases have been instituted in CA T and CA T has disposed off 6,43,760 cases,
leaving pendency of 38,209 cases only. The disposal rate of cases is 94.39%. Steps are being taken by
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench to undertake study, in order to determine the percentage of
cases in which appeal have been filed in the High Courts, in last five years.
Committee’s further observation
27.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
28.0. The Committee takes serious note of the increased pendency with the Commission as its rate of
disposal is lower than the rate of institution of cases. The Commission was set up with a mandate to provide
speedy relief to the aggrieved parties. However, the current situation runs counter to this mandate.
(Para 4.43)
Action Taken Reply
28.1. The observation of the Committee has been conveyed to CIC for necessary remedial action.
Committee’s further observation
28.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
Civil Services Examination
Recommendation/Observation
29.0. The Committee desires that the UPSC should examine whether details with respect to moderation of
marks can be put in the public domain without compromising the objective behind it so that the fairness of
the UPSC is not questioned and also the desired level of transparency prevails. (Para 4.53)
Action Taken Reply
29.1. The marking system which includes moderation, is an integral component of the Commission’s
evaluation process, to which the Commission assigns a high degree of confidentiality. This modality of
moderation has evolved over a period of time and is based on a rational criteria which has stood the test of
time. The Commission makes merit-based recruitment and maintains the highest standards of integrity and
fair play in the examinations and selection processes. The Commission, therefore, does not support the
proposal for placing such confidential information   pertaining to its internal evaluation processes  in  the
public domain, which could have a high litigation potential that may impinge on the confidentiality and
integrity of the examination  process.
29.2. The Department agrees with the Commission.
Committee’s further observation
29.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.

16
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
Status of implementation of recommendations of the 2 nd Administrative Reforms Commission
Recommendation/Observation
30.0. The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken up by Department. The Committee feels that the
recommendations of the 2
nd ARC as are accepted by the Government for improving governance practices in
the country be implemented in a time-bound manner and monitoring mechanisms developed to oversee
implementation of such recommendations in a time bound manner. (Para 3.27)
Action Taken Reply
30.1. Based on a decision taken by the Committee of Secretaries in  a meeting held on 06.11.2012, all
Secretaries if Ministries/Departments of Government of India and Chief Secretaries of the States/ Union
Territories, have set an institutional mechanism to review the implementation of the accepted recommendations
of 2nd ARC. The Recommendations which required administrative steps are almost complete. Those involving
enactment of laws by the Parliament are at various stages of consideration. The Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances has also flagged this issue as on the agenda items which may be considered
in the various Inter State Zonal Council meetings being organized by Inter State Council Secretariat, MHA.
Reforms are in nature of a continuous ongoing process. In a federal set up like ours, the States may or may
not accept some or other of the recommendations.
Committee’s further observation
30.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Initiatives Taken for Recording and Institutionalization of Best Practices
Recommendation/Observation
31.0. The Committee takes note of the initiatives of the Department for dissemination of best practices in
good governance. The Committee feels that the initiatives should also be put up on the websites of the
various Government Departments. (Para 3.35)
Action Taken Reply
31.1. The suggestion made by the Committee has been noted for taking up the matter with other Ministries/
Departments.
Committee’s further observation
31.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Centralized Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS)
Recommendation/Observation
32.0. The Committee is of the view that efficient grievance redressal mechanism is the soul of responsive
and efficient governance machinery. While noting the gradual increase in the percentage of disposal of

17
grievances, the Committee also notes increase in the number of grievances received through the Portal.
The Committee is of the view that the system of grievance redressal must not only be confined to
resolving individual problems but must also result in systemic changes. Where required to reduce
grievances, the Committee desires that the Department should analyse grievances received by it in
order to identify the Departments/Organizations and problem areas in those Departments/Organization
which form major source of grievances. The problem areas must be clearly identified and institutional
and procedural reforms introduced in such areas to remove or reduce the grievances arising from
them. (Para 3.40)
Action Taken Reply
32.1. The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances is committed to efficient and
effective redressal of grievances of the Citizens.
32.2. As regards bringing about systemic reforms, the Department has analysed the Public Grievances
across 20 categories with respect to 90 Ministries/Departments in the Government of India. This has enabled
to identify major reasons for grievances across various Ministries/ Departments. Thus, major number of
grievances concern Ministries/Departments such as M/o Railways, D/o Telecommunications, D/o Posts,
M/o Health and Family Welfare and CBDT etc. Similarly, the major category of grievances include grievances
of employees, cases of harassment/atrocities, allegation of corruption/malpractices, grievances concerning
quality of service/civic amenities and on land related issues etc.
32.3. Based on the above, a number of steps have already been taken. These include resolution of grievances
through the Pro Active Governance and Timely Implementation (PRAGATI) system of monthly monitoring
and follow up system has also been introduced were in monthly meetings are held in DARPG with grievance
receiving Ministries/Departments so as to resolve them including through pro-people policy/process steps.
A proposal is also under examination for rendering well reasoned replies to the grievances so as to fully and
justifiably address the grievance of the petitioner.
32.4. The above steps inter-alia are expected to bring about systemic reforms as advised by the Hon’ble
Parliamentary Standing Committee.
Committee’s further observation
32.5. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
33.0. The Committee during its examination of the grievance redressal mechanism available for fishermen
and Sri Lankan refugees in Tamil Nadu, had interacted with the representatives of their Associations. The
Committee was apprised of the need of a single window grievance redressal system. Currently, an aggrieved
individual has to approach multiple authorities and has to constantly track his requests across various
offices. This not only causes hardship to the complainant, but also reduces the efficacy of the grievance
redressal machinery as often, there is a lack of co-ordination amongst the various authorities. The Committee
desires that the possibility of establishing a single window grievance redressal system should be studied and
if possible, it should be integrated with the grievance redressal machinery of the concerned agencies of the
Central/State Governments as the case may be. (Para 3.41)

18
Action Taken Reply
33.1. DARPG has already created a Single Window in the form of PG portal on which the grievances can
be lodged directly to the concerned Ministry/Department or the State Government. In addition the common
Service Centres have been integrated with the online CPGRAMS and thus any person can lodge the grievance
through the Common Service Centres. Field trials were held on 700 CSCs in 8 States and further
implementation, is under consideration.
Committee’s further observation
33.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEPARTMENT OF PENSIONS AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE
Sevottam Initiatives
Recommendation/Observation
34.0. The committee appreciates the efforts of the Department towards improving public service delivery
mechanism through the Sevottam project. The project needs to be expanded to all Government Departments.
More State Governments should also be encouraged to implement the Sevottam framework of public service
delivery in their respective Organizations. (Para 3.30)
Action Taken Reply
34.1. Most of the Ministries/Departments have implemented Sevottam through formulation of Citizen’s
Charter and implementation of Grievance Redress Mechanism through pgportal.gov.in the Citizens/Clients
Charter are available of the website of most of the Ministries/Departments. Letters have recently been issued
on 23.03.2015 and 13.05.2015 to update the Citizen’s/Client’s charter on a half yearly basis (copy enclosed).
A link to the online system PG portal has also been provided by the Ministries/Departments on the websites.
For capability building regular trainings are being held in the Department of CPGRAMS. Review meetings
are also being held regularly for monitoring the pendency of grievances in Ministries/Departments.
34.2. For the implementation of Sevottam in States the Department has been supporting State A TIs through
its Scheme for Strengthening of State ATIs through implementation of Sevottam training Cell. There are 10
such States namely Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, NCT of Delhi, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand and Punjab.
Committee’s further observation
34.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
35.0. The Committee takes note of the initiative for spreading pension related awareness. The Committee
is of the view that more publicity needs to be given to the initiatives taken by the Departments through mass
media campaigns. Workshops for retiring employees should be held while they are still in service in order to
acquaint them with the facilities offered in the Portal. A number of pensioners do not know the appropriate
authority to approach for seeking redressal of their grievances. Therefore, publishing frequently faced

19
problems and their solutions along with the appropriate authority to contact may go a long way in helping the
Pensioners.  The Department may also consider loading of film ‘Help at your Finger Tips on its Pensioners’
Portal’. (Para 3.46)
Action Taken Reply
35.1. This Department has produced a documentary film on Pensioners Portal entitled “Help at your Fingers
Tips” which is being telecast through National and regional channels of Doordarshan from time to time. The
recommendations of Committee to give more publicity to the initiative through Mass Media has been noted.
35.2. This Department has been holding Pre-Retirement workshop for retiring employees. The module of
the Pre-Retirement Counselling (PRCs)  would be streamlined to include more details on Pensioners Portal
so as to acquaint the retiring personnel about the facilities available under the Pensioner Portal with a view to
disseminate the information about the appropriate authority to approach for seeking redressal of grievances.
35.3. Pensioners Portal and the website of the Department encompass the frequently Asked Question and
their replies. This Department has also prepared an information brochure for retiring employees which
contains a gist of important pension related circulars as also the details of important websites and telephone
numbers of officers who could be approached for redressal of pension related grievances.
35.4. The Department has also uploaded the film “Help at your Fingers Tips” on the pensioner portal as
per suggestions of the Standing Committee.
Committee’s further observation
35.5. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CPENGRAMS
Recommendation/Observation
36.0. The Committee notes with appreciation that number of grievances disposed off between 2012 to
2014 far exceeded the number of complaints received.  The Committee however, would like to advise the
Department that it should also pay equal attention to the quality of disposal of grievances. The Department
may also consider introducing systematic institutional reforms to remove or reduce common complaints.
(Para 3.48)
Action Taken Reply
36.1. The suggestions of the Committee regarding paying equal attentions to the quality of the disposal of
grievances has been taken note of and suitable instructions are being issued to the concerned Nodal Officers
in the Ministries/Departments to ensure that the grievances are properly examined and a reasoned
communication is sent to petitioner before closing the grievance.
36.2. This Department has also placed on its website the frequently asked questions with a view to reduce
the common complaints on pensionary matters.
Committee’s further observation
36.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.

20
Bhavishya Programme
Recommendation/Observation
37.0. The Committee takes note of this initiative and recommends that the Payment Tracking System may
be integrated with the Pensioners’ Portal so as to enable the Pensioners to have access to all their pension
related issues through a single window. (Para 3.54)
Action Taken Reply
37.1. Same has been integrated.
Committee’s further observation
37.2. The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the efforts of the Department.

21
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURUSE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING
National Centre for Good Governance (NCGG)
Recommendation/observation
38. The Committee takes note of the above mentioned activities of NCGG during 2014-15 and desires
that the findings of the case studies and impact assessments made by it be uploaded in the websites of the
DoPT and respective implementing Departments and agencies of the various schemes. The Committee
would further like NCGG to introduce at least one innovate governance reform each year that would lead to
fundamental and substantial improvement in the governance of the country. (Para 3.5)
Action Taken Reply
38.1 NCGG is in the process of summarizing and editing the findings of the case studies and impact
assessment already made by it to be uploaded in the website of the DoPT and respective implementing
departments and agencies of the various schemes at the earliest. The suggestion of the Committee has been
noted.
Committee’s further observation
38.2 The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee hopes that the Center will complete
the updation on a time bound manner and as early as possible.
Protection of Whistle Blowers
Recommendation/observation
39. The Committee expresses its strong displeasure over non implementation of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2013 and the Whistle Blowers’ Protection Act. It is unfortunate that the Ministry has so far not taken
any steps to amend the Whistle Blowers Protection Act though it maintains that amendments are needed
before the Act can be implemented. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary
action for quick opprationalisation of both the Acts. (Para 3.10)
Action Taken Reply
39.1 The Whistle Blowers Protection Bill, 2011 was passed by the Lok Sabha on the 27th of December,
2011 and was transmitted to the Rajya Sabha. Subsequently, it was noticed that some of the provisions in the
Bill needed a relook with a view to strengthening the safeguards against disclosures which may prejudicially
21

22
affect the sovereignty and integrity of the country, security of the State, etc. Accordingly, notices for certain
official amendments were given to Rajya Sabha Secretariat from time to time. The Bill was finally taken up
for consideration and passing on 21st February, 2014. However, as the Bill was taken up on the last day of
the last Session of the 15th Lok Sabha, the official amendments which had been given notice of, were not
moved during consideration and passing of the Bill on the said date. The Bill was passed by the Rajya Sabha
without any amendments ( i.e., in the same form as passed by the Lok Sabha) on 21st February, 2014. The
Bill has received the assent of the President on 9th May, 2014 and has become the Whistle Blowers Protection
Act, 2011 (No. 17 of 2014). In view of this, the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 requires some
amendments (aimed at safeguarding against disclosures affecting sovereignty and integrity of India, security
of the State, etc.), before it is brought into force. To make these amendments to the Act, the Government
has introduced the Whistle Blowers Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in the Lok Sabha on 11th May, 2015
which has been passed by the Lok Sabha on 13
th May, 2015. Notices are proposed to be issued for consideration
and passing of the said Bill in the Rajya Sabha during the ensuing Monsoon Session. Thus, the Department
has already taken action for expeditious implementation and enforcement of the Whistle Blowers Protection
Act, 2011. The same will be brought in force after the Parliament passes the aforesaid amendment Bill and
Presidential assent thereto is received.
39.2 The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011, after being passed by both the Houses of the Parliament has
become an Act titled “The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014)” which was brought into force
with effect from 16
th January, 2014 vide notification of the same date. The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
2013 requires some amendment so as to provide for situations where the composition of the Selection
Committee is deficient / incomplete due to absence of Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha, etc. Accordingly,
Lokpal & Lokayuktas and other related law (Amendment) Bill 2014 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 18.12.2014.
The same has been referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law& Justice and is presently under consideration of the Committee. The Parliamentary Standing Committee
considering the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and other related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014 has so far held its
meetings on the Bill on 08-01-2015, 03-03-2015, 08-04-2015, 15-04-2015 and 26.05.2015. Further one
more meeting has been scheduled for 16.07.2015. Besides this, the Standing Committee has also undertaken
study-visit on the said Bill to Kolkata, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Tirupati and Chennai from 14th to 23rd June,
2015 and to Srinagar from 10th July to 12th July, 2015. Further action can only be taken by the Government
after the Standing Committee submits its report on the said Bill.
Committee’s further observation
39.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA)
Recommendation/observation
40. The Committee takes note of the initiative of LBSNAA. The Committee feels that their initiative may
be replicated in other training institutes as well. The e-initiative should be scaled up and an effort made to
make the functioning of the various Central Government Ministries/Department paperless. (Para 3.18)
Action Taken Reply
40.1 The Heads of all State ATIs/CTIs have been addressed to take appropriate action in this regard.

23
40.2 E-initiative regarding functioning of various Central Government Ministries/Departments is not within
the mandate of DOPT.
Committee’s further observation
40.3 The Committee takes note of the reply. The Department must follow up with the State ATls/
CTls on this aspect on a regular basis.
V acancies in IAS, Allied Services, CCI, CDC etc.
Recommendation/observation
41. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in this direction. However, it notes that
still there is 28.40% deficit in promotion quota. This suggests that on one hand officers of State Civil
Services are not getting inducted into IAS on the due time and such officers must be feeling demoralized. On
the other hand, a large number of vacancies in IAS mean that posts required to be manned by IAS officers
are not being appropriately manned. This state of affairs should not be allowed to persist and the Department
and UPSC must ensure that State Civil Services officers get their induction into IAS at due time and there is
no significant deficit in promotion quota in IAS. (Para 3.22)
Action Taken Reply
41.1 This Department has taken various steps to ensure that the State Civil Services Officers get their
induction into IAS in time. The process of determination of vacancies in all the States / Joint Cadres of IAS
was initiated well in advance and was completed by 31 st March, 2015 after having meetings with the State
Governments. In the Meeting with the Principal Secretary (GAD) of all the State Governments held on
18.05.2015 the State Governments were impressed upon to send their proposals to UPSC for convening of
Selection Committee Meetings for preparation of the Select List 2014 (SCS) and 2014 (Non-SCS) in respect
of all States/Cadres latest by October, 2015. Instructions have been issued to the State Governments to
publish the seniority list of their State Civil Services officers and also to standardize the mechanism of
submission of ACRs of these officers so as to enable it to prepare the Select Lists expeditiously. This
department also participates in the zonal review meetings conducted by UPSC so as to monitor the progress
of recruitment by promotion. Further the promotion regulations have been made more exact and transparent
so as to reduce the scope of litigation.
Committee’s further observation
41.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the Department would take proactive
measures to ensure that there is no deficit in either of the cadres.
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Human Resource
Recommendation/observation
42. The Committee is concerned at the large number of vacant positions in the CBI. On the one hand,
the number of investigations being entrusted to CBI is rising but on the other hand, there is an acute staff
crunch. The Committee fears that if this situation persists for a long time, this may adversely impact the

24
quality of investigation of CBI. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take all
possible steps to ensure prompt filling of vacancies in CBI. (Para 4.4)
Action Taken Reply
42.1 Occurrence and filling up 9fvacancies is a continuous process. The number of vacancies keeps on
varying depending on the induction, promotion, repatriation and retirement of officers. Department of
Personnel and Training concerned with filling up posts of level of SP and above in CBI has filled up a
number of vacant posts at senior level on the recommendations of CBI Selection Committee held frequently.
42.2 CBI, responsible with filling up vacancies at junior level executive posts, has made persistent efforts
to fill up these posts by various methods of recruitment. CBI as well as Department of Personnel & Training
has pursued with SSC to expedite process of selection for junior executive posts to be filled up by direct
recruitment. Similarly, CBI has pursued with UPSC to expedite vacant executive/legal/Technical posts in
CBI at different levels. CBI has also taken steps for conducting DPCs to expedite appointments for vacant
executive posts at various levels by promotion in time bound manner.
42.3 Various measures/steps have been taken to attract personnel to CBI in executive/technical posts at
various levels and to smoothen the process of recruitment by providing special dispensation/amendments in
the RRs of various posts as under :
Recruitment Rules in respect of various posts in CBI have been amended from time to time as
recommended by Parliamentary Standing Committee in its various reports in consultation with the
UPSC.
CBI has been exempted from consultation with UPSC for recruitment to the post of Dy. SP for a
period of three years.
There was 100% Direct Recruitment of constables in CBI which has been now dispensed with
keeping in view the expensive, long drawn and cumbersome exercise for a small organization like
CBI.
Efforts are being made to fill up vacant posts by promotion by relaxing the provisions of RRs as and
when sufficient numbers of eligible officers are not available in the feeder grade.
42.4 Attempts are being made to attract more officers to join CBI on deputation by modernizing CBI in
terms of equipments and machinery, infrastructural support, investigation tools, weaponry and vehicles,
designing special incentive allowances, increasing number of residential quarters, etc.
Committee’s further observation
42.5 The Committee takes note of the reply. The CBI must ensure adequate staffing in order to
deal with the rising burden of investigations.
CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
Submission of RTI Returns
Recommendation/observation
43. The direction given by DoPT in their guidelines for implementation of Section 4 of the RTI Act

25
which required appointment of a Joint Secretary rank officer as the Nodal Officer should be followed in
letter and spirit. The Committee feels that all Ministries/ Departments/ Organisations themselves must
encourage suo-motu disclosure of relevant information. The Committee suggests the publishing of RTI
requests and their replies on the websites of the Departments so that duplicity of requests is avoided. All
Departments must make an analysis of information which is sought most often from applicants and provide
it on their website as suo-motu disclosure. (Para 4.40)
Action Taken Reply
43.1 In accordance with the guidelines issued on 15.4.2013, regarding implementation of Section 4 of
RTI Act, all Ministries / Departments were requested vide O.M. dated 21.10.2014 to initiate action to
provide the facility to upload the replies to RTI applications and first appeals on their respective websites
w.e.f. 31.10.2014.
43.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been brought to the notice of all Ministries/Departments
for strict compliance.
Committee’s further observation
43.3 The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the Department for quick
implementation.
DEPARTMENT OF PENSIONS & PENSIONERS’ WELFARE
SANKALP
Recommendation/observation
44. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department. The Committee however recommends
that more publicity needs to be given to the initiative so that more persons could benefit from this initiative.
(Para 3.51)
Action Taken Reply
44.1 The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted.
Committee’s further observation
44.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the Department has taken adequate
steps to give publicity to the initiative.

26
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
Chief Vigilance Officers
Recommendation/observation
45. The Committee feels that a full time CVOs should be appointed in all sensitive Central Ministries/
Departments and the bodies/PSUs falling within their purview. This appointee should be from outside the
organization having adequate experience in dealing with vigilance cases. This would ensure transparency
and impartiality in the conduct of vigilance proceedings. (Para 4.17)
Action Taken Reply
45.1 Full time independent CVOs are being appointed in the Central Public Sector Enterprises, Public
Sector Banks/Insurance companies/Financial Institution. Appointment of CVOs in Central Public Sector
Enterprises is made by DoP&T and appointment of CVOs in Public Sector Banks/Insurance companies/
Financial Institution are made by Department of Financial Services with the approval of the Commission.
CVOs are appointed for an initial tenure of three years which is extendable by two year with the approval of
the Commission. CVOs cannot be relieved/repatriated without the approval of the Commission. Thus, it has
been ensured that CVOs discharge their duties and functions without any fear and pressure.
45.2 Further it is submitted that at present, there are part-time CVOs in Central Ministries/Departments.
A Joint Secretary of the Ministry/Department is generally appointed as CVO with the approval of the
Commission. The CVO reports directly to the Secretary of the Ministry/Department in vigilance related
matters. The vigilance related work in the Ministries/Departments are not enough to require a full time
officer of the rank of Joint Secretary working as CVO.
Committee’s further observation
45.3. The Committee reiterates its recommendations that full time Chief Vigilance Officers need
to be qppointed in the Ministries/ Departments to curb corruption.
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
46. The Committee also desires that the Commission should consider conducting the exams online on
multiple dates. In this regard, the examination process of the GMAT exam may be studied carefully and its
26

27
applicability in the examinations conducted by the Commission evaluated. Similarly, the pattern of online
examinations conducted by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) may also be considered. (Para 4.64)
Action Taken Reply
46.1 Noted.
Committee’s further observation
46.2 The Commission should reconsider the pattern and methodology of the conducting the exam.

28
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING
Viability of Kendriya Bhandars and Initiatives Taken to Improve their Efficiency
Recommendation/observation
47. The Committee takes notes of the steps undertaken to improve the efficiency of Kendriya Bhandar.
The Committee however, recommends that a study be undertaken to find out as to the extent customers are
satisfied with the quality of products sold in Kendriya Bhandar and to what extent these products are
cheaper than the prevailing market prices. The study may also find out the percentage of its sales to
Government Organisations due to preferential treatment clause and its sale to government employees and
public in general and in case its sale to latter category is low, reasons thereof maybe furnished to the
Committee. Such a study may help in revamping the Kendriya Bhandar in a manner to help to serve the
objectives for which it was set up. (Para 3.13)
Action Taken Reply
47.1 The task of study has been entrusted to Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA), which will
submit its report shortly.
Committee’s further observation
47.2 The Committee directs the Department expedite the study and furnish the report as soon as
possible.
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
Complaints: Receipts, Status, Disposals
Recommendation/observation
48. It is not clear to the Committee if complaints forwarded to CVO/CBI are treated as disposed off by
CVC. The Committee is of the view that CVC should continue monitoring of such complaints particularly if
these fall within its jurisdiction, till these have been finally investigated. (Para 4.11)
Action Taken Reply
48.1 Noted.
Committee’s further observation
48.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Central Vigilance Commission must
28

29
ensure careful monitoring of the cases referred to Central Bureau of Investigation and ensure that
investigation process is completed in time so that innocent officers are not harassed unnecessarily.
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION
Statutory Status
Recommendation/observation
49. The Committee supports above recommendation of the Expert Group. The DoPT may pursue the
matter and ensure that statutory backing is provided to the SSC. The Committee further desires that the
DoPT may look into the other recommendations of the Expert Group and ensure that they are implemented
as far as practical. (Para 4.66)
Action Taken Reply
49.1 Noted.
Committee’s further observation
49.2 The Department must seriously consider the recommendations of Expert Group and implement
them as far as practical.

30
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE MINISTRY
1. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Paras 1.2, 2.4, 3.3, 4.2, 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2, 9.3, 10.2,
11.2, 12.2, 13.2, 14.2, 15.4, 16.3, 17.5, 18.2, 19.3, 20.2)
2. The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the efforts of the Department.
(Para 21.3)
3. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Paras 22.3, 23.6, 24.2, 25.2, 27.2, 28.2, 29.3, 30.2,
31.2, 32.5, 33.2, 34.3, 35.3, 36.3, 37.2)
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
 TO PURUSE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
1. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee hopes that the Center will complete
the updation on a time bound manner and as early as possible. (Para 38.2)
2. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 39.3)
3. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Department must follow up with the State ATIs/
CTIs on this aspect on a regular basis. (Para 40.3)
4. The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the Department would take proactive
measures to ensure that there is no deficit in either of the cadres. (Para 41.2)
5. The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the Department has taken adequate
steps to give publicity to the initiative. (Para 42.5)
6. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 43.3)
7. The Committee takes note of the reply. The CBI must ensure adequate staffing in order to
deal with the rising burden of in vestigations. (Para 44.2)
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE
HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
1. The Committee reiterates its recommendations that full time Chief Vigilance Officers need
to be appointed in the Ministries/ Departments to curb corruption. (Para 45.3)
30

31
2. The Commission should reconsider the pattern and methodology of the conducting the exam.
(Para 46.2)
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
1. The Committee directs the Department expedite the study and furnish the report as soon as
possible. (Para 47.2)
2. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Central Vigilance Commission must
ensure careful monitoring of the cases referred to Central Bureau of Investigation and ensure that
investigation process is completed in time so that innocent officers are not harassed unnecessarily.
 (Para 48.2)
3. The Department must seriously consider the recommendations of Expert Group and implement
them as far as practical. (Para 49.2)

MINUTES

35
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 14 th March, 2016 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Rajani Patil
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
5. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri P.P . Chaudhary
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Dr. A. Sampath
11.
Shri M. Udhayakumar
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the consideration
and adoption of the draft 81st, 82nd and 83rd Reports of the Committee on (i) the Role of Ministry of Law and
Justice in Framing/Approving the Provisions of International Covenants/Multilateral/Bilateral Treaties or
Agreements (ii) Action Taken Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained
in the 75 th Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and (iii)  Action
Taken Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained in the 76 th Report on
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. Hon’ble
Members deliberated on the Reports, and thereafter, the Reports were adopted with minor editorial
amendments.
3. The Committee decided to present the 81 st Report to both Houses of Parliament on the 15 th March,

36
2016. It authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Bhupender Yadav to present the Report to Rajya
Sabha and Shri P.P. Chaudhary and in his absence, Adv. Joice George to lay the same in Lok Sabha. The
Committee also decided to present the 82nd and 83rd Reports to both Houses of Parliament on the 16th March,
2016. It authorized Shri K.T.S. Tulsi and in his absence, Smt. Rajani  Patil to present the Report to Rajya
Sabha and Dr. A. Sampath and in his absence, Shri M. Udhayakumar to lay the same in Lok Sabha.
4. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.