  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
  December, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
108 
 
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE-HUNDRED SIXTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December 2021) 
 (Laid on the table of the Lok Sabha on 10th December 2021) 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

  
CS (P & L) - …. 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
   
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
  December 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
  
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE-HUNDRED SIXTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
 (Laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
 

  
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii)     
   
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                       (iii-v) 
 
4. REPORT       1-50 
(i) CHAPTER I          2-22            
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY  
(ii) CHAPTER II                                                                   23-31                                                           
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH TH E COMMITTEE DOES NOT  
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY  
(iii) CHAPTER III                                                                                                            32-50                                                                                               
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPE CT OF WHICH COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS G IVEN FOR NOT ACCEPTI NG ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS.    
 
  5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE                               51-57 
 
  6. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                                                58-60 
 
  7. ANNEXURE (I -VII)                                                                                                                                       61-73 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                      
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
7. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. Shri P. Wilson 
10. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
14. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' 
20. Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Suresh Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Director 
3. Shri Amit Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Mohammad Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
6. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
(i) 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred  Eighth Report on 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the One  
Hundred Sixth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. 
2. The One Hundred Sixth  Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 16th March, 2021. 
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action 
Taken Replies on the One Hundred Sixth  Report of the Committee i n July, 2021 . The 
Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 8th 
December, 2021. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
8th December, 2021                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

  
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ACC   Appointments Committee of the Cabinet 
ACIS   Advance Case Information System 
AIS   All India Service Officers 
APAR   Annual Performance Appraisal Report 
APPPA  Advanced Professional Programme in Public Administration 
ARC   Administrative Reforms Commission 
ARPG   Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
ASCI    Administrative Staff College of India  
ASO   Assistant Section Officer 
ATI   Administrative Training Institutes  
CAPFs   Central Armed Police Forces  
CAT    Central Administrative Tribunal  
CBI   Central Bureau of Investigation 
CCA   Cadre Controlling Authorities  
CIC    Central Information Commission  
CPENGRAMS Centralized Pension Grievances Redress And Monitoring 
System 
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievances Redress And Monitoring System 
CPSE   Central Public Sector Enterprise 
CRC   Cadre Review Committee 
CS   Central Secretariat 
CSCS   Central Secretariat Clerical Service 
CSE   Civil Services Examination 
CSS   Central Secretariat Service 
CSSS   Central Secretariat Stenographer Service 
CTV   Centralized Technology Vertical 
CVC   Central Vigilance Commission 
DARPG  Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances  
DLC   Digital Life Certificate  
DoPPW  Department of Pensions and Pensioner’s welfare 
(iii) 

  
DoPT   Department of Personnel and Training 
DP   Disciplinary Proceedings 
DPG   Directorate of Public Grievances  
DS   Deputy Secretary  
EP   Expert Panel 
IAS   Indian Administrative Service 
ICEI   International Center for Excellence in Investigation 
ICEFS   International Centre for excellence in Forensic Sciences 
IDBI   Industrial Bank of India 
IFS   Indian Forest Service 
iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training 
IIPA   Indian Institute of Public Administration 
IPS    Indian Police Service 
ISTM   Institute of Secretariat Training and Management 
LBSNAA   Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration  
LIMBS  Legal Information Management & Briefing System  
MSF   Multi Source Feedback 
NABARD  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
NBCC   National Building Construction Corporation 
NCT   National Capital Territories 
NGO   Non Governmental Organization 
NIC   National informatics Centre 
OBC   Other Backward classes 
PESB   Public Enterprises Selection Board 
PSU   Public Sector Undertaking 
QCI   Quality Council of India 
RBI   Reserve Bank of India 
RTI   Right to information act  
SC   Scheduled Caste 
SCM   Selection Committee Meeting 
SCOVA   Standing Committee of Voluntary Agencies  
SCS   State Civil Services 
SIDBI   Small industrial Development Bank of India  
(iv)  

  
ST   Scheduled Tribe 
SSC   Staff Selection Commission 
STQC   Standard Testing And Quality Certification  
UIDAI   Unique Identification Authority of India 
UPSC    Union Public Service Commission  
 US     Under Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
  
R E P O R T 
  
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations 
of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law a nd Justice in its One Hundred sixth Report on the Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of the Ministry, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha on the 16th March, 2021. 
2. The Committee had made as many  as 53  recommendations/observations in its One 
Hundred Sixth Report. Replies of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
thereto have been categorized and scrutinized under three chapters on the basis of satisfac tion 
of the Committee. Out of 53  recommendations where final replies have been received as 
many as 36 (68  percent approximately) of total recommendations are satisfactory.  These 
replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations ( 27) which have been  accepted by the 
Ministry, i.e. in respect of paras 2.18, 2.21, 2.56, 3.8, 3.15, 4.5, 4.21, 4.22, 
5.4, 5.9, 5.15, 6.9, 6.24, 6.30, 6.35, 7.9, 7.11, 7.13, 7.15, 7.20, 7.25, 7.28, 
8.10, 8.13, 8.17, 8.26 and 8.36  of the Report. The Committee is pleased to 
note that the Ministry has accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:   Recommendations/observations (09) which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry, i.e. in respect of 
paras 2.7, 2.50, 3.3, 4.18, 4.27, 5.14,  6.18, 6.19 and 6.37 of the Report. 
The Committee is satisfied with the explanations advanced by the Ministry 
and does not wish to pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations (1 7) in respect of which Committee has 
not accepted the replies of the Ministry, i.e. with regard to paras 3.9, 3.18, 
3.20, 3.21, 3.24, 4.3, 4.7, 4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 6.5, 6.13, 6.26, 6.36, 7.17 
and 7.29 of the Report. The Committee does not accept the reas ons given 
for not accepting its recommendations of the Committee and reiterates the 
same. 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by  the 
Committee in this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. 
  

2 
 
  
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.0 The Committee notes that the Ministry has utilized only ₹51.81 crores as against 
₹112.37 crores earmarked for schemes until 31 st January, 2021. The Committee expresses 
concern over the pattern of expenditure and recommends the Ministry to take corrective 
measures for proportionate and timely disbursement of funds. The Committee feels that the 
absorption capacity and perhaps the slo w pace of expenditure may have ultimately 
contributed to the drastic cut in funds to the tune of 77 crores allocated to the ‘Scheme’ 
component at RE stage. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry should spend 
the allocated resources on critical a reas such as capacity building, strengthening human 
resource potential, reforming administration and improving governance.   2.18 
Action Taken 
1.1  On account of COVID 19 pandemic and subsequent lockdown, expenditure 
restrictions were imposed by Ministry of Finance in the first three quarters of the financial 
year 2020-21. Also, relatively lower activities / works were carried out under the Schemes in 
that period on account of expenditure restrictions & COVID. As a result of which, pace of 
expenditure was relatively low in that period. Accordingly Scheme allocatio ns were reduced 
from Rs 190.00 crores to Rs 112.37 crores by M/o Finance at RE 2020-21 stage.  
1.2 Recommendations of the Committee regarding the focus on the key areas in respect of 
the BE 2021-22 allocations have been noted for compliance.   
Further observation 
1.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that it will judiciously 
spend the allocated resources on critical areas such as capacity building, strengthening 
human resource potential, reforming administration and improving governance. 
  

3 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4 The Committee believes that optimal utilization of funds is as important as allocation 
of funds itself. It has been observed that the Ministry has utilized about  68% of the funds 
allocated to it till 31 st January, 2021. Further, analysis of the utilization trends of various 
bodies under the administrative control of the Ministry revealed that the percentage of 
expenditure ranged from as low as 29% to as high as 10 0%. The Committee notes with 
concern that Lokpal has utilized a meagre 30% of the Sanctioned outlay. In view of Finance 
Ministry’s instructions imposing a ceiling limit on the expenditure that can be incurred in the 
last quarter and last month (March), the  Committee is concerned whether the remaining 
funds will be optimally utilized by the end of the ongoing fiscal year. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to identify the factors that restrict or hinder the 
utilization of funds by institutions  coming under its purview and draw an action plan 
accordingly to improve the utilization of funds. 2.21 
Action Taken 
1.5 On account of COVID 19 pandemic & subsequent lockdown along with    expenditure 
restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance in the first three quarters of the financial year 
2020-21, pace of expenditure in the Financial Year 2020-21 was slow.  
1.6 Observations of the Committee have been n oted for adherence & compliance. 
Necessary instructions will be issued to all the Organisations and a conscious effort will be 
made to utilise the allocation of funds in commensuration with the actual needs.  
Further observation 
1.7 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.8 The Committee observes that UPSC, the Premier recruitment agency of the Country, 
is functioning with two -third of the sanctioned strength. The Committee is fully conscious of 
the fact that recruitment is a continuous process and that some vacancies exist at any given 
point of time. However, nothing can justify such large number of vacancies, that too in a 
recruiting body which itself is mandated to fill up vacancies. The Committee is of the view 
that ‘perpetual vacancy’ should never be accepted as a norm as it can have a adverse impact 
on the productivity of the existing staff. In view of the above, the Committee recommends the 

4 
 
  
Ministry to recruit requisite additional staff in UPSC at the earliest and ac cordingly provide 
adequate budgetary allocation to UPSC to meet its increased establishment related 
expenditure. 2.56 
Action Taken 
1.9 The posts in various grades of UPSC are filled through multiple organized cadres or 
schemes such as Central Staffing Scheme, Central Secretariat Service (CSS), Central 
Secretariat Stenographers Service (CSSS), Central Secretariat Clerical  Service (CSCS), 
Department of Official Language (CSOLS Cadre), Controller General of Accounts in 
addition to Ex-Cadre posts of UPSC. The vacancies arising in these cadres are being reported 
from time to time to the respective Cadre Controlling Authorities for filling up. For filling up 
the vacancies in Ex -cadre which are borne on the establishment of UPSC, the recruitment 
action is at various stages and being closely monitored. 
1.10 With regards to Central Secretariat Services, due to ongoing litigation in the Apex 
Court, regular promotions in all grades of CSS/CSSS/CSCS were held up. In December 
2020/January 2021, this Department in cons ultation with Department of Legal Affairs had 
initiated an exercise to work out the possibility of filling up the existing vacancies in all the 
grades of CSS through ad-hoc promotions. 
1.11 As a result of ad -hoc promotions in pursuance, the vacancies of Di rector/Deputy 
Secretary in Union Public Service Commission have been filled up completely. In Under 
Secretary and Section Officer grades also, all the eligible officers were promoted. The present 
status is as below:  
 
1.12 The remaining vacancies in Under Secretary, Section Officer and Assistant Section 
Officer Grades are likely to be considered to be filled from July 2021 onwards, by ad -hoc 
Grade Sanctioned Strength In-position Vacancy 
Director/ Deputy 
Secretary 
36 36 0 
Under Secretary 72 68 4 
Section Officer 158 110 48 
Assistant Section 
Officer 
358 255 103 

5 
 
  
promotion of eligible officers and the appointment of Direct Recruit ASOs through 
Combined Graduate Level Examination by SSC. 
Further observation 
1.13 The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by Union Public Service 
Commission for filling up vacancies at various levels through adhoc promotions. The 
Committee also hopes that the remaining vacancies in Under Secretary, Section Officer 
and Assistant Section Officer Grade shall be filled up appropriately in a time bound 
manner. 
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.14 The Committee has persistently recommended that backlog reserved vacancies should 
be filled through special recruitment drives. However, the Committee observes that backlog 
vacancies are multiplying at an exponential rate, year after year. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends Do PT to instruct each Ministry/ De partment of the Central Government to 
designate an officer of appropriate level exclusively for the purpose of monitoring the 
backlog reserved vacancies of that Ministry/ Department from time to time and ensuring that 
they are filled up. 3.8 
Action Taken  
1.15 Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT)  issued instructions to all 
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government to designate an officer at least of the rank 
of Deputy Secretary, as Liaison Officer, to ensure due compliance of the orders and 
instructions pertaining to reservation admissible to SCs, STs and OBCs. 
1.16 DoPT also issued instructions to all Ministries/Departments of the Central 
Government to constitute an In -House Committee for identification of backlog reserved 
vacancies, to study the root cause of such vacancies, to initiate measures to remove the 
factors causing such vacancies and to fill them up through Special Recruitment Drives. 
Further observation 
1.17  The Committee appreciates DoPT for instructing all Ministries/Departments of 
the Central Government to designate an officer at least of the rank of Deputy Secretary, 

6 
 
  
as Liaison Officer, to ensure due compliance of the orders and instructions pertaining to 
reservation admissible to SCs, STs and OBCs. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.18  The Committee observes that cadre review of 38 Central Government Group A 
services is pending at various stages. The Committee recommends DoPT to impress upon the 
Cadre Controlling Authorities  (CCAs) to strictly observe the prescribed periodicity of five 
years for Cadre review, henceforth. CCAs may also be instructed to undertake cadre 
restructuring, wherever necessary, to address stagnation and ensure proper career 
progression in a time-bound manner. 3.15 
Action Taken  
1.19 Provisions governing the process of cadre review of Central Group „A‟ Services were 
issued as consolidated guidelines vide Office Memorandum No. I -11011/1/2009-CRD dated 
14.12.2010 along with a monograph. Under the said guidelines, every cadre should be 
reviewed once in five years . The Monograph issued with cadre review guidelines details all 
the issues involved in cadre review including the objective of the cadre review to make a 
healthy balance between legitimate career progression and functional requirement. Prime 
reason for the  delay in cadre review being non -submission of cadre review proposal by the 
concerned CCA. The Department is taking up the matter regularly with the concerned CCAs 
for expediting cadre review proposal. Apart from DO letters in this regards, meetings are al so 
organized from time -to-time. In order to get all the pending cadre reviews (pending till the 
end of 2021) complete by this year, this Department had issued a calendar for cadre review 
on 12.02.2021 placing 3 -6 services every month directing the CCAs to submit cadre review 
proposal by that month. Further, meetings are being held with these CCAs to discuss the 
reasons for delay in submission of cadre review proposals and issues in the proposal in one 
month advance of the calendar. Two such meetings were he ld on 11.03.2021 by Deputy 
Secretary (CRD) with CCAs of cadre review of Central Engineering Services (CPWD), 
Central Electrical and Mechanical Engineering Services (CPWD), Central Architect Service 
(CPWD) and Central Labour Service. Various issues viz. the  need and procedure of cadre 
review, preparation of cadre review proposal, functional justification and need of career 
progression etc. are being discussed in detail during the meetings. 
 

7 
 
  
Further observation 
1.20  The Committee notes that delay in the submission of Cadre review proposals by 
Cadre Controlling authorities concerned is, by and large, responsible for the stagnation 
of cadre review process. The Committee appreciates the Department for pursuing the 
matter vigorously and for following up with authorities concerned through regular 
meetings and expects that all pending cadre reviews get completed by December 2021. 
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.21 The Committee notes that 386 disciplinary cases requiring the advice of UPSC  are 
pending with it since last year. Secretary, UPSC, in her deposition before the Committee, 
attributed the delay in giving advice on disciplinary matters by UPSC to the shortage of 
qualified and competent officials. The Committee is of the view that administrative lag should 
be avoided at all costs and that no official should be made to undergo mental agony and 
monetary loss due to administrative delays. The Committee recommends UPSC to strengthen 
the mechanism so that inordinate delays could be avoided.  4.5 
Action Taken  
1.22 There is a continuous increase in the receipt of disciplinary cases in view of backlog 
with Ministries/Departments due to pandemic and monitoring of pendency with Ministries/ 
Departments by CVC. Thus, in order to „make even‟ the present rate of receipt and for 
disposal of disciplinary cases in a campaign mode, following actions/ decisions have been 
taken by Commission: 
a) It has been decided to engage additional 18 qualified and competent 
consultants (DS/US) on contract basis for a period of one year. 
b) It has been decided to continue with the existing scheme of paying additional 
remuneration to submit extra cases in order to motivate officers and 
consultants to meet the targets by putting in extra hours or working on 
holidays. 
c) Officers/Consultants of Services -I Branch have been exempted from exam 
duties at non-Delhi centers. 
 
 

8 
 
  
Further observation 
1.23 The Committee is appreciative of UPSC for rising to the occasion and engaging 
qualified and competent consultants  and for providing incen tives to them in order  to 
dispose of disciplinary cases in a time bound manner. 
Recommendation/observation 
1.24 The Committee is unable to understand as to how PESB is functioning without 
Chairperson and a Member. The Committee also notes that the percentage of female 
candidates recommended by PESB to top managerial posts in PSUs is abysmally low. The 
Committee recommends PESB to carry out an in -depth study and examine whether this 
gender gap is due to scarcity of competent women aspirants or due to glass ceiling effect. The 
Committee is of the considered opinion that there is a need to build an equitable work place 
for women and PESB must make an endeavour in this regard. 4.21 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.25  PESB was functional with existing two Members who pe rformed various tasks 
including finalizing job specification, scrutiny and shortlistings of applications etc. thereby 
enabling the PESB in the stage of readiness for holding the selection meetings as soon as the 
Chairperson is appointed by the Government.  Chairperson and one Member have since been 
appointed vide ACC communication dated 1.4.2021 and selection meetings for various 
positions have commenced since 23.04.2021.  Since the assumption of charge by the 
Chairperson, selection meetings for 23 posts [13 CMDs & 10 Directors] have been conducted 
in which recommendations were made against 21 posts [Annexure – II]. 
1.26 With reference to low percentage of female candidates recommended by PESB to top 
managerial posts in PSUs, it is stated that PESB is responsible for making selection/ 
recommendation of person(s) for appointment to Board level posts of Central Public Sector 
Enterprises (CPSEs). The pool of candidates comprises employees from CPSEs, Central 
Government, State Public Sector Enterprises (SPS Es) and Private Sector.  As per a recent 
survey in 30 CPSEs, the percentage of women executives in Board level is about 7.4%, 
whereas in the feeder pool in CPSEs it is about 5.8%.  Against the recommendation made for 
21 posts, as mentioned in above  para, 2 woman executives have been recommended which is 
about 10% of the total recommendations made. Further, percentage of women representation 
in Private Sector/ Central Government and SPSEs at senior positions continues to be low 
(though improving year on year ), thereby limiting applications received from these 

9 
 
  
categories.  This impacts the overall select percentage of female candidates recommended for 
top positions by PESB, though efforts are continuously being made to improve this. 
1.27 Attaining gender diversity in CPSEs has always remained a core priority for the 
Government.  Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) vide its OM No. 16(13)/2011 -GM 
dated 16.01.2019 has provided guidelines to all CPSEs to develop mechanism for employees‟ 
engagement in gender  diversity as a core priority and to initiate mentorship program for 
women for leadership development.  It is expected that such initiatives undertaken by the 
Government and the CPSEs would not only create conducive atmosphere for women at their 
workplace but will also contribute significantly to increase their numbers in the board level 
positions in the CPSEs in the coming years.  
Further observation 
1.28 The Committee is contented  to note that Public Enterprises Selection Board is 
functioning with full ca pacity and has already recommended candidates for 21 posts. 
The Committee hopes that initiatives taken by the Central Government and CPSEs 
from time to time will help build an equitable workplace for women. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.29 The Committee recommends PESB to furnish the details of PSUs coming under its 
purview where top managerial posts are lying vacant. PESB may also indicate against each 
vacancy, whether the vacancy is due to lapse on the part of concerned PSU in informing 
PESB about likel y vacancies or due to delay on the part of PESB in advertising vacancies 
and holding Selection Committee meetings. PESB may furnish a Status note on this in three 
month’s time. 4.22 
Action Taken 
1.30 The details of vacancies are annexed as under: 
i) The details of recommendations made by PESB from 23.04.2021 to 14.06.2021 is 
at Annexure-II; 
ii) The details of vacancies under PESB purview as on 01.04.2021 is at Annexure-
III; 
iii) The details of vacancies which are to be filled through SCSC/CSB Mode as on 
01.04.2021 is at Annexure-IV; and 
iv) The details of vacancies for which the administrative Ministry/Department has 
requested to keep in abeyance or on hold as on 01.04.2021 is at Annexure – V. 

10 
 
  
Further observation 
1.31 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
TRAINING INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.32 The Committee is of the view that Civil Services Training should be all encompassing 
and should focus on behavioural aspects and interpersonal relations as well.  The Committee 
is of the considered view that the  benefits of policies and programmes will percolate down to 
the intended beneficiaries only when the administrators working at the grassroot level are 
service oriented. Therefore, the Committee recommends LBSNAA to recalibrate its training 
programmes and i nstill a new service -oriented professionalism in civil servants so that they 
reach out to the citizens they serve.  5.4 
Action Taken  
1.33 The following action has been taken by LBSNAA for recalibrate the training 
programmes: 
1. New initiatives to improve the training imparted to Civil Servants has been initiated 
through Online courses which was placed on the i-GOT platform of the DoPT in order 
to facilitate self-paced learning and reinforce concepts that are a part of the training on 
campus. 
2. The inputs in the training are imparted in a modular format covering around fifteen 
key domains. These inputs aim to introduce Officer Trainees/ Participants to theory as 
well as experiences of Officers in the field and to new developments and initiatives of 
the Government so that they may be able to implement these programmes effectively. 
3. The Academy has included sessions/Modules on Leadership, Negotiation, 
Emotional Quotient, empathy/ empower through differentiable awareness session, 
Effective grievance redressal , Social Inclusion by exposing OTs to best & good 
practices from across the country. Along with this, sessions on simulation of the 
experiences of differently -abled persons and sessions on women empowerment, 
transgender persons are also a part of the Academy's courses. 
 

11 
 
  
Further observation  
1.34 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by LBSNAA to instill a new 
service oriented professionalism in civil servants.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.35 The Committee notes that there are a large number of vacancies in ISTM. The 
Committee has been apprised that vacancies of faculty have arisen due to recent promotions 
and consequent repatriations of faculty to their respective Ministries/ Cadres and also d ue to 
non-availability of suitable candidates as per Recruitment Rules. The Committee is of the 
view that ISTM should have a permanent faculty besides guest faculty and officers coming on 
deputation, in order to sustain the institution in the long run.   5.9 
Action Taken  
1.36 In spite of repeated attempts for filling up vacant posts, either no candidate was 
found suitable or there was no application for the posts. 
1.37 Further, following measures have been taken/ are being taken to fill up vacant posts: 
(a) Process for filling up vacant posts is under way; 
(b) Amendment to Recruitment Rules relating to 14 faculty designation (25 
posts) to make them more broad based and attractive is under process.  
(c) A proposal for encadrement of 12 faculty posts are under consider ation to 
ensure that these posts could be filled up on regular basis from the 
respective cadres immediately on arising of vacancy. 
(d) Relaxation of clause of minimum 9 years of service to apply on deputation 
(as per para 2.2. of DoPT‟s OM No. OM No. 7/10/2018 -CS. I(A) dated 
30.12.2019) for ISTM is under process to enable ASO Direct recruits to 
apply for the post of Assistant Director in the Institute. 
1.38 In addition to advertisement in Employment News, advertisements will also be 
released in National dailies through DAVP for better publicity and attracting better talent. 
  

12 
 
  
Further observation 
1.39 The Committee takes note of the efforts put in by ISTM to fill up vacancies. The 
Committee recommends ISTM to make posts lucrative so as to attract and retain talent. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.40 The Committee notes that APPPA training programme is benefiting middle level civil 
servants immensely. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the frequency of the 
programme may be considerably increased. The Committee also finds that Officers joining 
the Ministries of Central Government in the rank of Joint Secretaries and above under 
Central Staffing Scheme come from different services and lack exposure to the working of the 
Ministries. The Committee, therefore recommends IIPA to provide short term training to such 
officials so as to acquaint them with the functioning of the Ministries.  5.15 
Action Taken 
1.41 Administration (APPPA), the 10 month long course is a very popular mid -career 
training programme conducted by IIPA under the aegis of DoPT. It is attended by 
Middle/Senior Civil Servants and Defence Forces Officers. It has been running successfully 
for over 46 years now since 1975. DoPT conducted 46th APPPA course from1st July, 2020 to 
30th April, 2021. Due to COVID -19 pandemic, only 29 applications received and all of them 
were nominated for 46 th APPPA course. If DoPT received more applications for APPPA 
course, DoPT will consider to conduct 2 nd APPPA course. The recommendations 
/oberservations of the Committee to conduct short term training Prgoramme for Additional 
Secretary/Joint Secretary lever officers under Central Staffing Scheme has been noted. 
Further observation 
1.42 The Committee would like to be updated about the progress made in this regard.  
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND SERVICE MATTERS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.43 The Committee is concerned to note that CTV-CBI, International Centre of Excellence 
in Forensic S cience and International Centre of Excellence in investigation have not 
materialized yet. The Committee requests CBI to prepare a road map elaborating on how 
long it would take for these three ambitious projects to come into exi stence and furnish the 

13 
 
  
same to the Committee. The Committee is of the considered view that these three projects will 
strengthen the core competencies of CBI and greatly enhance its investigation capabilities 
and therefore, can brook no further delay.  6.9 
Action Taken  
1.44 CBI has informed that road map for CTV is being prepared in consultation with the 
Consultant, National Institute for Smart Government (NISG) and will be provided shortly. 
1.45 With regard to ICEFS and ICEI, CBI has informed that the matter relating to setting 
up of ICEI is in process of further examination whereas the matter relating to delinking of 
ICEFS from ICEI and formation of a Society for Governance of ICEFS is in process. Upon 
completion of these exercise, road map for these two projects will be prepared and provided. 
Further observation 
1.46 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends CBI to provide 
roadmaps of CTV-CBI, ICEI, ICEFS projects as and when finalized. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.47 The Committee i s in agreement with the views of the CVC and opines that the 
vigilance set -up in the Ministries / Departments of the Central Government needs to be 
augmented with manpower so as to expedite vigilance activities / cases at all stages. The 
Committee further recommends CVC to explore the feasibility of holding the authorities 
concerned answerable for inaction or delayed action. 6.24 
Action Taken  
1.48 In order to ensure timely finalization of disciplinary matters, the Central Vigilance 
Commission has issued various guidelines stressing upon the importance of adhering to the 
time schedule as prescribed by the Commission and DoPT. On observing that despit e 
issuance of guidelines by the Commission, in some organizations the disciplinary matters 
were pending for a considerably long time, Commission vide its Circular Nos. 18/12/20 dated 
14/12/20 and 20/12/20 dated 30/12/ 20 has given timelines to finalize acti on in old pending 
cases.  

14 
 
  
1.49 The Commission has viewed inordinate delay in handling official matters adversely 
and vide its Circular No. 23/04/04 dated 13.04.2004 read with modification vide Office Order 
No. 74/12/05 dated 21.12.2005 had decided to hold „Delay‟ as having vigilance angle. 
Further observation 
1.50 The Committee is pleased to note that Central Vigilance Commission has 
decided to hold Delay as having vigilance angle. However, the Committee would like to 
know if there any instances where disciplinary action has been taken against authorities 
concerned for inaction or delayed action in handling vigilance matters.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.51 Lokpal has informed the Committee that it has received requests for reconsideration 
of its orders but the same were not considered as the Lokpal does not have statutory powers 
to review an order passed by it. Further, Lokpal has also apprised the Committee that it has 
requested the Department of Personnel & Training for taking necessary action to am end the 
Act at an appropriate stage for including the power to review the orders passed by it. The 
Committee recommends DoPT  to explore the feasibility of amending the Lokpal and 
Lokayuktas Act  so as to confer on Lokpal the Power to reconsider and review its orders. The 
Committee recommends DoPT to apprise its views on the proposed amendment in a three 
months time. 6.30 
Action Taken 
1.52 The Lokpal,  based on the recommendations of its three -member in-house committee, 
has submitted a proposal for incorpora tion of power of review by way of amendment of the 
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. 
1.53 However, there may be other areas that may require to be looked into as the 
implementation of the provisions of the Act moves forward. As such, all these issues, 
including the current proposal of the Lokpal will be considered holistically as a part of the 
comprehensive amendment proposal.  In the interregnum, the Lokpal will have ample 
opportunity of gathering empirical data to cogently support the proposal. 
Further observation 
1.54 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 

15 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.55 Transparency is the corner stone of Good governance. Right to information Act has 
played an instrumental role in bringing about transparency. The Committee is  of the view 
that rural masses- the people most vulnerable to corrupt practices are the ones who know the 
least about their rights under RTI Act. The Committee recommends CIC to spread awareness 
about the Act in rural areas through All India Radio, folk plays and other means and perhaps 
involve Civil society and NGOs to achieve the said objective. The Committee further 
recommends CIC to simplify the mode of payment of RTI fees further.  6.35 
Action Taken  
1.56 As recommended by the Committee it is to apprise that in order to spread awareness 
about the RTI Act, implementation of Annual Programme on “Improving Transparency and 
Accountability in Govt. through Effective Implementation of RTI Act” is already being 
carried out through providing grants to ATI s and SICs. Under this , there is a provision for 
innovative awareness generation activities which include nukkad nataks, local folk troupes, 
development of publicity material in local languages etc. However, ATIs may furthermore be 
encouraged for collabora tive working with Civil Society Organisation/ NGOs to achieve the 
objective of RTI Act. 
1.57 As far as simplification of the mode of payment of RTI fees for the citizens through 
RTI online portal is already functional. 
Further observation 
1.58 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.59 The Committee appreciates the Department for institutionalizing an appellate 
mechanism in CPGRAMS. The Committee is of the view that the succes s of any initiative 
depends upon the extent of its reachability to the targeted population groups. The Committee 
notes that CPGRAMS portal is currently operational in Hindi and English. Since CPGRAMS 
also receives and directs grievances against State Governments and UTs, the Committee is of 
the opinion that CPGRAMS portal should be operationalized in all Scheduled languages. The 
Committee also emphasizes that the Department should publicise the portal through all 

16 
 
  
possible means including the print and elect ronic media so that the benefits of the grievance 
redressal mechanism percolate down to those at the bottom of the pyramid. The Committee 
also recommends the Department to develop an Interactive Voice Response System for 
registration of grievances for the benefit of people who inhabit remote areas and have no 
proper access to the internet. 7.9 
Action Taken 
1.60 The Department has scaled up awareness strategy for CPGRAMS through PIB, Social 
Media like Facebook and Twitter etc. Over the last few years CPGRAMS  has expanded its 
outreach as more and more people are approaching the authorities through CPGRAMS for 
their grievances. About 22 lakh grievances have been received in CPGRAMS in year 2020 
Which is more than double since 2015. The Department has noted the recommendation of the 
committee to publicize the portals through all possible means for compliance. 
 1.61 In CPGRAMS grievances can be filed in any of the scheduled languages, however 
drop down labels and instructions are currently available only in Englis h and Hindi. The 
suggestion of the Committee is noted for implementation.  Regarding Interactive Voice 
Response System for registration of grievances in CPGRAMS, a Proof of Concept (PoC)  is 
underway to assess the technical and resource requirement to imple ment the IVRS menu in 
CPGRAMS. 
Further observation 
1.62 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the multilingual 
version of CPGRAMS portal and I nteractive Voice Response System are 
operationalized soon. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.63 As regards the redressal of grievances by States/UTs, the Committee notes with 
concern that the percentage of grievance disposal is not satisfactory. The Committee 
recommends the Department to develop a ‘Grievance Redressal Index’ on the lines of Good 
Governance Index to rank Organizations of GOI and States/UTs on parameters that are 
output and outcome -oriented. The Committee believes that such Index will present 
Organization-wise and State -wise comparative picture and provide valuable insights about 
strong areas and weak areas which in turn would help in improving their performance.7.11 

17 
 
  
Action Taken  
1.64 DARPG will explore the recommendation of the Committee to create a healthy 
competition among the States through a ranking   system to improve their performance.   
Further observation 
1.65 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.66 The Committee is concerned to note that 50,000-1 lakh grievances have been received 
against 8 Ministries/Departments; 1lakh to 2 lakh gri evances against 4 
Ministries/Departments; more than 2 lakh grievances against 2 Ministries/Departments 
during the period between 2018 -2020. The Committee recommends the Department to 
instruct the Ministries/Departments of Central Government to constitute s ocial audit panels 
to identify core grievance prone areas and streamline their systems accordingly. The 
Committee also recommends DARPG to progressively bring down the maximum time limit 
for grievance redressal from 60 to 45 days. 7.13 
Action Taken  
1.67 DARPG has requested the Ministries and Departments to analyse the grievances to 
understand underlying cause of the grievances from the process, person and policy point of 
view so that appropriate intervent ion can be made to address the m ain points on susta inable 
basis. The recommendation of the Committee to bring down the maximum time limit for 
grievance redressal from 60 to 45 days is being taken up for consideration. 
Further observation 
1.68 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.69 The Committee acknowledges the continuous efforts being made by the Department to 
improve the grievance redressal machinery. The Committee believes that integration of State 
Portals with CPGRAMS under ‘One Nation -One Portal’ will obviate the  need to log into 
multiple portals for lodging complaints. The Department may gradually integrate District 
level portals with CPGRAMS so that CPGRAMS will serve as a single window interface for 
lodging grievances.7.15 

18 
 
  
Action Taken  
1.70 As a pioneer of district level integration with CPGRAMS, the JK -IGRAMS (Jammu 
& Kashmir-Integrated Grievance Redress and Monitoring System)  integrates the grievances 
from CPGRAMS at the top with the last mile district level offices in the UT of Jammu & 
Kashmir at the bott om. 260 Departments / Offices and 1724 District level Offices have been 
linked in the grievance redressal system of the UT.   The Department will  replicate the 
template with Other States/UTs also in phased manner 
Further observation 
1.71 The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has already set the 
process of integrating district level portals into CPGRAMS into motion. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.72 The Committee has been apprised that there are 5,538 Grievances pending against 
Ministries/ Departments for more than one year. The Committee recommends the Directors 
of Public Grievances of the concerned Ministries/Departments to hold Jan Sunvais and 
dispose of the grievances pending for more than one year at the earliest. Similarly, top 20 
grievance receiving Ministries/Departments may dedicate a day every month for hearing the 
grievances of citizens.7.20 
Action Taken 
1.73 Age wise pendency  has been enabl ed in CPGRAMS so that the Ministries/ 
Departments can view their pendency and expedite action. A letter  dated 11.01.2021, from 
Secretary, DARPG has also been written to all Secretaries of Central Ministries and to all 
Chief Secretaries of States and UTs to expedite old pending grievances. 
Further observation 
1.74 The Committee appreciates the Department for making an all -out effort to 
ensure effective redressal of grievances. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.75 The Committee takes note of the fact that there has not been much demand for 
Sevottam from A dministrative Training Institutes in the past few years. The Committee also 
notes that the Department is reviewing the Scheme and has roped in IIPA for a third party 

19 
 
  
evaluation. The Committee recommends the Depar tment to revamp the scheme in the light of 
feeback/suggestions received from States and implement the revamped Scheme in all 
States/UTs. 7.25 
Action Taken 
1.76 The Scheme in its present form has not generated much response from the States. The 
scheme will be revamped/ restructured based on the report of the 3rd party evaluation 
Further observation 
1.77 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.78 e-office was rolled out with the objective of promoting e-Governance. E-filing is safer, 
faster and more convenient than physical filing. However, it is observed that physical filing is 
still preferred to e -Filing. The Committee observes that difficulties encountered while using 
e-Office are driving Officials towards physical filing  system. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends the Department to address the operational issues being encountered by users 
while using e-Office at the earliest. 7.28 
Action Taken 
1.79 The difficulties encountered while using e -Office are brought to the notic e of NIC, 
MeitY for addressing.  Some of difficulties are addressed through the upcoming versions of 
e-Office. 
Further observation 
1.80 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and hopes that 
operational diff iculties being encountered by e -Office users will be addressed in 
upcoming versions. 
PENSIONS AND PENSIONER’S WELFARE 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.81 The Committee is appreciative of the efforts being made by the Department to redress 
Pensioners’ Grievances. However, going by the philosophy of the Kaizen principle, the 
Committee feels that things can always get better, even if they seem to work well in a 

20 
 
  
particular moment. Change is constant as long as it is a change for the better. The Committee 
is of the view that the maximum time limit for redressal of grievances may be brought down 
from 60 to 45 days. The upper time limit for redressal of grievances pertaining to super 
senior citizens and family pensioners may be considerably reduced to 30 days.   8.10 
Action Taken 
1.82 Noted. Accordingly, DoPPW will bring down the maximum time limit for redressal of 
grievances; as recommended by the DRPSC and make ne cessary changes in CPENGRAMS 
portal. 
  

21 
 
  
Further observation 
1.83 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.84 The Committee notes that 15 grievances pertaining to family pensioners and 37 
grievances pertaining to super senior citizens are pending for over one year. The Committee 
attaches paramount importance to the concerns of the elderly. The Committee feels that  
family pensioners and super senior citizens should be the priority target groups of pension 
welfare interventions. The Committee desires that the elderly should not be regarded as 
recipients of welfare dole but as the claimants of their rightful entitleme nts. The Committee 
recommends the Department to ensure the expeditious disposal of 52 long pending 
grievances pertaining to Family pensioners and Super Senior Citizens. 8.13 
Action Taken 
1.85 The Department is following -up on a War -footing, the 52 long pen ding grievances 
pertaining to Family pensioners and Super Senior Citizens. 
Further observation 
1.86 The Committee is confident that the 52 long pending grievances pertaining to 
family pensioners and Super senior citizens will be resolved soon. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.87 The Committee notes that there is a steep increase in the number of re -registered 
grievances over the years. This, coupled with the feedback  given by the aggrieved, drives 
home the point that the quality of grievance redress al is not satisfactory. The Department 
may put an accountability mechanism in place and explore the feasibility of holding the 
grievance redressal authorities concerned answerable for summarily disposing of grievances 
without appropriate qualitative action. 8.17 
Action Taken 
1.88 Noted. Department will emphasize upon all Ministries/Departments to put an 
accountability mechanism in place and make the concerned answerable for summarily 
disposing of grievances without proper qualitative action 
  

22 
 
  
Further observation 
1.89 The Committee recommends the Department o f Pensions and P ensioner’s 
welfare to pursue the matter vigorously with the Minis tries/Departments and see that a 
proper accountability mechanism is put in place. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.90 The Committee is pleased to note that Pension Adalat has emerged as an effective 
platform for the redressal of pension grievances. The Committee recommends the 
Department to make Pension Adalat a permanent feature. The Committee is of the view that 
such Adalats should be organized on a half -yearly basis so that the grievances which could 
not be resolved through CPENGRAMS during the six month period and beyond can be 
redressed at once. 8.26 
Action Taken 
1.91 Noted. DoPPW will organize the Pension Adalats on a half yearly basis.  During F.Y 
2021-22, it will be conducted as soon as the COVID -19 pandemic situation comes under 
control. 
Further observation 
1.92 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.93 The Committee lauds the Department for leaving no stone unturned in ensuring the 
welfare of senior citizens. The Committee is pleased to note that DoPPW has roped in India 
Post Payments Bank and utilized the network of Postmen and Gramin Dak Sevaks for 
providing doorstep facility  to pensioners for submission of Digital Life Certificate. The 
Committee desires that three facilities namely, Door step Banking Service, Video -based 
Customer Identification Process and Door step service through postmen/Gramin Dak Sevak 
should be extended to all major cities and towns across the Country. 8.36 
Action Taken  
1.94 Noted. DoPPW will make sincere efforts to cover all major cities and towns across 
the country for providing doorstep facility to pensioners for submission of Digital Life 
Certificate through three facilities namely, Door step Banking Service, Video -based 
Customer Identification Process and Door step service through postmen Gramin Dak Sevak. 
Further observation 
1.95 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  

23 
 
  
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 The Committee notes that the total budgetary  allocation made to the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for the upcoming fiscal year is just about 0.06 % 
of the total budget. Further, the Ministry has apprised the Committee that it has projected an 
outlay of ₹3096.92 crore to the M inistry of Finance under Demand No.73 for BE 2021 -22 
against which the Ministry of Finance has approved an outlay of ₹2058.57 crore. Thus, the 
approved outlay is just 66.47% of the projected outlay. The Committee acknowledges that the 
Ministry of Personnel , Public Grievances and Pensions has a wider and diverse mandate 
ranging from recruitment and training to investigation, vigilance, grievance redressal and 
administrative reforms. Therefore, the Committee, in no uncertain terms, recommends the 
Government to provide adequate funds to the Ministry so that it can execute its mandate to 
the fullest extent possible. 2.7 
Action Taken  
2.1 BE 2021-22 Allocation of Rs 2058.57 crores would be optimally utilised to meet all 
the requirements of the Ministry. Additional requirement of funds, if any, will be taken up 
with M/o Finance at the Supplementary/ Revised Estimates 2021-22 stage. 
Further observation 
2.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that additional 
requirement of funds, if any, projected by it at the Supplementary/ Revised Estimates 
Stage 2021-22 shall be provided to it.   The Committee is of the view that the investment 
made in human resources management helps improve efficiency of administration and 
ultimately results in Good Governance 
  

24 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3 The Committee is of the view that success of vigilance, particularly, preventive 
vigilance depends upon Surveillance capabilities. The growing number and complexity of 
financial frauds make a case for strengthening existing surveillance capabilities. The details 
of suspicious individuals/parties or officers of doubtful integrity collected during surveillance 
may be stored in a centralized database accessible to all the entities concerned. The 
Committee believes that increased surveillance would lead to better vigilance. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry to provide adequate funds to CVC for strengthening 
surveillance capabilities and for setting up a Centralized Surveillance Database.     2.50       
Action Taken 
2.4 Additional requirement of funds, if any, to cater to the needs of CVC, will be taken up 
with M/o Finance at the Supplementary/ Revised Estimates 2021-22 stage. 
Further observation 
2.5  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that adequate funds 
should be provided to CVC for strengthening surveillance capabilities and for setting up 
a Centralized Surveillance Database. 
PERSONNEL  MANAGEMENT  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6 The Committee notes that the gap between the sanctioned strength and the in -position 
strength of IAS officers is increasing exponentially year -on-year. DoPT has informed the 
Committee that the constitution of Committee for reviewing the annual intake of IA S officers 
beyond Civil Services Examination 2021 is under process. The Committee hopes that the 
annual intake of IAS officers will be significantly enhanced keeping in view the evolving 
needs of the Indian administration. The Committee recommends DoPT to undertake an 
assessment of the impact of shortage of IAS officers on administration. The Committee 
believes that the outcome of Impact Assessment and the knowledge gained from that exercise 
would be of immense help in improving future performance.  3.3 
 
 

25 
 
  
Action Taken 
2.7 The approved annual intake of IAS for Civil Services Examination from CSE -2012 to 
CSE – 2020 is 180 IAS officers every year. Beyond CSE – 2020, in order to determine the 
annual intake through Civil Services Examination (CSE) for the next te n (10) years i.e. from 
CSE-2021 till CSE-2030, a committee is being constituted by this Department with following 
Terms of Reference (ToR):   
(i) To ascertain the cadre gaps in the different state cadres of the service vis -à-vis 
the current authorized strength of each cadre. 
(ii)  To make realistic assessment of cadre deficit by adding number of IAS 
officers likely to retire on superannuation during next 10 years to cadre gaps 
ascertained in point (i) above.  
(iii) To make assessment of the number of officers that would b e required over the 
next 10 years to man the various senior positions in the state cadres and central 
deputations duly taking into account:- 
a) The large number of ex -cadre posts being operated by the various states 
in respective cadre structure of the IAS. 
b) Cadre strength of state cadres likely to be revised.  
c) Officers who may opt for deputation under Rule 6(2) (ii) of the IAS 
(Cadre) Rules, 1954 OR may seek voluntary retirement for post 
retirement commercial employment otherwise as per present trend. 
(iv) To assess the status of utilization of the central deputation reserve component 
of the IAS cadre strength at DS/Director level, including identifying problems, if 
any, administering the same and to suggest measures to redress such problems. 
(v) To assess the utilization of state deputation reserve. 
(vi) On the basis of all the above, suggest a recruitment plan for the 2021 -2030 
duly suggesting the measures required to be taken in the immediate, medium as well 
as the long term. 
(vii) To review the status of incumbency of the officers against promotion quota of 
IAS and suggest measures for filling up all such vacant posts for due urgency. 
(viii) To identify various factors contributing to accumulation of large number of 
vacancies in the cadre strength of IAS both in direct recruitment  as well as 
promotion quota components and suggest means and measures to prevent them in 
future. 

26 
 
  
(ix) To review the existing policy framework for its adequacy in meeting the 
quantitative as well as qualitative requirement of manpower for the IAS, in keeping 
with the existing demand of emerging administrative interventions in various fields.  
2.8 It is submitted that this Department has already given „in -principle‟ approval    for                    
constitution of the committee.  
Further observation 
2.9 The Comm ittee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the recommendations made by the Expert Committee to be constituted by it 
at an appropriate stage. 
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.10 The Committee is of the view that there is a proportionate relationship between the 
integrity of examination process and litigation. The more fair, transparent and objective the 
examination process, the less the litigation. The Committee recommends SSC to spare no 
efforts to ensure the integrity of examination process at all costs. Now that SSC has made a 
shift to Computer Based Examination, it may get an independent audit of hardware and 
software done periodically to ensure that the systems are robust, tamper proof and immune to 
cyber attacks. 4.18 
Action Taken  
2.11 Staff Selection Commission takes all possible precautions and measures to ensure the 
conduct of free and fair examinations and thereby the integrity of examination process.  Some 
of the prominent measures taken in this regard include:-  
i. Careful selection of examination venues, 
ii. Biometric registration of candidates, 
iii. Conduct of Computer Based Examinations under CCTV Camera surveillance, 
iv. Thorough frisking of candidates with the use of Hand Held Metal Detectors 
(HHMD), 
v. Randomised seating arrangements of the candidates, 

27 
 
  
vi. Intensive invigilation and inspection – including deployment of Inspecting 
Officers and Flying Squads, 
vii. Deployment of Quick Response Teams to the selected examination venues by 
the Service Provider. 
viii. Computer Based Examination is conducted on LAN with no internet facility to 
prevent outside intervention of any kind. 
ix. Randomization of questions and their options in a manner that every candidate 
gets a different set of questions. 
x. A three tier security system is deployed at examination venues, in accordance 
with the following scheme :- 
a) The security arrangement inside the examination venues is ensured 
through a Private Professional Security Agency engaged by the Service 
Provider. These security personnel also undertake a thorough physical 
frisking of candidates and meticulously regulate their entry into the 
examination venues. 
b) Peripheral security at the examination venues is provided by the State 
Police. 
c) The Commission, wherever required, with the assistance of  the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, deploys Para Military Forces at the 
sensitive/hyper sensitive examination venues.   
xi   All security personnel on duty at the examination venues are required to strictly 
adhere to a dress code with a valid ID card displayed on their person for easy 
identification. 
xii  Issuance of a Notification regarding prohibited items which is strictly 
implemented during the examination,  
xiii  Stringent action is taken against candidates found indulging in malpractices.  
Under this dispe nsation FIRs are lodged against the delinquent candidates, their 
candidature is cancelled and they are debarred from appearing in future 
examinations of the Commission for a specified period. 
xiv    Installation of jammers at the venues of Computer Based Examinations. 
xv   A state of the art „Command Centre‟ has been set up at SSC Headquarters, with 
latest IT infrastructure having reliable and real time pan -India remote monitoring 
system. 
2.12   The Commission has engaged Standardization Testing and Quality  Certification 
(STQC) Directorate which is an attached office of the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), Government of India for comprehensive auditing of 

28 
 
  
Applications, Servers, Examination Centres, End to end flow of data, Authenti city of 
Examination Applications and Randomization of Questions, being undertaken by the service 
provider. 
Further observation 
2.13 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.14 The Committee feels that the establishment of  National Recruitment Agency will be a 
milestone in recruitment for Government jobs. This will certainly be helpful in reducing 
lengthy recruitment cycle and provide respite to unemployed youth, recruiting institutions & 
Government by saving money and effo rt. However, the Government should also ensure that 
multiple recruitment agencies are not becoming a burden on the candidates as well as on the 
system. The Committee feels that long -term relevance of such reforms will depend on the 
commitment of Government  to raise the level of public employment and expand services to 
the public. The Committee also notes that less than 20 percent public employment comes 
under the purview of the Central Government (predominantly in Railways & Defence), with 
the rest falling within the purview of States. The Committee feels that similar reform is 
needed at State level as well.  4.27 
Action Taken 
2.15 Initially, National Recruitment Agency (NRA) will be conducting CET for the 
recruitment for the subordinate posts in central government made through SSC, Railways and 
IBPS. However, any employer, public sector or private sector, may avail the score of CET of 
the candidates and recruit/appoint them. State Government may also shortlist the desired 
candidates on the basis of the scores of CET to be conducted by NRA on MOU basis. 
Further observation 
2.16 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
TRAINING INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.17 The Committee has been informed that inspite of apparent ‘lack of funds’, IIPA has 
been trying hard to innovate and make it a Centre of Excellence. The Committee recommends 

29 
 
  
DoPT to provide adequate funds to IIPA to meet its infrastructural and training nee ds so that 
it emerges as a Centre of Excellence in the field of Public administration. 5.14 
Action Taken 
2.18 Government of India has provided an amount of Rs. 10.50 crore under Grant -in-aid 
Capital during the financial year 2020 -21 for upgradation of old existing infrastructure to 
enhance the output of Training and Research both in term of quality and quantity. IIPA has 
been able to create 07 digitally enabled classrooms with all facilities for Online training. It 
will construct a big State -of-the-Art TNC Memorial Lecture Hall to undertake big 
Seminars/Lectures. It has started renovation of non -functional Auditorium so as to put the 
non-functional, dilapidated space to the best use. In the financial year 2021 -22, Rs. 8.50 crore 
will be provided to IIPA for infrastructure. If needed, additional funds will be provided 
depending an allocation in RE 2021-22. 
Further observation 
2.19 The Committee is contended to note that adequate funds have been provided to 
IIPA for revamping existing infrastructure and for set ting up digitally enabled 
classrooms. 
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND SERVICE MATTERS  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.20 The Committee is of the opinion that pendency of cases in CAT is strongly linked to its 
strength as well as number of Benches. The Committee recommends the Government to fill up 
vacancies in CAT at the earliest.  In order to mitigate the huge arrears of pending cases that 
have been affecting the efficiency of CAT and to ensure the right of citizens to timely delivery 
of Justice, the Committee recommends that the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
regarding setting up of Permanent Benches or Circuit Ben ches of CAT at the seat of every 
High Court should be implemented at the earliest. 6.18 
Action Taken  
2.21 As on date, out of total 66 sanctioned posts of Members including posts of the 
Chairman of the CAT, 27 posts (11 - Administrative Member and 16 - Judicial Member) are 
lying vacant. DoP&T vide their letters dated 27.07.2020 issued vacancy circulars for 20 

30 
 
  
Members (13 Judicial Members + 07 Administrative Members). These 20 vacancies were to 
be filled up in accordance with Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal and o ther Authorities 
(Qualification, Experience and other Conditions of Service of Members) Rules, 2020. 
However, in light of  Supreme Court Judgment dated 27.11.2020 in Writ Petition (C) No. 804 
of 2020 (Madras Bar Association Vs. UOI &Anr.), the said Rule is  required to be reframed. 
Department of Revenue , M/o Finance is in the process of re -framing of the rules. As such, 
appointments against these 20 vacancies have been kept in abeyance. As and when, the new 
Rules are framed, the appointments to the said vac ancies along with newly created vacancies 
will be initiated by the Government. 
2.22 As regards, establishment of the Permanent Benches of CAT at the seat of every High 
Court, it is submitted that setting up of a permanent Bench at the seat of High Court wh ere 
there is no permanent Bench of CAT at present, can be considered principally on account of 
the number of cases instituted there. As per norms stipulated by CAT itself for disposal of 
cases, a Division Bench has to dispose of 5 cases per day and a Singl e Bench has to dispose 
of 7 cases per day. Therefore, with about 215 working days in CAT, a Single/ Division Bench 
has to dispose 1000 to 1400 cases in a year. Therefore, the States with an average of those 
numbers of cases being instituted can be considered to have a permanent Bench of CAT.  
2.23 As on date there are 18 Regular and 19 Circuit Benches of CAT functioning in 
different States. Permanent/ circuit Benches of CAT are available in all the places wherever 
there is a seat of the High Court, except in Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh. The matter of setting 
up of Permanent/ Circuit Bench at Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh is under process. 
Further observation 
2.24 The Committee would like to know as to when the said  Recruitment Rule will be 
reframed by the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. The Committee is happy 
to note that but for one, Permanent/circuit Benches of CAT are available in all places 
wherever there is a seat of the High Court. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.25 The Committee observes that CAT was established to expedite the redressal of service 
related grievances. However, it is observed that a large number of Writ Petitions are being 
filed against the orders of CAT in High Courts every year. The Committee feels that this is 
defeating the very purpose of the Administrative Tribunals Act. The Committee recommends 

31 
 
  
CAT to analyse as to why the aggrieved are approaching High Courts and furnish a status 
note to the Committee in three months time. 6.19 
Action Taken 
2.26 Challenging the orders passed by Tribunal or lower courts before High Courts/ 
Supreme Court is a constitutional right. Any aggrieved party, not satisfied with the orders of 
a Tribunal can challenge the orders under Article 226/227 of the Constitution befor e 
respective Hon‟ble High Courts in whose territorial jurisdiction the Bench of the Tribunal is 
situated. As per records available in this office, from 1998 to February, 2021, total 57,847 
Writ Petitions have been filed before various High Courts challengi ng the orders of Tribunal. 
Number of cases disposed by different Benches of the Tribunal during this period is 5,45,277. 
Therefore, only 10.61% orders of the Tribunal have been challenged in High Courts. Out of 
these 57,847 Writ Petitions, 43,210 have already been decided by High Courts. In 65.20 % of 
decided cases, orders of the Tribunal have been upheld by the  High Court, in 28.75 % cases 
orders of the Tribunal have been reversed. The type of decision in remaining 6.05 % cases are 
not known.  
Further observation 
2.27 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.28 The Committee is concerned to note that there are a large number of vacancies in the 
Posts of Information Commissioners in State Information Commissions. The Commi ttee 
desires CIC to furnish a status note detailing the strength of all State Information 
commissions in a three months time. 6.37 
Action Taken  
2.29 Data in respect of vacancies of Chief Information Commissioner and Information 
Commissioners is not centrally maintained. 
Further observation 
2.30 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
  

32 
 
  
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN FOR NOT ACCEPTING ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS. 
 
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 The Committee has requested DoPT to furnish details of Backlog reserved vacancies 
of all Ministries/Departments of the Central Government. DoPT has furnished latest data 
pertaining to six Ministries/Departments only. The Committee expresses concern about this 
and recommends DoPT to furnish the data sought by the Committee at the earliest. 3.9 
Action Taken 
3.1 DoPT monitors the progress in filling up of backlog reserved vacancies for SCs, STs 
& OBCs with ten Ministries/Departments, having more than 90% of the employees of Central 
Government. These Ministries/Departments collect these data from their attached/subordinate 
offices, Central Public Sector Undertakings, Financial Institutions, Nationalized Banks, etc 
and, thereafter, furnish consolidated data to DoPT.  
3.2 A statement showing data collected from various Ministries/Departments of the 
Central Government, in this regard, is at Annexure-I. 
Further observation 
3.3 The Committee notes that DoPT monitors the progress in filling up of backlog 
reserved vacancies for SCs, STs & OBCs with ten Ministries/Departments, having more 
than 90% of the employees of Central  Government and that these 
Ministries/Departments collect the data from their attached/subordinate offices, Central 
Public Sector Undertakings, Financial Institutions, Nationalized Banks, etc and, 
thereafter, furnish consolidated data to DoPT . The Committee is concerned to note that 
the data on reserved vacancies was last updated on 01.01.2020 and that too, is 
inadequate as it doesn’t cover ten Ministries/Departments. The Committee recommends 
DoPT to instruct the Ministries/Departments concern ed to create a dashboard on their 
sites showing the details of reserved vacancies and the progress made in filling them up. 

33 
 
  
The Department may also create a similar Dashboard on its site and update it regularly 
as and when information regarding reserved va cancies is made available to it by the 
Ministries/Departments. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.4 The Committee observes that there is acute shortage of bureaucrats both at the 
middle level and the entry level. The Committee is of the considered view that this  human 
resource deficit can be offset by expanding the scope of the Central Staffing Scheme to 
include all levels of bureaucracy and by reframing the eligibility conditions to cover the 
officers of all the organs of Governance of the Union Government inclu ding the legislature, 
the Judiciary, autonomous and Constitutional Bodies among others. The officers so inducted 
may be adequately trained on the same lines as those inducted through Lateral Entry 
Scheme. The Committee opines that revamping the Central Sta ffing Scheme entails many 
benefits and will help bring in qualified human resources, domain expertise and new 
ideas.3.18 
Action Taken 
3.5 The Central Staffing Scheme has been in vogue since 05.01.1996 and over time has 
been found to be very efficient in staffing critical posts of the centre under central staffing 
scheme. Further, it has also functioned as an important source for strengthening the federal 
link by drawing officers of All India services from the various state governments which also 
leads to exchange of talent.  To draw on talent available within departments in Central 
Government, the net of pool has been cast wide which includes 37 participating services. By 
practice, it has been found that Central Staffing Scheme is working well although seas onal 
shortages occur. 
3.6 The scheme is constantly reviewed and diligent efforts have even made to ensure 
adequate contribution from participating services to the central pool to fill the various posts. 
3.7  The positions within the Central government that  are manned through the Central 
Staffing Scheme are that of specialized executive nature where officers with appropriate 
experience, aptitude and suitability are drawn and posted. Expanding the scope of Central 
Staffing Scheme to non executive branches of the government therefore, may not be wholly 
appropriate. 

34 
 
  
Further observation 
3.8 The Committee notes that under Lateral Entry Scheme, applications have been 
invited from ‘talented and motivated Indian nationals willing to contribute towards 
nation building to join the Government at the level of Joint Secretary or Director’ , the 
object is to draw expertise, experience and also to facilitate exchange of talent. The 
Committee, in its recommendation, underscored the extension of the same principle to 
Central Staffing scheme. The Committee has suggested the Department to expand the 
scope of Central Staffing Scheme not with an intention to overhaul the bureaucracy but 
only to fulfil the twin purposes of bringing in domain expertise and addressing the 
shortage of bureaucrats. The Committee fails to understand as to why officers from non 
executive branches of the Government cannot be appropriately trained on the same 
lines as outside experts inducted through Lateral Entry Scheme especially when the 
former have an adv antage over the latter as they know a thing or two about the 
functioning of the Union Government. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.9 The Committee is of the opinion that Indian administration has become heavily 
dependent upon a particular administrative service. They seem to have an edge over others in 
securing key decision -making positions in the Government. It is time to give equal 
opportunity to officers belonging to other services having expertise in that specific domain. 
The Committee is of the view that while making appointments to higher echelons of 
administration, priority should be given to the integrity, calibre, aptitude  and interest of the 
officer among other things rather than the service to which he belongs.3.20 
Action Taken 
3.10 The service -wise heterogeneity of the Departments of Government of India at all 
levels are supported by the details of posts being manned by all the Central Services, the 
relevant updated records of which is available with Cadre Review Division of DoPT. 
3.11 In Government of India higher posts at the top include cadre posts and the posts filled 
under Central Staffing Scheme (CSS) on deputation basi s. The various cadre posts at higher 
levels in Government of India are earmarked and exclusively manned by the officers of the 
respective Organized Group A Services. There are no deputation posts in Gover nment of 

35 
 
  
India exclusively for I AS officers and they  are considered under Central Staffing Scheme 
along with the members of other thirty -six participating services. At the Centre, at higher 
levels (JS level and above) around 514 posts are operated under Central Staffing Scheme 
whereas for Organized Group A officers number of such higher level cadre posts, exclusively 
earmarked, are more than 5900. Further, at JS level, out of 234 posts currently operating 
under Central Staffing Scheme at the Centre, o nly 71 Officers are members of I AS and 163 
officers are members of other participating services. 
3.12 The All India Service Cadre rules enable officers to be deputed to Centre through the 
Central Deputation Reserve which is 40% for IAS/IPS and  20% for Indian Forest Service. 
The Officers of Indian Police Service a nd Indian Forest Service have other avenues (besides 
Central Staffing Scheme) of central deputation exclusively earmarked for them. In case of 
Indian Police Service (IPS), there are 180 deputation reserve posts including 40 Additional 
Secretary level and 1 1 Apex level posts in Government of India at higher level exclusively 
for IPS officers. Similarly, in case of Indian Forest Service, there are about 33 deputation 
reserve posts including 13 Additional Secretary level and 2 Apex level posts at higher levels  
exclusively for IFoS officers at the Centre. Similarly, the officers belonging to Central 
Services also have exclusive Cadre posts within Central Government. The officers earn 
promotions in their respective cadres where they have opportunities to rise to HAG+ and 
apex levels. For example, in case of Indian Revenue Service (IT), 1052 posts have been 
provisioned in the cadre under the Government of India at higher level for Indian Revenue 
Service (IT) officers only, including 391 Additional Secretary level a nd 26 Apex level posts. 
Similarly, under the Ministry of Railways about 1678 posts have been provisioned at higher 
level, exclusively for different Railway Service /Cadres, including 255 Additional Secretary 
level and 12 Apex level posts. 
Further observation 
3.13 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee would like to 
know whether DoPT has received any representation from any Officer/ Officers’ 
Association alleging discrimination between IAS and other services. The Committee 
also recommends DoPT to compile the gist of such representations and furnish the same 
to the Committee. 
 

36 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.14 The Committee observes that the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary have 
well defined roles and they all function under the  Constitution. The Committee is of the 
considered opinion that these three organs of governance, by and large, constitute the Union 
Government. The Committee feels that it is inappropriate to use the term ‘Central 
Government Officials’ to those serving the  executive wing alone. The Committee desires the 
term ‘Central Government’ to be substituted by ‘Union of India’ and the officials of the three 
organs of governance of the Union Government, henceforth, be referred to as ‘Officials of the 
Union of India’. 3.21 
Action Taken  
3.15 The Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) is the coordinating agency of the 
Central Government in personnel matters especially in respect of issues concerning 
recruitment training career development and staff welfare. DoPT acts a s the formulator of 
policy and the watch -dog of the Government ensuring that certain accepted standards and 
norms as laid down by it are followed by all Ministries/Departments in the recruitment 
regulation of service conditions posting/transfers and deputa tion of personnel as well as 
other issues of personnel management. The Department is the cadre controlling authority 
for the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officers and the three Secretariat Services in the 
Central Secretariat. It operates the Central  Staffing Scheme for placement of officers at the 
level of Deputy Secretary/Director and Joint Secretary on the basis of tenure deputation in 
the Central Government. DoPT also deals with appointments of senior functionaries in the 
various Public Sector Und ertakings/Enterprises Corporations Banks and financial 
institutions. It also deals with the assignment of Indian experts to various developing 
countries. It is also responsible for formulation and coordination of training policies for the 
All India and Cen tral Services and providing support for the capacity building of State 
Government officials. 
3.16 The Establishment Division of the Department deals with mainly:- 
i) Central Civil Services (CCS) Conduct Rules 1964; 
ii) Central Civil ServicesClassification, control &appeal  (CCA) Rules, 1965; 
iii) CCS (LTC) Rules, 1988. 

37 
 
  
In all these rules, the term Central Government Officials has not been used, instead 
Government Servant.   
3.17 However, it is felt that the observation of the committee regarding the substitution of 
the term “Central Government‟ with the “Union of India‟ including the three organs of 
Governance (Legislature, Executive & Judiciary) seems outside the mandate and purview of 
M/o PPG&P.  
Further observation 
3.18 The Committee notes that Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions is the nodal agency for ‘Personnel Management’ in India. The Ministry is also 
responsible for formulation of policies concerning recruitment, regulation of service 
conditions, p osting/transfers, deputation of personnel as well as other related issues. 
Therefore, the Committee feels that there is no better forum than the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions to initiate discussion in this regard. The 
Committee woul d like DoPT to seek views of the Union Legislature and Judiciary 
regarding the same and furnish them to the Committee. 
 Recommendation/Observation 
3.19 The Committee notes with concern that 349 IAS officers have not submitted their 
Annual Immovable Property Returns for the year 2020 in the stipulated time limit. During the 
examination of Demands for Grants (2020 -21), the Committee was informed that 338 IAS 
officers had not filed Immovable Property Returns for 2019. This makes a case for institution 
of strin gent measures other than denial of vigilance clearance against erring officers. The 
Committee recommends DoPT and CVC to increase surveillance on the activities of such 
officials. The Committee also recommends DoPT to furnish a status note detailing the 
stringent measures that can be taken against IAS Officers who fail to file IPRs within the 
stipulated time limit.  3.24 
Action Taken 
3.20 Out of 349 IAS officers who had not filed their IPRs for the year 2020 (as on 
1.1.2021), the IPRs of 33 IAS officers have since been taken on record after due 
consideration. Hence, there are now 316 IAS officers who have not filed their IPRs for the 
year 2020. 

38 
 
  
(i) As per Rule 16 (2) of All India Services (Conduct) Rule, 1968, every member of the 
Service shall submit an a nnual return in such form as may be prescribed by the Government 
in this regard, giving full particulars regarding the immovable property inherited by him or 
owned or acquired by him or held by him on lease or mortgage, either in his own name or in 
the name of any member of his family or in the name of any other person. 
(ii) Government has introduced the facility of online filing of IPRs w.e.f. 1.1.2017. 
Establishment Officer & Additional Secretary had vide D.O. letter dated 22.12.2017 
addressed to Chief Se cretaries of all cadres requested them to issue necessary instructions to 
all IAS officers under their jurisdiction for timely filing of IPRs online. Subsequently, 
Secretary (P) vide D.O. letters dated 4.12.2018, 21.11.2019 and EO & AS vide letter dated 
6.1.2021 has also issued necessary instruction to all State Governments to ensure that IAS 
officers submit their IPRs online in the IPR Module, as per the prescribed timeline. 
(iii) Further, Central Government examines the vigilance clearance in respect of A IS officers 
for the purpose of (a) inclusion in the offer list (b) empanelment (c) any deputation for which 
Central Government clearance is necessary, including deputation under rule 6[1] and 6[2](ii) 
of the AlS (Cadre) Rules (d) appointments to sensitive posts (e) assignments to training 
programmes (except mandatory training) are examined as per guidelines contained in DoP&T 
OM No.104/33/2005AVD-I dated 29.10.2007 and 7.9.2011. The vigilance clearance shall be 
denied to an officer if he fails to submit his annual immovable property return of the previous 
year latest by 31st January of the following year, as required by Government of India 
decisions under Rule 16 of the All India Services (Conduct) Rule, 1968. 
(iv) Government of India vide letter No. 11017/7 4/93 AIS(III) dated 04.01.1994 have 
requested all State Governments to ensure that the returns of immovable property are 
submitted by all members of the service under their control, in respect of every calendar year, 
by the 31 st of January of the next year . It was also asked to be impressed upon them that 
failure on the part of the members of the Service to comply with the requirements of the 
aforesaid rules constitutes good and sufficient reason for institution of disciplinary 
proceedings against them. 
(v) The All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 provide for adequate mechanism for taking 
action in case of violation of AIS (Conduct) Rules, 1968. Therefore, it is requested that the 
Committee may kindly consider treating the queries as settled. 

39 
 
  
Further observation 
3.21 The Committee is deeply concerned to note that 316 IAS officers are yet to file 
Immovable Property Returns for the year 2020. The Committee recommends DoPT to 
furnish details of disciplinary action taken by the Central Government or State 
Government concerned against each of these 316 officers under appropriate rules.  
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.22 The Committee is of the view that the credibility of Public Service Commissions is 
founded upon the faith of the common man in its proper functioning. Therefore,  the 
Committee feels that the Chairperson and Members of the Union Public Service Commission 
should be persons of impeccable integrity, rectitude, high calibre and impartiality. The 
Committee feels that the methodol ogy followed for their selection should be fair, transparent 
and objective and also uphold the principles of Social Justice, diversity and Gender equality. 
DoPT may collate the details of selection procedure currently being followed while making 
appointments to the Posts of Chairperson and Members of UPSC and may furnish them to the 
Committee. DoPT may also apprise the Committee about the methodology currently being 
followed for the recruitment of administrative staff of UPSC.4.3 
Action Taken  
3.23 Article 316(1) of the Constitution provides that a Member of the UPSC shall be 
appointed by the President. At present, for selection/appointment of Chairman/Member, 
UPSC following system has been evolved. 
3.24 For appointment of Chairman/ Member, UPSC, a Search Co mmittee, under the 
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary with four other Members, is constituted at each occasion.  
This Search Committee examines the applications/ recommendations received, considers the 
names of Chairmen/ Members of State Public Service Comm issions and other prominent 
names from public as well as private sector.  Keeping in view the vacancy available, the 
Search Committee recommends a panel of names for consideration of Hon‟ble President. 
From amongst the names recommended in the panel, the s uitable candidates (s) is/are 
selected by the President.  Before submission of file to Hon‟ble President, the file is routed 

40 
 
  
through MoS(PP) and Prime Minister. They provide necessary aid and advice to Hon‟ble 
President. 
3.25 As regards recruitment of admi nistrative staff of UPSC, AIS officers are posted by 
E.O. division on transfer posting basis. The posts in various grades of UPSC are filled 
through multiple organized cadres or schemes such as Central Staffing Scheme, Central 
Secretariat Service (CSS), Ce ntral Secretariat Stenographers Service (CSSS), Central 
Secretariat Clerical (CSCS), Department of Official Language (CSOLS Cadre), Controller 
General of Accounts in addition to Ex -Cadre posts of UPSC. The vacancies arising in these 
cadres are being report ed from time to time to the respective Cadre Controlling Authorities 
for filling up. For filling up the vacancies in Ex -cadre which are borne on the establishment 
of UPSC, the recruitment action is at various stages and being closely monitored. 
Further observation 
3.26 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee recommends 
UPSC to furnish the list of candidates who served as Chairmen and Members of UPSC 
from 2010 and 2020. The Committee also recommends that against the name of each 
candidate, the details of Gender, Category to which he/she belongs, state to which he/she 
belongs be mentioned. 
Recommendation/observation 
3.27 The Committee observes that there is an inordinate and unjustified delay in the 
notification of Recruitment Rules app roved by UPSC. The Committee notes that as many as 
371 Recruitment Rules approved by UPSC are still pending notification by the concerned 
Ministries/Departments. The Committee recommends DoPT to impress upon the concerned 
Ministries/Departments to inform r easons for delay in the notification of Recruitment Rules 
and also urge them to notify the Recruitment Rules without any further delay.4.7  
Action Taken 
3.28 Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) guidelines on framing / amendment / 
relaxation of Recruitment Rules, issued vide O.M. No. AB.14017/48/2010 -Estt..(RR) dated 
31.12.2010 to all Ministries and Departments, inter alia prescribed a time limit of ten weeks 
for notification of Recruitment Rules (RRs), after the approval of the Union Public Service 

41 
 
  
Commission. Ministries/Departments are required to notify the Recruitment Rules within the 
prescribed time limit as per these guidelines. 
3.29 Ministries/Departments, however, do not strictly follow the above timelines. Review 
of pending notifications of Recruitment Rules, approved by the Commission, is done 
regularly and the matter is pursued with the concerned Ministries/ Departments to notify the 
pending Recruitment Rules at the earliest. As a result of regular follow -up with concerned 
Ministries / Departments, the number of Recruitment Rules pending for notification have 
come down to 262 from 371 as on date. A statement indicating Ministries/ Departments along 
with the period of delay in notification of Recruitment Rules is also incorporated in the 
Annual Report of the Commission every year. 
3.30 Further, Recruitment Rules Formulation, Amendment Monitoring System (RRFAMS) 
Portal has been in operation since De cember, 2016 to enable Ministries/ Departments to refer 
to the proposals of framing/ amendment of recruitment rules, online to DoPT and UPSC, for 
their consideration and approval. It is proposed to add modules relating to legislative 
Department (for legal vetting of RRs approved by UPSC) and Directorate of Printing Module 
(for online submission of vetted RRs for publication in gazette of India). Once the RRFAMS 
portal is made fully functional, it is expected that delay in notification of RRs, approved by 
UPSC, would be greatly reduced. 
Further observation 
3.31 The Committee is concerned to note that as many as 262 Recruitment Rules are 
still pending notification. The Committee recommends DoPT to explore the feasibility of 
putting an accountability mechanism in place and holding the authority concerned 
responsible for delay in notification of recruitment rules. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.32 The Committee recommends UPSC to furnish a status note on the procedure of 
declaration of vacancies with respect to Civ il Services Examination. UPSC may also apprise 
the Committee whether vacancies determined at the stage of preliminary examination remain 
constant throughout the recruitment cycle or vary at a later stage. UPSC may also brief the 
Committee as to how it main tains the constant ratio of candidates belonging to various 
categories throughout the recruitment cycle, in case, the number of vacancies varies at the 
Preliminary and other stages. 4.9 

42 
 
  
Action Taken  
3.33 The vacancies notified at the stage of Notification of the Civil Services Examination 
(CSE) are tentative in nature, which may undergo change after getting firm number of 
vacancies from Cadre Controlling Authorities. The vacancy position is firmed up befor e the 
declaration of the final result. The Commission seeks confirmation about the vacancy 
position from the DoPT, which compiles the vacancy position by obtaining the requisite 
information from all the participating Ministries / Department of the CSE, ini tially before 
notification, then before declaration of result of the Civil Services (Preliminary) Examination 
and then before declaration of result of the Civil Services (Main) Examination and finally 
before declaration of final result after the Personalit y Test/ Interview. The vacancies may 
undergo changes at any of the intermediate stages between notification and declaration of the 
final result.  
3.34 The Following table contains the information about the status of vacancies at different 
stages of the exa mination during last 5 years at the Notification stage and the stages 
thereafter: 
Sl. 
No 
Year of 
Exam. 
Vacancies 
at the time 
of 
Notification 
Vacancies before 
declaration of result of 
Preliminary 
Examination 
Vacancies before 
declaration of 
result of Main 
Examination 
 
 
Vacancies before 
declaration of final 
result. 
1. 2016 1079 1209 1209 1209 
2. 2017 980 1058 1058 1058 
3. 2018 782 812 812 812 
4. 2019 896 936 927 927 
5. 2020 796 836 836 Yet to be confirmed 
 
3.35 As regards the issue of maintaining the constant ratio of candidates belonging to 
various categories throughout the recruitment cycle, in case, the number of vacancies varies 
at the different stages, it is informed that the Commission finalizes the results  of the various 
stages of the CSE as per the Rules of the Examination notified by the Government (DoPT). 
There is no explicit provision in the existing Examination Rules that entails that a constant 
ratio of candidates belonging to various categories is to  be maintained by the Commission 
throughout the recruitment cycle. However, as would be seen from the above table, the 

43 
 
  
changes in vacancy position between the Notification Stage and the final stage have been 
minor and thereby having little impact on the maintenance of the said ratio. 
Further observation 
3.36 The Committee is of the considered view that UPSC should notify the actual 
number of vacancies before the conduct of Preliminary examination  and that the 
number of vacancies should remain constant throu ghout the examination process . The 
Committee finds it difficult to comprehend as to how UPSC finalizes the list of 
candidates to be called for Mains and personality test if the vacancies keep fluctuating 
every single time. The Committee is of the view that  the Selection procedure needs to be 
corrected.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.37 The Committee, in its 100 th and 104 th Reports, recommended that an expert 
Committee must be constituted to  assess the impact of the drastic changes brought about by 
the Commission in the scheme of examination since 2010 on administration and candidates. 
UPSC has time and again informed the Committee that Baswan Committee has been 
constituted for the purpose . The Committee is well aware that Baswan Committee was 
constituted to make recommendations on the eligibility, Syllabus, Scheme and Pattern of 
Examination. What the Committee has been emphatic about in its recommendations is 
‘Administrative Impact Assessment’, i.e. an assessment of the impact of administrative 
decisions. UPSC changed the pattern of Civil Services Examination from time to time on the 
basis of recommendations made by various Expert Committees. However, no study has been 
commissioned to assess how such changes impacted the aspirants, nature of recruitment a nd 
administration at large. In light of the above, the Committee emphatically reiterates its 
recommendation and hopes that the Ministry will accomplish the task at the earliest. 4.10 
Action Taken  
3.38 This matter primarily concerns the Government. However , the Commission has 
constituted Expert Committees for the Civil Services Examination in the past from time to 
time to judge the efficacy of the examination system in selecting the most suitable candidates 
for the premier Government Services recruited thro ugh the Civil Services Examination. 
Based on the recommendations of such Committees, as accepted by the Government, 
necessary changes have been carried out in scheme of the Examination from time to time. All 

44 
 
  
these Committees had made their recommendations duly considering the changes effected in 
the scheme following the recommendations of the earlier Committees. The latest Committee 
constituted was the Baswan Committee in August, 2015, which submitted its report on the 
reforms in the Examination in August, 2016. The Commission has forwarded the Baswan 
Committee Report to the Government (DoPT). Subsequently, the Commission‟s comments 
on the recommendations of the Committee have also been sent to the Government. As regard 
the Administrative Impact Assessment s tudy, it is stated that no such study has been carried 
out by the Commission. 
3.39 It is informed that the recommendations of Baswan Committee report are currently 
under examination in this Department. 
Further observation 
3.40 The Committee has been emphatic about ‘assessment of the impact of changes 
made in examination system’ rather than ‘Examination reforms’. The Committee is 
aware that various expert Committees have been appointed from time to time to study 
the efficacy of t he examination system and suggest reforms, Baswan Committee being 
one of them. However, what the Committee wishes to know is whether the reforms 
undertaken so far have had a fruitful impact on aspiring candidates, nature of 
recruitment and administration at large. The Committee reiterates its recommendation. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.41 The Committee observes that there is an inordinate delay in the constitution of 
Departmental Promotion Committees (DPC). UPSC may examine the DPC process right 
from the s tage of receipt of DPC proposals to their disposal, identify the factors hindering 
timely promotions and furnish a status note to the Committee. Further, the Committee 
recommends UPSC to suggest the reforms that need to be undertaken in order to make 
promotions time bound in the status note. 4.11 
Action Taken 
3.42 There is no inordinate delay in convening DPCs on the part of the UPSC. The average 
time taken by UPSC to conduct the DPC in Promotion cases, upon receipt of complete 
proposal in every aspect, was 51 days in year 2020 -21 as against the target of 135 days ( for 
ACC Cases) and 180 days (for Non-ACC Cases) as per the Model Calendar.  

45 
 
  
3.43 Most of the Cadre Controlling Authorities fail to submit the DPC proposals within the 
time stipulated, for example,  15th April, 2020 for ACC cases and 30 th April, 2020 for Non -
ACC cases in respect of the vacancies of the year 2021. By now the submission of proposal 
for Vacancy Year 2022 should have been started. Not a single proposal for conducting DPC 
for Vacancy Year 2022 has however been submitted by Department(s) to UPSC. 
3.44 Commission feels that if timelines prescribed by DoPT relating to submission of DPC 
proposals and other guidelines /instructions issued by Govt. on the related subjects are 
followed by the Departments /Ministries carefully, promotions will happen timely. 
Further observation 
3.45 The Committee is appalled to note that Ministries/ Departments are not 
submitting DPC proposals to UPSC on time. The Committee recommends UPSC to 
emphasize upon all Ministries/Departments to put an accountability mechanism in place 
and make the concerned authorities answerable for delaying the submission of DPC 
proposals to UPSC. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.46 The Committee observes that promotions are currently reckoned from the date of 
approval by the competent authority and not from the date of occurrence of vacancy. The 
Committee feels that delay in holding DPCs result in deprivation of timely promotion to t he 
deserving candidates without any fault of theirs. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
DoPT and UPSC to submit their views on this. 4.12 
Action Taken  
3.47 Para 17.10 of DoP&T‟s OM No. 22011/5/86 -Estt.(D) dated 10.04.1989  states the 
general principle that promotion of officers included in the panel would be regular from the 
date of validity of the panel or the date of their actual promotion whichever is later. Further, 
para 6.4.4 of the aforesaid OM dated 10.04.1989 provides that while promotions will be made 
in the order of the consolidated select list, such promotions will have only prospective effect 
even in cases where the vacancies relate to earlier year(s). 
3.48 It therefore follows that promotions are made effective from the date the officer 
assumes charge of the post concerned and that it has only prospective effect as the officer 

46 
 
  
concerned will officiate in next higher grade from that date only and will handle higher duties 
and responsibilities of promotional post. 
3.49 As far as the issue of d elayed DPC is concerned, it is stated that DoP&T has issued 
instructions regarding timely and advance action in convening of DPC meeting in terms of 
Model Calendar, in May, 2017 and requested all Ministries/Departments to ensure strict 
adherence to the tim e scheduled prescribed in Model Calendar. This Department has been 
impressing upon all Ministries/Departments from time to time to adhere to the prescribed 
time line so as to ensure that the panel is ready in time and is utilized as and when the 
vacancies arise during the course of the vacancy year. Therefore, it is for the cadre 
controlling authorities to strictly comply with these instructions. 
3.50 Since the delay is caused by inordinately late submission of the DPC proposals by the 
Departments, not in c onformity with the Model Calendar on DPCs circulated vide DoP&T 
OM No.22011/4/2013 -Estt(D) dated 8.5.2017, the Cabinet Secretary has been requested 
through D.O. letter No.11/14/2021 -AUC dated 31.03.2021 by the Chairman, UPSC to issue 
suitable directives to  all Ministries / Departments for ensuring timely submission of DPC 
Proposals to UPSC so that the availability of select panels can be ensured well before the 
commencement of the vacancy year. 
Further observation 
3.51 The Committee is of the considered view that delay in the submission of DPC 
Proposals by the Ministries/Departments is depriving the deserving candidates of timely 
promotion. The Committee recommends DoPT to impress upon Ministries/Departments 
to put an accountability mechanism in place and hold authorities concerned responsible 
for delay in the submission of DPC proposals and the Committee may be apprised of the 
outcome in this regard. 
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND SERVICE MATTERS  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.52 The Committee beli eves that the performance of CBI is invariably linked to the 
strength and quality of its personnel. An organization is only as good as its people and an 
understaffed organization is usually overburdened. The Committee is of the view that CBI is 
in grave ne ed of Cadre restructuring and therefore, recommends the Government to 

47 
 
  
undertake Cadre restructuring of CBI at the earliest. The Government may also explore the 
feasibility of inducting Officers up to the rank of DSP as well as specialists into CBI through 
direct recruitment besides deputation. The Committee is of the considered view that it is 
important to align the human resource architecture of CBI to enhance its core competencies 
and improve its performance.6.5 
Action Taken 
3.53 It is informed that approved cadre strength of CBI in all ranks is 7273. The strength of 
this bureau has been increased at various occasions but overall re -structuring in a holistic 
manner has never taken place. With regard to increase in manpower in CBI i s concerned, it is 
mentioned that a proposal for Cadre Review/ Restructuring of CBI is already under 
consideration in consultation with CBI for creation of 734 additional posts in different ranks.  
3.54 Further, it is submitted that the earlier provision o f direct recruitment of Dy.SP 
(Group „ A‟) through UPSC has been done away with on the recommendations of the 
Committee constituted in this regard.  After due consultations with Do P&T and UPSC and 
keeping in view   the functional requirements of the Organiza tion to ensure a greater career 
progression   for sub-Inspectors/ Inspectors  in CBI, the earlier system of Direct Recruitment 
has been done away with and Limited Departmental Competitive Examination (LDCE) has 
been introduced for fast track promotion of s erving CBI employees, who have completed 04 
years of service, to the rank of Dy. SP. LDCE will ensure that competent and meritorious 
personnel are encouraged by fast track promotion.   
3.55 It stated that departmental CBI officers play a very important rol e in investigations 
but at the same time, officers on deputation from States/CPOs/CAPFs/Banks etc. at various 
levels bring fresh and new ideas based on their experience in different fields.  The 
deputationist officers are also aware of local laws, local co nditions and knowledge.  Hence, 
deputation reserve has been provided at various levels. Deputation reserve has been reduced 
at various levels. In case only direct recruitment quota is prescribed for various technical 
posts of CBI, it will affect career progression of staff due to limited number of posts available 
in hierarchy.   
Further observation 
3.56 CBI has apprised the Committee that there are as many as 822 vacancies in 
Executive ranks, 88 vacancies for Law Officer, 97 v acancies for technical officer as on 

48 
 
  
31.01.2021. The Committee recommends CBI to prepare a roadmap as to how and by 
when it plans to fill up such a large number of vacancies.  The Committee also hopes 
that cadre restructuring exercise is initiated soon. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.57 The Committee agrees with the view of CBI that withdrawal of General Consent by 
States impedes investigation. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to 
assess if there is a need to amend the existing Laws or bring out a new law altogether in 
order to clearly define the mandate of CBI and vest more powers in it. 6.13 
Action Taken 
3.58 It is informed that State Governments have withdrawn general consent under section 6 
of DSPE Act to CBI for conducting investigation in the state (not being a Unio n Territory or 
railway area) and they are now giving the requisite consent case by case basis.  
Further observation 
3.59 The Committee is concerned to note that CBI has not submitted its views as to 
whether there is a need to amend the exis ting Laws or bring out a new Legislation  
altogether in order to clearly define the mandate of CBI and vest more powers in it. The 
Committee would like CBI to state its opinion regarding the same. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.60 The Committee notes that CVOs are performing the functions of surveillance, 
vigilance and investigation as well.  As such, CVC cannot afford to keep posts of as many as 
63 CVOs vacant. Therefore, the Committee recommends CVC to fill up the vacant posts at 
the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the Commission’s endeavours in this 
direction and the outcome thereof. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore 
the feasibility of filling up existing vacancies and vacancies that are li kely to arise in future, 
in the posts of CVOs by inducting eligible officials having expertise in vigilance matters from 
other organs of governance of the Union Government. 6.26 
Action Taken 
3.61 At present EO (CVO) Division, DoPT is only responsible for appointment of CVOs in 
l38 (JS level-69, Director level-66, DS level-3) Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSE) and 
other organizations under Ministries/ Departments in which 34 posts (JS level -11, Director 

49 
 
  
level-21, DS level-2) are vacant at present (Annexure- VI). Most of these vacant posts have 
been operated on additional charge basis till the appointment of regular CVOs in those posts. 
This department takes initiatives for filling up the vacancies well in advance. However, some 
posts could not be filled  for a long time due to bad financial health of the organization, non 
availability of suitable eligible officers on offer for the remote locations of the posts and other 
reasons. 
Further observation 
3.62 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and re commends that the posts of 
Chief vigilance officer and vigilance officer may be made lucrative to attract and retain 
talent. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.63 The Committee recommends CIC to evaluate the effectiveness of RTI Act and to 
assess the challenges being faced by competent authorities in its implementation. The 
Committee recommends CIC to examine if the provisions of RTI Act are being misused to 
collect information for research purposes or to settle personal scores. 6.36 
Action Taken  
3.64 The recomm endations of the Committee has been forwarded to the CIC for their 
consideration. 
Further observation 
3.65 The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of its recommendations 
as merely forwarding to CIC will not complete the action taken endeavour. 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.66 The Committee is of the view that the purpose of any grievance redressal machinery is 
to promote good governance as well as to serve public interest. The Committee feels that 
poor and the marginalized should be able to reap the benefits of CPGRAMS. For this to 
happen, there should be a me chanism in place to take note of grievances involving larger 
public interest featuring in newspapers. The Committee is happy to note that the Department 
has already taken an initiative in this regard. The Committee recommends the Department to 
impress upon Ministries/Departments of the Central Government to set up such mechanism at 
the earliest and monitor the action taken by them.  7.17 

50 
 
  
Action Taken  
3.67 DARPG has issued guidelines as per it‟s OM dated 11.2.2016, wherein all 
Ministries/Departments, have been requested to regularly examine the Grievances column of 
the newspapers to pick up the cases coming under their purview and take expeditious action 
to redress the grievances in a time bound manner. During the COVID lockdown period, the 
DARPG took cognizance of social media tweets, newspaper clippings which was sent to line 
Ministries/State Governments for effective redressal of grievances.  
Further observation 
3.68 The Committee is of the view that newspapers are a significant source of public 
grievances. At times, newspapers bring to light unheard grievances of the 
underprivileged sections and the vulnerable groups.  In view of the above, the 
Committee strongly feels that there should be a mechanism in each 
Ministry/Department for picking and processing  newspaper grievances. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends DARPG to furnish the list of Ministries  that have not set up a 
mechanism to pick and process grievances featuring in newspapers. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.69 The Committee recommends the Department to evaluate the performance of e -Office 
in coordination with the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and take 
appropriate measures to make the functioning of e -Office hassle free and user friendly. The 
Committee also recommends that a Committee comprising officers of the middle level may be 
constituted to review the performance of e-Office periodically. 7.29 
Action Taken  
3.70 A committee to collate the change requests and recommend suitable actions in e -
Office has been constituted on 06.03.2020 (Annexure- VII). 
Further observation 
3.71 The Committee wishes to be apprised of the action taken by the e -Office 
Committee to make the functioning of e-Office hassle free and user friendly. 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
1.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that it will judiciously 
spend the allocated resources on critical areas such as capacity building, strengthening 
human resource potential, reforming administration and improving governance.     
                                                                                                                                     (Para 1.3)                                                                                                         
2. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                                         (Para 1.7) 
3. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by Union Public Service 
Commission for filling up vacancies at various levels through adhoc promotions. The 
Committee also hopes that the remaining vacancies in Under Secretary, Section Officer 
and Assistant Section Officer Grade shall be filled up appropriately in a time bound 
manner.                    (Para 1.13) 
4. The Committee appreciates DoPT for instructing all Ministries/Departments of 
the Central Government to designate an officer at least of the rank of Deputy Secretary, 
as Liaison Officer, to ensure due compliance of the orders and instructions pertaining to 
reservation admissible to SCs, STs and OBCs.               (Para 1.17) 
5. The Committee notes that delay in the submission of Cadre review prop osals by 
Cadre Controlling authorities concerned is, by and large, responsible for the stagnation 
of cadre review process. The Committee appreciates the Department for pursuing the 
matter vigorously and for following up with authorities concerned through r egular 
meetings and expects that all pending cadre reviews get completed by December 2021.    
                                                                                                                                   (Para 1.20)                                                                   
6. The Committee is appreciative of UPSC for rising to the occasion and engaging 
qualified and competent consultants and for providing incentives to them in order to 
dispose of disciplinary cases in a time bound manner.                                        (Para 1.23)          
7. The Committee is contented to note that Public Enterprises Selection Board is 
functioning with full capacity and has already recommended candidates for 21 posts. 

52 
 
  
The Committee hop es that initiatives taken by the Central Government and CPSEs 
from time to time will help build an equitable workplace for women.               (Para 1.28) 
8. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                                       (Para 1.31)           
9.  The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by LBSNAA to instill a new 
service oriented professionalism in civil servants.               (Para 1.34) 
10. The Committee takes note of the efforts put in by ISTM to fill up vacancies. The 
Committee recommends ISTM to make posts lucrative so as to attract and retain talent.  
                                                                                                                                   (Para 1.39) 
11. The Committee would like to be updated about the progress made in this regard.  
                                                                                                                                   (Para 1.42) 
12. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and rec ommends CBI to provide 
roadmaps of CTV-CBI, ICEI, ICEFS projects as and when finalized.              (Para 1.46) 
13. The Committee is pleased to note that Central Vigilance Commission has 
decided to hold Delay as having vigilance angle. However, the Commit tee would like to 
know if there any instances where disciplinary action has been taken against authorities 
concerned for inaction or delayed action in handling vigilance matters.           (Para 1.50) 
14. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.              (Para 1.54) 
15. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.              (Para 1.58) 
16. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the multilingual 
version of CPGRAMS portal and Interactive Voice Response System are 
operationalized soon.                  (Para 1.62) 
17. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.              (Para 1.65) 
18. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.              (Para 1.68) 
19. The Committee is pleased to note that the Departm ent has already set the 
process of integrating district level portals into CPGRAMS into motion.         (Para 1.71) 
20.  The Committee appreciates the Department for making an all -out effort to 
ensure effective redressal of grievances.                           (Para 1.74) 

53 
 
  
21. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.              (Para 1.77) 
22. The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and hopes that 
operational difficulties being encountered by e -Office users will be addressed in 
upcoming versions.                   (Para 1.80) 
23. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                         (Para 1.83) 
24. The Committee is confident that the 52 long pending grievances pertaining to 
family pensioners and Super senior citizens will be resolved soon.            (Para 1.86) 
25. The Committee recommends the Department of Pensions and Pensioner’s 
welfare to pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministries/Departments and see that a 
proper accountability mechanism is put in place.               (Para 1.89) 
26. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.              (Para 1.92) 
27. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                                       (Para 1.95) 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMI TTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
28. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that additional 
requirement of funds, if any, projected by it at the Supplementary/Revised Estimates 
Stage 2021-22 shall be provided to it.  The Committee is of the view that the investment 
made in human resources management helps improve efficiency of administration and 
ultimately results in Good Governance.                  (Para 2.2) 
29. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that adequate funds 
should be provided to CVC for strengthening surveillance capabilities and for setting up 
a Centralized Surveillance Database.                  (Para 2.5) 
30. The Committee notes th e reply of the Ministry. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the recommendations made by the Expert Committee to be constituted by it 
at an appropriate stage.                    (Para 2.9) 
31. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                                       (Para 2.13) 

54 
 
  
32. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                                       (Para 2.16) 
33. The Committee is contended to note that adequate funds have been provided to 
IIPA for revamping existing infrastr ucture and for setting up digitally enabled 
classrooms.                    (Para 2.19) 
34. The Committee would like to know as to when the said  Recruitment Rule will be 
reframed by the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. The Committee is happy 
to note that but for one, Permanent/circuit Benches of CAT are available in all places 
wherever there is a seat of the High Court.               (Para 2.24) 
35. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                                       (Para 2.27) 
36. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                                       (Para 2.30) 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN FOR NOT ACCEPTING ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS. 
37. The Committee notes that DoPT monitors the progress in filling up of backlog 
reserved vacancies for SCs, STs & OBCs with ten Ministries/Departments, having more 
than 90% of the employees of Central Government  and that these 
Ministries/Departments collect the data from their attached/subordinate offices, Central 
Public Sector Undertakings, Financial Institutions, Nationalized Banks, etc and, 
thereafter, furnish consolidated data to DoPT . The Committee is concerned to note tha t 
the data on reserved vacancies was last updated on 01.01.2020 and that too, is 
inadequate as it doesn’t cover ten Ministries/Departments. The Committee recommends 
DoPT to instruct the Ministries/Departments concerned to create a dashboard on their 
sites showing the details of reserved vacancies and the progress made in filling them up. 
The Department may also create a similar Dashboard on its site and update it regularly 
as and when information regarding reserved vacancies is made available to it by the 
Ministries/Departments.                    (Para 3.3) 
38. The Committee notes that under Lateral Entry Scheme, applications have been 
invited from ‘talented and motivated Indian nationals willing to contribute towards 

55 
 
  
nation building to join the Government at the level of Joint Secretary or Director’ , the 
object is to draw expertise, experience and also to facilitate exchange of talent. The 
Committee, in its recommendation, underscored the extension of the same principle to 
Central Staffing scheme. The Commi ttee has suggested the Department to expand the 
scope of Central Staffing Scheme not with an intention to overhaul the bureaucracy but 
only to fulfil the twin purposes of bringing in domain expertise and addressing the 
shortage of bureaucrats. The Committee fails to understand as to why officers from non 
executive branches of the Government cannot be appropriately trained on the same 
lines as outside experts inducted through Lateral Entry Scheme especially when the 
former have an advantage over the latter a s they know a thing or two about the 
functioning of the Union Government. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation.                                                                                       (Para 3.8) 
39. The Committee notes the r eply of the Ministry. The Committee would like to 
know whether DoPT has received any representation from any Officer/ Officers’ 
Association alleging discrimination between IAS and other services. The Committee 
also recommends DoPT to compile the gist of such representations and furnish the same 
to the Committee.                                                                                                     (Para 3.13) 
40. The Committee notes that Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions is the nodal agency for ‘Personnel Management’ in India. The Ministry is also 
responsible for formulation of policies concerning recruitment, regulation of service 
conditions, p osting/transfers, deputation of personnel as well as other related issues. 
Therefore, the Committee feels that there is no better forum than the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions to initiate discussion in this regard. The 
Committee woul d like DoPT to seek views of the Union Legislature and Judiciary 
regarding the same and furnish them to the Committee.                                    (Para 3.18) 
41. The Committee is deeply concerned to note that 316 IAS officers are yet to file 
Immovable Property Returns for the year 2020. The Committee recommends DoPT to 
furnish details of disciplinary action taken by the Central Government or State 
Government concerned against each of these 316 officers under appropriate rules.  
                                                                                                                                   (Para 3.21) 
42. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee recommends 
UPSC to furnish the list of candidates who served as Chairmen and Members of UPSC 

56 
 
  
from 2010 and 2020. The Committee also recommends that against the name of each 
candidate, the details of Gender, Category to which he/she belongs, state to which he/she 
belongs be mentioned.                                                                                 (Para 3.26) 
43. The Committee is concerned to note that as many as 262 Recruitment Rules are 
still pending notification. The Committee recommends DoPT to explore the feasibility of 
putting an accountability mechanism in place and holding the authority concerned 
responsible for delay in notification of recruitment rules.                                  (Para 3.31) 
44. The Committee is of the considered view that UPSC should notify the actual 
number of vacancies before the conduct of Preliminary examination  and that the 
number of vacancies should remain constant throughout the examination process . The 
Committee finds it difficult to comprehend as to how U PSC finalizes the list of 
candidates to be called for Mains and personality test if the vacancies keep fluctuating 
every single time. The Committee is of the view that the Selection procedure needs to be 
corrected.                                                                                                                  (Para 3.36) 
45. The Committee has been emphatic about ‘assessment of the impact of changes 
made in examination system’ rather than ‘Examination reforms’. The Committee is 
aware that va rious expert Committees have been appointed from time to time to study 
the efficacy of the examination system and suggest reforms, Baswan Committee being 
one of them. However, what the Committee wishes to know is whether the reforms 
undertaken so far have had a fruitful impact on aspiring candidates, nature of 
recruitment and administration at large. The Committee reiterates its recommendation.  
                                                                                                                                   (Para 3.40) 
46. The Committee is appalled to note that Ministries/ Departments are not 
submitting DPC proposals to UPSC on time. The Committee recommends UPSC to 
emphasize upon all Ministries/Departments to put an accountability mechanism in place 
and make the concerned authorities answerable for delaying the submission of DPC 
proposals to UPSC.                  (Para 3.45) 
47. The Committee is of the considered view that delay in the submission of DPC 
Proposals by the Ministries/Departments is depriving the deserving candidates of timely 
promotion. The Committee recommends DoPT to impress upon Ministries/Departments 
to put an accountability mechanism in place and hold authorities concerned responsible 

57 
 
  
for delay in the submission of DPC proposals and the Committee may be apprised of the 
outcome in this regard.                  (Para 3.51) 
48. CBI has apprised the Committee that there are as many as 822 vacancies in 
Executive ranks, 88 vacancies for Law Officer, 97 v acancies for technical offi cer as on 
31.01.2021. The Committee recommends CBI to prepare a roadmap as to how and by 
when it plans to fill up such a large number of vacancies.  The Committee also hopes 
that cadre restructuring exercise is initiated soon.              (Para 3.56) 
49. The Committee is concerned to note that CBI has not submitted its views as to 
whether there is a need to amend the existing Laws or bring out a new Legislation 
altogether in order to clearly define the mandate of CBI and vest more powers in it. The 
Committee would like CBI to state its opinion regarding the same.                  (Para 3.59) 
50. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that the post s of 
Chief vigilance officer and vigilance officer may be made lucrative to attract and retain 
talent.                                                                                                                        (Para 3.62) 
51. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of its recomm endations 
as merely forwarding to CIC will not complete the action taken endeavour.   (Para 3.65) 
 
52. The Committee is of the view that newspapers are a significant source of public 
grievances. At times, newspapers bring to light unheard grievances of the  
underprivileged sections and the vulnerable groups.  In view of the above, the 
Committee strongly feels that there should be a mechanism in each 
Ministry/Department for picking and processing newspaper grievances. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends DARPG to furnish the list of Ministries that have not set up a 
mechanism to pick and process grievances featuring in newspapers.                (Para 3.68) 
 
53. The Committee wishes to be apprised of the action taken by the e -Office 
Committee to make the functioning of e-Office hassle free and user friendly.  (Para 3.71) 
 
***** 
 
 
 

58 
 
  
       
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

59 
 
  
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
       
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on the 8 th December, 2021 
in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi – 110001.   
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
(ii) Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(v) Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
(vi) Shri P.Wilson 
(vii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
LOK SABHA 
(viii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(xi) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xii) Shri Suresh Pujari 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Director 
 Shri Amit Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
          Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Mohd. Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
 

60 
 
  
WITNESSES 
I. *             *                  * 
II.        *             *                  * 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Members about the agenda for 
the meeting, i.e.,  
(i)  consideration & adoption of draft 108 th, 109th, 110 th and 111 th reports of 
the Committee and  
(ii)       *             *                  * 
 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted all draft Reports and decided to 
present those Reports to Parliament on 10 th December, 2021.  The Chairman 
nominated Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar & Dr. Sasmit Patra for 
presenting the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari & Shri 
Jasbir Singh Gill for laying the reports in Lok Sabha.  
 
4. *             *                  * 
 
5. *             *                  * 
 
6. *             *                  * 
 
7. *             *                  * 
 
8. *             *                  * 
 
9. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.      The meeting adjourned at 04.51 PM.  
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________  
***relate to other matters 
 