 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2020 / Bhadra 1942 (Saka) 
  
REPORT NO. 
103 
 
ONE HUNDRED-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
FUNCTIONING OF  VIRTUAL COURTS/ COURT  
PROCEEDINGS  THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCING (INTERIM REPORT)  
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 (Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 (Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

CS (P & L) - 205 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2020 / Bhadra 1942 (Saka) 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
FUNCTIONING OF VIRTUAL COURTS/ COURT 
PROCEEDINGS THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCING (INTERIM REPORT)  
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 (Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 (Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
   PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii) – (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS      (iv) 
3. REPORT 1-26 
 (i)  CHAPTER – I 
   VIRTUAL COURTS  
 (ii) CHAPTER – II 
   CHALLENGES OF VIRTUAL COURTS 
 (iii) CHAPTER – III 
   BENEFITS OF VIRTUAL COURTS AND WAY FORWARD 
   
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE                     27-32                                                           
5.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE  33-44 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral 
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
4. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
6. Shri P. Wilson 
7. *Shri Abhay Bharadwaj 
8. *Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
9. *Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy 
10. *Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Pradan Baruah 
12. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
13. Shri Vinod LakhamshiChavda 
14. Shri MohanbhaiSanjibhaiDelkar 
15. Shri P. P. Mohammed Faizal 
16. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
17. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua 
18. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
19. Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone 
20. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
21. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Chirag Paswan 
24. Shri Suresh Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Assistant Committee Officer 
_____________________ 
*Nominated w.e.f. 23rd July, 2020 
 (i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee on 
its behalf, do hereby present the One Hundred-third  Report on the Subject ‘Functioning of 
the Virtual Courts/ Courts Proceedings through Video Conferencing’ (Interim Report). 
2. The Committee had taken up the subject ‘Functioning of the Virtual Courts/  Court 
Proceedings through Video Conferencing’ after the COVID -19 pandemic. The Committee 
had a detailed discussion on the subject with all probable stakeholders. After discussion, it 
has decided to present an Interim Report on the subject so as to highlight the issues in the 
present situation. The Committee will deliberate further on this issue and will present its Final 
Report at later stage after complete deliberations on the subject.  
3. The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Justice  and Secretary -General, 
Supreme Court of India in its meeting held on 27 th July, 2020 on the subject. The  Committee 
then heard the Chairman, Bar Council of India, President, Delhi High Court Bar Association 
and Chairman, All Delhi District Court Bar Association in its meeting held on 6 th August, 
2020.  The Committee thereafter heard the views of the Secretari es, Department of Legal 
Affairs and Department of Justice along with the representative of Supreme Court of India on 
the subject in its meeting held on 24th August, 2020.   
4. While considering the Subject, the Committee took note of the following 
documents/information placed before it:- 
(i) Background notes, power point presentations of Department of Justice; 
(ii) Replies furnished by Department of Justice, Department of Legal Affairs and the Bar 
to the questionnaires furnished by the Secretariat; 
 
(iii)  ‘Online Court and the Future of Justice’ by Richard Susskind 
(iv)  National Policy and Action Plan on implementation of ICT in the Indian Judiciary  
(v) Evaluation study of e Courts Integrated MMP by NCAER 
(vi) Brief Notes on e Courts project published on the website of Minist ry of Law and 
Justice 
 
(vii) Supreme Court guidelines on videoconferencing, e Committee Newsletter Apr 2016 
(viii) Research papers published by Daksh, Jane Donoghue, Thomson Reuters, Edward. H. 
Freeman, Jamie Young, Chitranjali Negi, Blake Candler. 
(ix) Report of the Sub -Committee headed by Hon’ble Ms. Justice G. Rohini on National 
Framework of Court Excellence. 
 
(x) News articles, editorials and material from the internet. 
 5. The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the representatives of the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments, Supreme Court of India and others for furnishing 
necessary information/ documents and rendering valuable assistance to the Committee in i ts 
deliberations.  
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
(ii) 

7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  8th 
September, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         BHUPENDER YADAV 
8th  September, 2020                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
BSNL     Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
CIS    Case Information Software  
 CrPC    Criminal Procedure Code 
 DG sets   Diesel Generator Sets 
 EUR    Euro 
HCL     Hindustan Computers Limited  
ICT     Information and Communication Technology 
IPAB     Intellectual Property Appellate Board 
NCLAT    National Company Law Appellate Tribunal  
NIC     National Informatics Centre 
NJDG    National Judicial Data Grid 
PPP     Public Private Partnership 
SDG     Sustainable Development Goals  
SWAN    State Wide Area Network  
TCS     Tata Consultancy Services 
TDSAT    Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate   
    Tribunal 
UN     United Nations 
UPS     Uninterrupted Power Supply 
US     United States  
USD     United States Dollar 
UYAP     Ulusal Yargi Agi Bilisim Sistemi  
VC     Video Conferencing 
WAN    Wide Area Network 
Wifi     Wireless fidelity  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
VIRTUAL COURTS 
1.1 World over, the COVID-19 pandemic has forced Courts to get creative to continue to 
execute their duties. Courts had to explore ways and means to become less dependent on 
physical appearances and more receptive to online  options. Virtual Courts have now become 
the primary or the only means for dispensation of justice. 
History of Virtual Courts 
1.2 One of the earliest references to Virtual Courts can be found in the works of Professor 
Frederick I Lederer who is currently t he Director, Centre for Legal and Court Technology, 
United states. He wrote in 1997- 
‘The Courtroom is a place of adjudication, but it is also an information 
hub. Outside information is assembled, sorted and brought into the Courtroom 
for presentation. Onc e presented, various theories of interpretation are argued 
to the fact finder who then analyses the data according to prescribed rules 
(determined by the judge through research, analysis and interpretation) and 
determines a verdict and result. The Courtroo m is thus the centre of a complex 
system of information exchange and management. Ultimately because lawyers 
and judges deal continuously with ‘data’, high technology Courtrooms exist and 
Virtual Courtrooms are possible.’ 
1.3 Lederer, as far back as in 1997, with an impressive degree of foresight, predicted how 
digital technologies transform the legal landscape in future. Given the pace and the degree of 
digital incursion into almost all facets of human activity, it is clear that technology will 
become an omnipresent feature of the Courtroom. 
The Great Debate 
1.4 Any discussion on Virtual Courts revolves around a central question - Is Court a place 
or a Service? The advocates of Virtual Courts argue that Court is a Service and not a place. A 
bird’s eye view of various definitions of ‘Court’ helps resolve the debate. 
1.5 As far as India is concerned, neither the Civil and Criminal Procedural Codes nor the 
General Clauses Act embodies the definition of the term ‘Court’. However, as per the legal 
glossary of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice, ‘Court’ is a place where 
justice is administered. Further, Section 3 of the Evidence Act, defines 'Court' as follows: 
'Court includes all Judges and Magistrates and all persons, except arbitrators, legall y 
authorized to take evidence. In Section 20 of the Indian Penal Code, 'Court of Justice' is 
defined as a judge, who is empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a body of judges 
which is empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when such judge or body of judges is 
acting judicially.' 
1.6 The US Federal Judiciary defines ‘Court’ as a Government entity authorized to 
resolve legal disputes. Black’s Law dictionary defines ‘Court’ as governmental body 
consisting of one or more judges who sit to adjudica te disputes or as a place where justice is 
judicially administered. 

2 
 
1.7 From the above, it is clear that although the definition of Court varies across 
jurisdictions, they all seem to have two elements in common -That Court is a Government 
entity comprising one or more judges and that Court deals with the administration of Justice 
thus making it clear that Court is more of a Service than a place. 
How are Virtual Courts different from regular Courts? 
1.8 In Virtual Courts, Plaint and other documents are filed  electronically, arguments are 
heard over videoconferencing/teleconferencing, evidence is submitted digitally, judges decide 
cases online either presiding from the physical Courtroom or sitting in some other place. 
Thus, Virtual Courts transform the documentation, evidential and procedural mechanisms and 
conduct hearings online from start to finish. 
Virtual Courts, Online Courts, Online Dispute Resolution- THE DIFFERENCE: 
1.9 The Committee has observed that the terms Virtual Court, Online Court, and Online 
Dispute Resolution are being used interchangeably. Richard Susskind in his famous book 
titled ‘Online Courts and the Future of Justice’ has explained the differences among these 
terms clearly. 
1.10 In Virtual Courts , Plaint and other documents such as vala klatnama, written 
submissions are filed electronically; Court fees are paid electronically; Evidence is submitted 
digitally; arguments are heard over videoconferencing; witnesses give their testimony 
remotely over videoconferencing and Judge decides the ca se online either presiding from the 
physical Courtroom or from some other place. A copy of the Order/Judgement is made 
available on the website of the Court or through some electronic means. 
1.11 Online Courts  constitute an advancement over Virtual Courts.  The only difference 
between Virtual Courts and Online Courts being that in the former hearing is synchronous 
and the latter involves asynchronous form of interaction. This means that, in Virtual Court 
hearings, the Judge, advocates, litigants and witnesse s need to be available at the time of 
hearing for a case to progress. In contrast, in Online Courts, the participants need not be 
present simultaneously; arguments, evidence are presented to the Judge without the parties 
being together at the same time. 
1.12 Online Dispute Resolution refers to the use of online platforms for the resolution of 
disputes between parties through Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanisms.  
International experience 
1.13 Virtual Courts are not a new phenomenon. Many countries have  adjudicated cases 
ranging from low value civil disputes to complicated criminal cases Virtually without 
advocates, litigants and witnesses having to set foot physically in the Courtroom. 
United States 
1.14 In United States, many State Courts have either installed webcast equipment or have 
Virtual Courtrooms. Mc Glothin Court room, set up by The Centre for Legal and Court 
Technology at the College of William and Mary Law School in Virginia is the world’s most 
technologically advanced trial and appellate Courtroom. 
Singapore  
1.15 The Singapore Supreme Court has successfully set up a Virtual Courtroom known as 
"The Technology Court", which has a Local Area Network (LAN) with an Internet 
connection and which allows the use of imaging, multimedia and video con ferencing. It also 

3 
 
has a Litigation Support System for Presentation (LSSP), a Computer Based Recording 
Transcription System (CBRT), a sophisticated audio visual system (AVS) which allows 
various types of audio and video information to be presented with eas e and a video 
conferencing to allow foreign witnesses to give evidence in any proceedings. The Supreme 
Court Infokiosk System (SCIS) which has touch sensitive screen and allows a user to obtain 
information on hearing schedules, the location of counter serv ices in the Supreme Court and 
to call up a multimedia floor directory of the Supreme Court complex.  
Turkey 
1.16 Turkey has a national e -judiciary system called UYAP. UYAP, which won the UN’s 
Public Service Award in 2012, has significantly increased the effectiveness and accessibility 
of the judicial system in Turkey, by providing faster, more transparent and more cost efficient 
judicial services than ever before. UYAP links together all judicial institutions in Turkey and 
it provides the possibility for the whole judicial process to be carried out through an 
electronic document flow. The system currently has 1.9 mill ion users, and it has resulted in 
annual savings of approximately 100 million USD, as well as significant environmental 
benefits, as it allows for a virtually paperless working environment. UYAP is complemented 
by an advanced video -conferencing service, wh ich allows for testimony and hearings to be 
carried out at distance, without having to transfer prisoners and detainees to Court.   
Canada 
1.17 In Canada, videoconferencing technology has been used to receive witness testimony 
in civil trials for over a de cade. The Ontario Rules of Civil Procedure allow for witnesses in 
civil trials to testify remotely using videoconference technology. 
Italy  
1.18 Italy has an “On -line Civil Trial” facility which covers all civil cases throughout the 
country. The system allows for an entirely electronic processing of cases, which significantly 
reduces the time and expenses related to accessing the Court. It integrates several high -
security features, including a two -stage authentication, digital signature, and certified email s. 
The system has 6 million daily users and it has resulted in annual savings of 55 million EUR. 
Virtual Courts and India 
1.19 The unpredictable lockdown caused by the corona virus pandemic has brought forth a 
crisis which affected human lives and also cri ppled the functioning of Indian Judiciary. In 
order to adjudicate urgent matters and to enable the judicial system to discharge its 
constitutional mandate of providing access to justice at all times, the Supreme Court of India 
has rolled out Virtual Court hearings. 
1.20 During the pre -COVID period, the VC set up was primarily used for conducting 
remand matters to prevent movement of prisoners between Courts and jails. Such VC 
facilities have been operationalized between 3240 Court complexes and correspondin g 1272 
prisons. 
1.21 Legal sanctity was given to videoconferencing by the Supreme Court by an 
overarching order invoking Article 142 of the Constitution of India passed on 6 th April 2020 
which covered all the High Courts in the country. Consistent with the peculiarities of the 
judicial system in every state and in view of the dynamic health situation, the High Courts 
were left with the discretion of adopting technology after cu stomisation to suit their purpose. 
Model rules on Video Conferencing have been circulated and the High Courts are in the 

4 
 
process of adopting them. The District Courts were to adopt the mode of video conferencing 
prescribed by the concerned High Court. 
 
  

5 
 
CHAPTER-II 
CHALLENGES OF VIRTUAL COURTS 
2.1 The Committee held a series of meetings with the Secretaries of Department of 
Justice and Department of Legal Affairs and Secretary General of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court and representatives of the Bar Council of In dia, Delhi High Court Bar Association and 
Delhi District Courts Bar Association on ‘Virtual Courts’ during which it heard both pros and 
cons of virtualization of Court proceedings. 
2.2 During the course of deliberations, the Committee was apprised as to ho w certain 
initial hiccups plagued Virtual Court hearings. The representatives of the Bar spoke at length 
on the shortcomings of Virtual Courts and why Virtual Courts can never be a complete and 
adequate substitute for regular Courts. The observations and r ecommendations of the 
Committee in this regard are as follows: 
Digital divide 
2.3 The representatives of the Bar brought to the notice of the Committee that a large 
number of advocates and litigants especially those living in rural and remote areas lack ba sic 
infrastructure and high speed internet connection required for virtual hearing of cases and that 
this digital divide makes access to justice unaffordable and inaccessible for a vast majority. 
2.4 While bringing the difficulties being experienced by adv ocates to the notice of the 
Committee, a representative of the Bar said, 
‘As far as e Courts and Virtual Courts are concerned, I can say with 
certainty and with an element of responsibility that in India, almost 50 percent 
lawyers, particularly in District  Courts, do not have any laptop or computer 
facility. How can we assume and presume that they would participate in these 
Virtual Courts and e Courts? So, infrastructure is a big issue in the functioning of 
Virtual Courts ’ 
2.5 In the opinion of the Committee, digital divide has three dimensions -namely, access 
divide (access to equipment and infrastructure), connectivity divide (access to broadband 
connectivity) and skill divide (knowledge and skills required to use digital platforms).  
2.6 While responding to a query raised by a Member of the Committee on the status of 
functioning of Mofussil Courts during the lockdown period and whether e filing is being done 
in Mofussil Courts, the Secretary, Department of Justice spoke about digital divide as below: 
 ‘There is a digital divide right now. About 560 million people have 
internet facility in the Country. So, there is a section of population which does 
not have this internet facility. As compared to urban areas, in the case of rural  
areas, the problem of digital divide is there. Therefore, there is exclusion and 
people are yet to take it in a big way.’ 
2.7 Department of Justice in its written replies to the Committee submitted that E-
Seva kendras have been established in all the High  Courts and in one District Court in 
each state as a part of a pilot project to provide assistance to lawyers and litigants 
ranging from information to facilitation and e filing. The Committee is highly 
appreciative of this initiative and believes that E-Seva Kendras will go a long way in 
bridging the ‘access divide’ and hopes that such facilitation centres be set up in all 
Court complexes across the country at the earliest. The Committee recommends that 
the feasibility of involving private agencies/service  providers who can help people who 

6 
 
are not tech savvy in connecting with Courts by taking VC equipment to their door 
steps on payment may be explored. 
2.8 Speaking about Connectivity divide, Secretary Department of Justice said, 
‘There is a problem in term s of internet penetration, especially in remote 
areas and therefore, the District and Subordinate Courts are perhaps more badly 
affected’. 
2.9 As regards connectivity divide, the Committee recommends the Ministry of 
communications to step up efforts to ens ure timely implementation of National 
Broadband mission which envisages broadband access to all so that the services 
provided by indigenous communication satellites are fully harnessed and the goal of 
Universal broadband access is achieved. 
2.10 The Commit tee is of the opinion that the Judiciary may also consider such 
innovative solutions as launching mobile videoconferencing facilities for the benefit of 
advocates and people living in remote areas. 
Technological competence 
2.11 The Committee was apprised that majority of advocates are not well conversant with 
the use of information and communication technology so as to effectively use them to present 
their cases on a Virtual platform and that there is a concern that virtual Courts unfairly benefit 
tech savvy advocates and law firms which have access to stable internet connection and high 
quality videoconferencing facilities. 
2.12 Speaking on digital divide, the Secretary, Department of Justice said, 
 ‘In urban areas, you have big time law firms; you also ha ve very well -to-do 
advocates. As compared to urban areas, in the case of rural areas, the problem 
of digital divide is there.’ 
2.13 The Committee is of the view that with the advent of Information technology, 
there is not a single facet of human life that is left untouched by it. ICT has also 
transformed the legal landscape in India and the Indian judiciary has come a long way 
from a paper -based era to the one dominated by digital technology and is now moving 
towards cloud based technology. The Committee be lieves that in coming times, 
technology will emerge as a game changer and advocates would be required to use 
technological skills in combination with their specialized legal knowledge and therefore, 
they should keep up with the changing times. 
2.14 Elaborating upon the initiatives taken to train advocates the Secretary, Department of 
Justice said, 
‘a training course was taken up by which first 25 master trainers were 
trained in each of the High Courts. These master trainers, in turn, trained 461 
master trainers in the districts. These 461 master trainers have been given charge 
of all the districts’. 
2.15 To address ‘skill divide’, the third facet of digital exclusion as mentioned 
previously, the Committee recommends that training and awareness programmes 
should be conducted in all Court complexes across the country including Subordinate 
Courts in order to acquaint advocates with the technology and to enable them to 

7 
 
acquire skills required for handling digital platforms so that advocates operate digital 
platforms themselves.  
2.16 A representative of the Bar opined that this unprecedented crisis should be turned into 
an opportunity and said, 
 ‘It is a good time to learn and to make all the young lawyers and the Law 
students to learn something about e filings, V irtual hearings and the use of 
technology. So, this is the time to make them learn and also to teach them.’ 
2.17 The Committee also recommends that the Bar Council of India may introduce 
computer course as one of the subjects in three year/five year courses to enable the 
students to get trained in handling computers and get adapted to the online systems 
while they pursue the Law Course. This will help educate and equip budding lawyers 
with knowledge and skills required for handling digital platforms. 
Poor Digital connectivity 
2.18 In view of the pandemic, Courts are hearing cases online. Standard Operating 
Procedure has been put in place for e-filing, mentioning, listing and hearing of matters 
through videoconferencing/teleconferencing mode. The  advocate /party is required to file the 
petition preferably through e filing mode. Upon completion of all formalities, the 
advocate/party is required to specify as to whether he would like to link to the Hon’ble Bench 
through Desktop/laptop or would like to ava il the facility for video conferencing in the Court 
premises. Web links for joining the Virtual Court hearing will be provided to the advocate 
and litigant. 
2.19 The Committee was informed that one of the biggest hurdles being faced during 
virtual hearings is that of poor digital connectivity. The representatives of the Bar briefed the 
Committee as to how technical glitches are plaguing Virtual Court hearings, especially during 
peak hours when many people log into the videoconferencing system, how it often crashes. 
The committee also learnt that broadband connectivity is woefully poor and is insufficient for 
Virtual Court proceedings.  
2.20 The Committee understands how poor quality audio/video, frequent loss of 
connection, disruptions and high latency affec ts judicial assessment of demeanour, 
emotions and other nonverbal cues and the changing communication dynamics which 
are also important variables in deciding a case. The Committee is of the view that 
improving the quality of Courtroom technology is a neces sary pre condition for 
virtualization of Court proceedings. The Committee also recommends that a study of 
Courtroom design be commissioned and customized software and hardware to facilitate 
Virtual Court hearings be developed to suit the needs of Indian judiciary. 
2.21 The Committee notes that frequent disconnections and disruptions occurring during 
videoconferencing are not always due to technical glitches on the Court’s end but also due to 
some connectivity issues on the other side. Speaking on the same, the Secretary General of the 
Supreme Court said, 
 ‘For tele-connectivity, we must have robust internet connectivity on both 
sides to connect. In Supreme Court, we have 100 Mbps dedicated leased line. It 
requires only 2Mbps of connectivity for video connect ivity and we have 98 Mbps 
in spare to connect the Hon’ble Bench with the server. But, what about the other 
side? The lawyer side does not have that robust connectivity. We are constantly 
requesting the lawyers to enhance their systems. For example, they ca n have 4G 

8 
 
dongles with them. In Delhi, particularly, we are told that most of the chambers of 
lawyers are located in the basements. So, Wifi connectivity is a problem’.  
‘We are requesting advocates not to connect to the VC on their mobile 
phones because t he bandwidths are sometimes consumed by other mobile 
applications like Whatsapp or Facebook. If any other notification comes while you 
are connecting to the Bench, that would break the connectivity. So, if both the ends 
have better connectivity, that will facilitate better video conferencing. We have got 
some representations from advocates and Bar Associations stating that some of the 
lawyers do not even have the connectivity, so, we facilitated them by establishing 
seven centres across Delhi. In every Dist rict Court complex, we have a dedicated 
VC Center for connecting to the Supreme Court VC to facilitate the lawyers. They 
may go to any center near their residence and they will be facilitated.’ 
2.22 Describing how obsolete infrastructure is hampering hearings, a Member said, 
‘Courts don’t have proper infrastructure. Both hardware and software for 
conducting VC, the server and the bandwidth provided to the Courts have a very 
low configuration. Due to this, connectivity problem arises which leads to video 
blurring and voice quality deterioration. So, it thereby prejudices the entire 
judicial process.’ 
2.23 Speaking about technical glitches the Secretary, Department of Justice said, 
‘On the issue of videoconferencing facility, it is true that the video link is 
already about six years old. It has become outdated and the number of licenses 
that we have is a limited number, which we are not able to scale up. We have 
already taken it up through the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology and NIC to come u p with a Centralised Video Conferencing 
Infrastructure which would be going down right up to the District and 
Subordinate Court level which can be based on cloud computing so that 
disruptions do not take place’. 
2.24 The Committee recommends the Department  of Justice to step up efforts to 
provide WAN connectivity and superior quality videoconferencing facilities to all Court 
complexes across the country under Phase II of e Courts project more ambitiously 
within the prescribed timeline.  The Committee recomm ends that Government may 
explore the feasibility of roping in the private sector to eliminate the technical glitches 
and improve service quality, if need be. The Committee appreciates the proposal to 
establish a centralized Video conferencing infrastructur e and hopes that the proposal 
will  be materialized soon.  
2.25 Speaking on the importance of uninterrupted power supply, a Member opined 
‘While conducting the proceedings, if power supply at one end gets 
disturbed, whole proceedings get vitiated.’ 
2.26 The Committee  recommends that Judiciary may consider promoting harnessing 
of renewable energy in all Court complexes as it entails twin benefits of uninterrupted 
power supply and positive ecological impact. 
Open Court principle 
2.27 The representatives of the Bar expressed concern over the opaqueness of   Virtual 
Court hearings as said that Virtual Courts threaten the constitutionality of Court proceedings 

9 
 
and undermine the importance of Rule of law which forms a part of the Basic str ucture of the 
Constitution.  
2.28 Briefing the Committee as to how Virtual Court hearings go against the spirit of Open 
Court principle, a representative of the Bar said, 
 ‘First, this is by itself antithetical to the concept of open Courts. Open 
Court system is what has been emphasized by not  just our legislature but even the 
Judiciary, in their own orders and in their pronouncements, has emphasized on 
an open Court system. But in a Virtual Court, the very fact that process which is 
being adopted is its elf antithetical to that concept because there is a limited 
access.’ 
2.29 The Committee was informed that virtual hearings are not in consonance with the 
concept of open Court encapsulated in the Constitution of India under Article 145(4); Section 
327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;  and Section 153B  of the  Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908. 
2.30 Emphasising on the need of making hearings transparent, a member of the 
Committee remarked,  
‘There is Canada High Court Judgement which talks about openness 
and transparency. It says that public should know even if there is 
videoconferencing. Even in England, they have amended the Law recently. In 
the amendment, they have said that public should have access.’  
2.31 Speaking on the necessity of live streaming of Court proceedings, a Member 
opined,  
‘I think we are one of the few democratic countries where the Court 
proceedings are not recorded. I think, now the time has come for the 
Parliament to insist that Court proceedings must be recorded because as we 
are accountable, Judiciary must also be held accountable’  
2.32 The Hon’ble Supreme Court has reaffirmed the importance of open Court 
principle on multiple occasions and further observed that live streaming of Court 
hearings is an extension of Open Court princip le. In Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and Ors. v. 
State of Maharashtra and Ors, the Hon’ble Supreme Court stated, 
“… Public trial in open Court is undoubtedly essential for the healthy, objective 
and fair administration of justice. Trial held subject to the public scrutiny and gaze 
naturally acts as a check against judicial caprice or vagaries and serves as a 
powerful instrument for creating confidence of the public in the fairness, 
objectivity, and impartiality of the administration of justice.” 
2.33 The Committee also notes that in 2018, the Supreme Court had, in Swapnil 
Tripathi vs. Supreme Court of India , espoused the benefits of adopting technology in the 
judicial system, particularly live stre aming of Court proceedings: Highlighting the 
potential “tangible and intangible benefits” to stakeholders, especially litigants, the 
Court had observed that  

10 
 
“technology could epitomize transparency, good governance and 
accountability, and more importantly, open the vista of the Court rooms, 
transcending the four walls of the rooms to accommodate a large number of 
viewers to witness the live Court proceedings.” In the same judgment, the 
Supreme Court also recognized that live streaming of Court pr oceedings had 
been implemented in other jurisdictions globally.  
2.34 The Committee further notes that in Indira Jai Singh vs. Secretary General of 
Supreme Court & Ors (2018)  has inter alia observed that : (i) It is important to re - 
emphasise the significa nce of live streaming as an extension of principle of open justice 
and open Courts; (ii) The process of live streaming should be subjected to carefully 
structured guidelines;(iii) Initially, a pilot project may be conducted for about three 
months by live s treaming only cases of national and constitutional importance which can 
be expanded in due course with availability of infrastructure. Department of Justice has 
informed that the e Committee of the Supreme Court has set up a Committee of 5 Judges 
to overse e and assist e-Committee of the Supreme Court in preparing guidelines for live 
streaming of cases to make justice delivery mechanism more transparent. The guidelines 
would cover all facets including technologies to be deployed, safeguards and proceedings. 
The report of the Committee is awaited. 
2.35 The Committee is happy to note that in a first, the Madras High Court allowed 
live relay of Contempt proceedings initiated against lawyers to be viewed by advocates 
outside the Court campus on 1 st October, 2015.  And recently, the Calcutta High Court 
permitted live streaming of hearing in a case involving Parsi community saying that the 
proceedings would have ramifications for the entire community across the country in 
February 2020.  
2.36 Also, more recently, the  High Court of Gujarat, while hearing a petition seeking 
public access to Virtual Court hearings observed,   
“the right to know and receive information is one of the facets of Article 
19(1)(a) of the Constitution and for which reason, the public is entitle d to witness 
the Court proceedings involving the issue having an impact on the public at large 
or a section of the public, as the case may be.” The Bench observed: “To observe 
the requirement of an open Court proceedings, the members of the public should 
be allowed to view the Court hearings conducted through the video conferencing, 
except the proceedings ordered for the reasons recorded in writing to be 
conducted in-camera.” 
2.37 Following that, the High Court of Gujarat constituted a Committee of two High Court 
Judges for the purpose of working out the modalities to facilitate the people at large including 
the media to watch the virtual hearing. 
2.38 The Committee notes that w orld over, Court proceedings are recorded in some 
form or the other. The apex Court has time and again emphasized the significance of 
live streaming of Court proceedings in promoting openness and transparency which in 
turn reinforce public faith in judicia l system. The Committee agrees with the 
observation made by the apex Court that live streaming Court proceedings, especially 
cases of constitutional and national importance having an impact on public at large or a 
section of the public will promote transpa rency and openness. The litigant need not 

11 
 
come to the Court to watch the proceedings and thus will reduce crowding inside the 
court. The Judiciary may also consider broadcasting virtual hearings of certain 
specified categories of cases to further the principle of open justice and open Court. 
Data privacy and Data security 
2.39 There are concerns that Virtual Courts will compromise privacy of data as well as 
confidentiality of discussions and Court proceedings. For instance, Courts in the United 
States had to deal with Zoom bombing, an unwanted intrusion by hackers and internet 
trolls into a video conference call, while conducting Court proceedings through 
videoconferencing using Zoom which is a third party software application. Currently, 
third-party softwa re applications such as Vidyo, Cisco and Jitsi are being used in India 
for conducting Court hearings through videoconferencing.  
2.40 Expressing concern over third party software applications, a representative of the 
Bar said,  
 ‘When Virtual videoconferencing and Virtual hearing started, one of 
the software platforms was basically rejected by all on the ground that it is 
insecure. We are talking of insecure systems, those systems which the 
presiding officers are using.’  
2.41 The Committee thin ks that third -party software is not only an unviable 
option but poses a major security risk as such software programs and applications 
are prone to hacking and manipulation. The Committee recommends the Ministry of 
Law and Justice and Ministry of Electroni cs and Information Technology to address 
data privacy and data security concerns while developing a new platform for India’s 
judicial system.  
2.42 Speaking on the need of having a secure indigenous electronic document exchange 
system, a Member opined as follows: 
 ‘As Courts are moving towards VC, the need for Electronic Document 
Management System intensifies. Currently, neither the Courts nor the Counsel 
appearing for the parties have any option for secured transmission of 
documents’ 
2.43 The Committee recommends that Block chain technology should be leveraged to 
improve reliability of evidence and security of transactions and to fortify digital security 
of case files. Proper standardized systems of authentication need to be put in place. 
Online systems should be underpinned by proper procedural safeguards. 
Indigenous Hardware and Software  
2.44 The Committee is of the view that India can become a role model for the world in the 
arena of legal and Courtroom technology given our remarkable achievements in IT and IT 
enabled services sector. Technologies must be built and incorporated in the Court systems in 
such a manner that fundamental legal principles such as participatory justice, fairness, 
impartiality and access to justice are not compromised. 
 
 
 

12 
 
2.45 While expressing concern over technical glitches a Member said, 
‘NIC should develop an efficient system which can be accessed  across the 
Country, especially, a customised application which is efficiently and cheap for 
videoconferencing.’ 
2.46 The Committe e is of the opinion that antiquated working practices may well be 
jettisoned for better outcomes. Technology should be employed so as to effect changes that 
are both incremental and transformational. Besides streamlining and optimizing inefficient 
manual processes through a host of small refinements, innovative technologies like machine 
learning, artificial intelligence and block chain technology may be employed to bring about a 
transformational change. 
2.47 While suggesting certain reform measures to bring  about improvement in the existing 
Virtual Courts system, a Member said, 
‘India is known as the home of software. The Whole World looks to us. We 
have companies like TCS, Infosys, HCL, Wipro and so many other companies.’ 
2.48 The Committee recommends that Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology may be approached by the Administrative Ministry to develop indigenous 
Software applications to handle Virtual Court hearings. The Committee also 
recommends to rope in Private IT companies, if need be, to develop Artificial 
intelligence systems capable of supporting bulk documentation, remote location of 
parties and sophisticated use of graphics.  
2.49 The Committee believes that Legal technology Start ups engaged in innovative 
solutions can play a crucial role in harnessing the unlimited potential of technology to 
connect stakeholders in the justice delivery system and in finding solutions that are 
affordable and efficient and therefore recommends the Government to promote them. 
Infrastructural Constraints and need for a revised policy 
2.50 The Calcutta High Court Bar Association in its written replies to the Committee 
apprised how infrastructural deficiencies are crippling Virtual Court hearings. The Bar 
Association stated, 
‘There are 38 Judges in the Calcu tta High Court but there is not sufficient 
infrastructure to enable all Hon’ble Judges to undertake virtual hearings. For 
example, on 03.08.2020 only 8 Hon’ble Judges were able to take up matters 
virtually both in Division Bench as well as singly.’ 
2.51 Expressing concern about the poor state of judicial infrastructure in the Country, a 
member of the Committee said, 
 ‘You are talking about the Supreme Court and the High Courts. Go to the 
lower level of District Courts and Mofussil Courts. Judges don’t hav e connection. 
There is no Wifi facility. So, Videoconferencing is practically a nonstarter in 
District Courts.’ 
2.52 The above two observations are strengthened by the findings of National Council of 
Applied Economic Research which has made the following o bservation in its Report entitled 
‘Evaluation study of  e-Courts Integrated Mission Mode Project’  

13 
 
‘Court complexes in remote locations suffer due to low connectivity. One main 
important condition for the success of the project is uninterrupted connectivit y. 
Internet as well as electrical connectivity needs to be improved.’ 
2.53 The Committee is constrained to note that District and Subordinate Courts lack 
basic infrastructure and are experiencing difficulties in adapting to Virtual Court 
system. The Commit tee understands that transition from physical Courtrooms to 
Virtual Courtrooms requires massive investment as basic infrastructure required to 
support digitized Court hearings such as electronic case files, equipment to project 
documents and images, audio and video, tools to record hearings, videoconferencing and 
reliable WiFi needs to be put in place. Since transition to Virtual Courts requires high 
initial investment, the Committee desires that feasibility of new financing approaches 
such as PPP model may  be examined. The committee also feels that since the stake 
holders are advocates, the Bar council of India should advise the respective state bar 
councils to conduct crash classes to equip the advocates for handling Online/Virtual 
Courts. The Bar Council of India should also address the problems of advocates hailing 
from the weaker sections relating to acquisition of necessary infrastructure to support 
online Virtual Courts in view of the transition having taken place suddenly. 
Tardy progress of e Courts Integrated Mission mode project 
2.54 Indian Judiciary has been faced with a huge number of pending cases. Preservation 
and orderly arrangement of records and their retrieval in manual mode has become extremely 
difficult. To solve such serious problems and t o make the judicial system efficient, efforts to 
computerize some of its processes have been going on since 1990s. However, the need was 
felt to make the programme of ICT enablement of the Indian Judiciary mission -critical. 
Consequently, the e - Committee w as formed in 2004 to draw up an action plan for ICT 
enablement of the Judiciary with the Patron -in-Chief-cum-Adhoc Chairman as the Chief 
Justice of India. 
2.55 The e Courts Integrated Mission mode project is a Pan India e governance project 
being implemented in High Courts and district/subordinate Courts of the country. The project 
has been conceptualized on the basis of National policy and Action plan for implementation 
of Information and Communication Technology in the Indian Judiciary by the e Committee of 
the Supreme Court. The project is monitored and funded by the Department of Justice and 
implemented by National Informatics Centre (NIC). 
2.56 e-Courts project has been initiated with the objective of providing services to all key 
stakeholders including  the Judiciary, the District and Subordinate Courts and 
Citizens/lawyers/litigants through ICT enablement of all District and Subordinate Courts in 
the country by providing Computer Hardware, Local Area Network, WAN/broadband 
Connectivity and installation of Case Information software at each Court complex and making 
the justice delivery system more affordable, accessible, cost effective, transparent and 
accountable. The first phase of the project was implemented during 2007-2015 and the second 
phase was launched in 2015 and is currently going on. 
2.57 Various activities taken up under phase - I and being taken up under phase II of e-
Courts project are listed below: 
 
 

14 
 
S.No. Component Brief description 
1 Hardware for Courts Each Court complex has been equipped  with the 
required hardware such as desktops, printers, servers 
and scanners. Computerisation of 14249 District and 
Subordinate Courts with 4 computers provided per 
Court. 
2 Hardware to judicial officers Laptops, printers, provided to 14309 judicial officers to 
enhance the capacity of all judicial officers. UPS and 
DG sets have been provided to create necessary power 
back up to desktops and servers.  
3 Software Case Information software (CIS) has been dev eloped 
and made available for deployment at all computerized 
Courts. CIS automates the case management lifecycle 
and all major processes such as case filing, scrutiny, 
registration, allocation and Court diary/proceedings. 
Cause lists, case status, certifie d copies of orders and 
copy of judgements can be viewed/downloaded with the 
help of CIS. Entry of data regarding past cases has been 
initiated and data in respect of over 72 million cases is 
available online 
 4 Creation of a computer 
room/Site preparation  and 
setting up of Judicial Service 
Centres 
A dedicated area for housing the servers and related ICT 
equipment has been set up at each Court complex. 
Judicial Service Centres (Citizen -service interface 
counter) have been established at all computerised 
Courts which serves as a single window for filing 
petitions and applications by litigants/lawyers as also 
obtaining information on ongoing cases and copies of 
orders and judgements etc.. 
5 Change Management and 
Training 
ICT training has been imparted to judi cial officers and 
Court staff to make them familiar with and proficient in 
the use of ICT tools.14000 Judicial Officers trained in 
the use of UBUNTU -Linux OS and 4000 Court staff 
trained in CIS software. Technical manpower has been 
deployed at all District Courts, High Courts, High Court 
Benches and Supreme Court under the project to 
provide ‘trouble shooting’ support, necessary 
maintenance and training support at the Court Complex 
and assist in the transition from a manual case 
management system towards an ICT enabled one. 
6 Process Re-engineering Process Re- engineering Committees set up in all High 
Courts to review existing rules, processes, procedures 
and forms. 
7 Video Conferencing VC  be rolled out in 500 locations across the country. 
8 Service Delivery  The e -Courts portal has become operational; provides 
online services such as case registration, cause list, case 
status, daily orders, and final judgements. 
 

15 
 
S.No. Component Brief description 
9 National Judicial Data Grid NJDG is intended to be the  national data warehouse for 
case data for all district and subordinate Courts across 
the country. Litigants can access case status information 
in respect of pending and decided cases and 
orders/judgements pertaining to district and subordinate 
Courts. 
10 Communication, 
Connectivity and Local Area 
Network 
Installation of Local Area Network, provision of 
internet. 
All Court Complexes are connected under the State 
Wide Area Network and also provide last mile 
connectivity from SWAN’s point of presence to the 
Court complexes. 
11 Digital Signature Digital Signature certificates have been provided to all 
judicial officers to enable them to sign the judgement or 
any electronic official documents digitally when 
required. 
 
2.58 Department of Justice in its written replies to the Committee stated that the following 
additional areas are proposed to be covered under Phase II of e-Courts project: 
 Dedicated central video conferencing infrastructure for Courts.  
 Additional video conferencing equipment for Courts, jails  
 Video conferencing facility for advocates.  
 Strengthening the existing e-Filing infrastructure.  
 e-Payments.  
 Scanning and digitization of case records.  
  Live streaming of virtual hearings 
  More Helplines and e-Sewa Kendras 
  Improved power backup facilities 
  Greater emphasis on awareness creation and training of advocates to get used to e 
Court services. 
2.59  The Committee is happy note the progress made so far because taking all paper work 
of Courts to an online platform is a huge task in itself. However, the Committee is constrained 
to state that this progress is not sufficient and the gaps are glaring.  
2.60 According to the data provided by the e-Committee of Supreme Court to the 
Department of Justice, the number of functional Court rooms provided with Video 
Conferencing is 3477 and number functional Court rooms which would still require this 
facility is 14443. 
2.61 While expressing concern over the state of infrastructure in the Judiciary, a Member 
said, 
 ‘We are connecting the whole world and yet we cannot connect our 
Courts. This is something that does not make sense at all.’ 
2.62 Statistics seem to corroborate the above observation, as per the data provided by the 
Department of Justice as many as 2992 sites are yet to get WAN connectivity. 

16 
 
           Status of WAN Connectivity as on 21st August, 2020: 
Total sites to be connected 2992 
Commissioned as on date 2882 
TNF( technically not feasible) sites 58 
Work in progress by BSNL 21 
Sites still to be connected 31 
 
2.63 Digitization of case files is also progressing at snail’s pace. The position with regards 
to the High Courts and District Courts is as under: 
S.No High Court 
Status of Scanning in High Court 
Status of Scanning 
in District Court 
 
Disposed of cases. Pending cases. Disposed 
of cases. 
Pending 
cases 
1 Allahabad 
At Allahabad: More than 
26.27 lac files containing 
more than 16 Cr pages 
and at Lucknow: more 
than 6.88 lac decided 
case files containing 
more than 3.67 Cr have 
been scanned/ digitised 
till date.  
 
As estimated at Allahabad 
= more than 36 lac 
decided case files and as 
estimated at Lucknow= 
more than 23 lac decided 
case files. 
Not 
Started 
Not 
started 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
The High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Amaravati has 
been established from 01-01-2019. The Scanning & 
Digitization of Judicial and Administrative records is 
yet to be commenced.  
Not 
Started 
Not 
started 
3 Bombay 
Software is under 
development by the 
vendor 
Software is under 
development by the 
vendor 
Software 
modificati
ons 
pending  
Scanning 
Count - 
Mumbai 
3237891 
and 
Washim- 
3112937 
Software 
is under 
develop
ment by 
the 
vendor 
4 Calcutta 1,22,62,298 pages have 
been scanned. Not started Not 
Started 
Not 
started 
5 Chhattisgarh Started at High Court of 
Chhattisgarh Not Started Not 
Started 
Not 
started 

17 
 
S.No High Court 
Status of Scanning in High Court 
Status of Scanning 
in District Court 
 
Disposed of cases. Pending cases. Disposed 
of cases. 
Pending 
cases 
6 Delhi 
Total number of scanned 
pages (pending & disposed 
of cases) is 17,65,50,901. 
Presently, all the fresh 
filings (other than e-
filings) are scanned at 
the time of filing. 
Pending cases are 
continuously being 
scanned. All the pending 
cases to be listed before 
e-Courts are scanned on 
priority basis preferably 
2-3 days before the date 
of hearing. 
43278 
(Approx) 
4633 
(Approx) 
7 Guwahati 
(Assam) 
Scanning of disposed of 
cases is going on Not started 
Scanning 
of 
disposed 
of cases 
are going 
on. 
Not 
started 
8 Gujarat 
Scanning initiated for 
Disposed as well pending 
cases. Scrutiny and porting 
to DMS is underway. 
Scanning initiated for 
Disposed as well 
pending cases. Scrutiny 
and porting to DMS is 
underway. 
 
Started on 
pilot basis 
for 10 lac 
pages 
Not 
started 
9 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Approximately 95,421 
cases are uploaded to 
DMS(Dspace) 
Scanning of Pending 
cases not started yet.  
Not 
Started 
Not 
started 
10 Jammu & 
Kashmir Data not provided Data not provided 
Data not 
provided. 
 
 
11 Jharkhand 
In Progress (481139 case 
files till 31st March 2020 
have been scanned) 
In Progress (308116 
case files till 31st March 
2020 have been 
scanned) 
Not 
Started 
Not 
started 
12 Karnataka Number of pages scanned 
till date 8440481 
Number of pages 
scanned from 2011 to 
2018- 63291 
Pages 
pending 
and 
disposed 
259592 
 
 
 

18 
 
S.No High Court 
Status of Scanning in High Court 
Status of Scanning in 
District Court 
 
Disposed of cases. Pending cases. Disposed of 
cases. 
Pending 
cases 
13 Kerala 
Pre-scanning activities 
commenced from 
20.05.2020. As on 
09.06.2020, 9627 files 
verified for scanning  
( 417753 pages) 
Not started Not Started Not started 
14 Madhya 
Pradesh 
38.63 Lakh files 
comprising of 15.02 
Crore pages 
Digitization/Scanning 
under progress 
11 Crore 
pages  
completed 
at 25 
Districts  
Starting 
Shortly 
15 Madras Data not provided Data not provided Not Started Not started 
16 Manipur 11,14,537 Data not provided Not Started Not started 
17 Meghalaya Data not provided Data not provided   
18 Orissa Yes, it is ongoing for 
disposed of cases. No Not Started Not started 
19 Patna 1,65,02,486 40,194 Not Started Not started 
20 Punjab & 
Haryana 20,78,116 4,40,300 
3,08,068 P Not started 
4,43,862 H Not started 
80900 C Not started 
21 
Rajasthan 
 
Scanning and digitization 
work of record disposed 
till the year 2015 is in 
progress. More than 20% 
work has been done. 
 
Scanning work started 
only for Disposed 
Cases, work not started 
for Pending Cases 
Not Started Not started 
22 Sikkim completed till 2017 not completed completed 
till 2018 
not 
completed 
23 
Telangana 
2,35,242 Cases 
comprising of 
1,41,67,125 Pages 
1,48,794 Cases 
comprising of 
1,27,08,650 Pages 
Not Started Not started 
24 Tripura Not started Not started Not Started Not started 
25 Uttarakhand Till 2015 Not started Not Started Not started 
 
 

19 
 
 
2.64 As far as e Filing is concerned, in about half of the states e Filing is still in the trial 
stage. 
 
Status of Implementation of e-Filing is as under: 
S.No High Court 
e-Filing 
High Court District Court 
1 Allahabad Yes Yes 
2 Andhra Pradesh Yes Testing 
3 Bombay HC CIS Yes 
4 Calcutta Testing Testing 
5 Chhattisgarh Yes Yes 
6 Delhi Yes Yes 
7 Guwahati (Arunachal Pradesh)  Testing Testing 
8 Guwahati  (Assam) Testing Testing 
9 Guwahati  (Mizoram) Testing Testing 
10 Guwahati  (Nagaland) Testing Testing 
11 Gujarat Testing Testing 
12 Himachal Pradesh Yes Yes 
13 Jammu & Kashmir Testing Testing 
14 Jharkhand Yes Yes 
15 Karnataka Testing Yes 
16 Kerala Yes Yes 
17 Madhya Pradesh Yes Yes 
18 Madras Yes Yes 
19 Manipur Testing Testing 
20 Meghalaya Testing Testing 
21 Orissa Yes Yes 
22 Patna Testing Testing 
23 Punjab & Haryana Yes Yes 
24 Rajasthan Yes Yes 
25 Sikkim Yes Yes 
26 Telangana Testing Testing 
27 Tripura Testing Testing 
28 Uttarakhand Testing Testing 
 
The real benefit of Virtual Courts will percolate down only when there is sufficient 
infrastructure in place. 

20 
 
2.65 The Committee is unhappy to note that e Courts Integrated Mission mode project 
is progressing at a tortoise’s pace. Without proper infrastructure in place, Virtual 
hearing of cases is an impossible proposition. Moreover, the Committee feels that the 
benefits of Virtual Courts will percolate down only w hen all Court Complexes are fully 
ICT enabled. The Committee strongly recommends the Department of Justice to take 
stock of the situation, introspect, identify the bottlenecks and take necessary remedial 
measures to ensure that the targets are achieved mor e ambitiously in prescribed 
timeframe. 
2.66 The Committee notes that the Apex Court, High Courts and Subordinate Courts 
are at different stages of ICT enablement. Moreover, the world has seen staggering 
technological changes in the last decade. The Committ ee feels that there is a need to 
revise the National policy and Action plan for implementation of ICT in the Indian 
Judiciary was brought out in 2005.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the 
policy needs to be evaluated and revised in the light of tr ansformation of legal landscape 
in the last fifteen years and a drive towards digital justice. 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
BENEFITS OF VIRTUAL COURTS AND WAY FORWARD 
 
3.1 Despite shortcomings, Virtual Courts have infinite benefits to offer for all the 
stakeholders involved. Moving to a largely virtual system has long term benefits for the 
judiciary, advocates and the public at large. 
Management of Docket explosion 
3.2 The Committee notes that India has been experiencing Docket explosion and Courts 
are staring at an avalanche of cases. At present, more than 30 million cases are pending in 
different Courts across the country. The problem of huge arrears of pending cases has be en 
retarding the efficiency of justice dispensation system and the rights of citizens to timely 
delivery of Justice. 
3.3 Inspite of various attempts such as reforms in Procedural Laws, tribunalisation, 
adoption of Alternative Dispute Resolution mechanism, establishment of Fast Track Courts 
and constitution of Courts under different statutes, the reduction of arrears in Courts and 
ensuring timely Justice to the litigant public continue to be a major challenge to the Indian 
Judiciary. 
3.4 The Committee believ es that ‘Justice delayed is Justice denied’ but ‘Justice 
hurried is also Justice buried’. The Committee is of the view that Virtual Courts is a 
mechanism that will strike a balance between these two extremes and extends 
expeditious Justice to the litigant public without compromising quality . The Committee 
feels that transfer of certain categories of cases from regular Court establishments to 
Virtual Courts will reduce the pendency of cases which has been clogging the wheels of 
Justice for decades. 
3.5 To continue with the functioning of Virtual Courts in all the Courts even during 
non pandemic time, the Committee feels that the present system should be allowed to 
continue on an experimental basis with the consent of all parties for certain categories of 
cases like Appeals etc  and final hearings where physical presence of the parties/counsels 
is not required and online virtual hearing alone is sufficient. The expenditure involved in 
the establishment of a large number of Tribunals /Courts can be cut down size ably. This 
will also reduce the crowd in the court and cut down other litigation costs and 
overheads. 
 
3.6 The Committee is also of the opinion that Virtual Courts can be extended 
permanently to various Appellate Tribunals like TDSAT, IPAB, NCLAT etc., loc ated 
across the country which do not require personal appearances of the parties/advocates. 
Permanent Virtual Courts can also be established for hearing matters relating to 
Administrative and other Tribunals at the time of final hearing. This will cut down  the 
cost and increase the efficiency in disposal of the cases without being unnecessarily being 
adjourned. The Committee is also of the opinion that necessary Amendments may be 
brought in laws to legalise Virtual Courts and its proceedings without being 
unnecessarily challenged before Courts. 
Promotes Docket Inclusion 

22 
 
3.7 The Committee notes that still in some parts of the country a substantial number of 
people have limited access to Justice and are unable to approach Courts due to locational or 
economic handicaps. 
3.8 The Committee notes that India's Courts are organised based on pecuniary thresholds 
when it comes to civil matters and gravity thresholds (how grave the crime is) when it comes 
to criminal matters. This means, that more often than not, there  is only one principal District 
Court for a whole district. In large states, some districts can be as large as some countries. 
Parties have to travel quite far to ensure that they can access the Court  premises. Further, not 
just parties, their lawyers also  must travel far to access Courts. On the appellate side of most 
High Courts, parties, and counsel, travel all the way from the districts to attend hearings. 
3.9 The Committee believes that Virtual Courts can better promote the principle of 
Distributive Ju stice. Distributive Justice requires that Court services should be 
accessible to all and that the service should be affordable by all. No member of the 
general public should be disadvantaged by locational or economic handicaps or 
otherwise. The Committee i s of the opinion that Digital Justice is cheaper and faster. 
People living in remote and far flung areas can also take part in Court proceedings 
through videoconferencing without having to spend a fortune to set foot in the 
Courtroom. 
Access to Justice 
3.10  The Committee notes that Goal 16 of the Sustainable Development Goals framework 
is dedicated to the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, 
the provision of access to justice for all, and building accountable instituti ons at all levels. 
Target 16.3  ‘Promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure 
equal access to justice for all’ is to be achieved by 2030.The Committee hopes that Virtual 
Courts will help India accelerate progress towards achieving its SDG target 16.3by 2030. 
3.11 Access to Justice is a Fundamental Right. Virtual Court system can increase access to 
justice by addressing locational and economic handicaps. For instance, people from remote 
and far flung areas can access the Su preme Court through a competent lawyer without having 
to spend a fortune in travelling all the way to the National Capital time and again. 
3.12    Videoconferencing facilitates a lawyer to argue in any Court in any part of India. Cases 
can be heard from se veral Courts in a single day. A lawyer can argue in one Court in the 
morning, and be present for a case in another Court later in the day. This is not possible with 
physical Court hearings.  Thus, both advocates and litigants have wider choice and this will  
result in substantial reduction of costs associated with litigation in appellate Courts which may 
otherwise require instructing a local lawyer. Litigants need not leave their work to attend 
Court as they can access proceedings from their home or office. V irtual proceedings also 
mitigate significant logistical costs incurred in the transportation of prisoners between jail and 
Court. 
3.13 Virtual Courts also enable vulnerable witnesses to provide testimony from a safer 
environment. Also, Virtual hearings are  more convenient and less traumatic for children, 
women and victims of abuse and the differently abled who cannot easily attend physical 
hearings in Courtrooms. 
3.14 The Committee also feels that at present, there is an enormous gulf between 
knowing one’s rights and being able to enforce them. Only well resourced 

23 
 
individuals/organizations are able to deploy lawyers and fight for justice. Virtual Courts 
have the potential to bridge the gap between people knowing the law and being able to 
enforce their entitlements, thereby creating a level playing field between the affluent and 
the less well off, between those who have always had Courts at their disposal and those 
who have always felt alienated. In the opinion of the Committee, Virtual Courts deliver 
‘Enforceable Justice’.   
Speedy Justice 
3.15    The Committee notes that one of the principal benefits of Virtual Courts is that they 
expedite processes and procedures which would otherwise be protracted and laborious. 
Virtual Courts can deliver results faster and  with fewer resources. Virtual Courts also reduce 
commute time to the Courts and wait time at the Courts. Dedicated time slots will in still more 
disciplined time management. 
3.16 Virtual Courts helps in concise, pointed and focused arguing by lawyers maki ng the 
system faster. Drawing a comparison between Virtual Court hearings and regular Court 
hearings, the Secretary, Department of Justice said, 
 ‘Videoconferencing has led to a change in style and approach before the 
Court. Now, you have to go in for very concise oral arguments. You don’t have 
time to carry on arguments for a very long time. There is also a change in the 
manner in which you handle  witnesses and adversaries. That also has changed 
quite a bit as compared to an open Court where the entire spirit and ethos are a 
little different.’ 
3.17 Also, the problem of truncated hearings interspersed by frequent adjournments can be 
avoided as there  can be no excuse for litigants and lawyers not being able to attend Court. 
Repeated adjournment of cases, truncated hearings are resulting in rescheduling Court process 
and disrupting the progress of the case. 
3.18 The Committee is of the opinion that int roduction of Virtual Courts would result 
in an improvement over traditional Courts as they are more affordable, citizen friendly 
and offers greater access to justice. They yield substantial savings in costs for both 
individual litigants and Courts. Traditi onal Courts, by and large, are accessible to very 
few people and even then only at disproportionate expense and effort, Virtual Courts 
can help overcome these injustices. 
 
 
Proportionate Justice 
3.19 The Committee feels that the Court system is already bog ged down by arrears. The 
Committee notes that at present there is no mechanism to segregate simple cases which can be 
disposed of within shortest possible time as compared to complex cases involving 
cumbersome procedures and number of witnesses. Petty case s which constitute a major chunk 
of the caseload need to be separated from complex ones.  
3.20 In the opinion of the Committee, Virtual Courts can better promote the principle 
of Proportionate Justice. The principle of Proportionate Justice requires that t he 
expense, speed, complexity and the extent of combativeness of any case should be 
proportionate to the substance and scale of that case. The Committee feels that there 
should be some mechanism to segregate simple cases from complex ones .In simple 

24 
 
terms, one should not use a sledge hammer to crack a nut. Petty cases should be dealt 
with swiftly in a reasonable timeframe. Such cases should not require cumbersome 
procedures. 
Pilot project and the way forward 
3.21 The representatives of the Bar contended tha t Virtual Courts do injustice to the art of 
advocacy as they deprive the advocates of an opportunity to argue and put forth one’s case 
and change the course of arguments based on the changing dynamics of a case during the 
hearing. Most lawyers find it diff icult to present their case efficiently and effectively via 
videoconferencing. 
3.22They further submitted that an advocate gets to understand the mood of the judges and 
stands a better chance at convincing them during physical hearings. However, online 
hearing creates a psychological pressure on both the advocates as well as the judges. 
Physical presence can serve important expressive functions, particularly during cross -
examination, which ultimately leads to the discovery of truth. Evidence recorded by mea ns of 
video conferencing may distort non -verbal cues such as facial expressions, postures, and 
gestures. For instance, delayed streaming may come in the way of detecting facial reactions. 
Even in a live stream that is working perfectly, merely the face of a person may 
overemphasize facial expression while leaving gestures partially obscured or out of view 
entirely.  
3.23    The Coordination and cooperation between the briefing counsel and the arguing 
counsel is completely lost in virtual hearings which actually works to the detriment of the 
litigant besides leading to lengthier arguments. Moreover, cases which require intensi ve and 
elaborate hearing on facts and points of law cannot be effectively heard and disposed of by 
Virtual Courts. An inability to cross -examine properly inadvertently increases the risk of 
error. A representative of the Bar said, 
 ‘….That integrity portion or that element of honesty and transparency is 
totally lost. I do not know who all are sitting next to the witness or to the 
opposite side. My screen is basically limited to his camera and whatever his 
webcam can see is all that I can see. I really do not know whether he is under 
duress; he is under coercion or he is being tutored’ 
3.24   They further opined that holding of trials through videoconferencing would have 
several pitfalls and could be a tool for misuse in the hands of unscrupulous litiga nts. The 
whole purpose of judicial tools such as cross examination would be defeated. The trial 
through videoconferencing would encourage witness tutoring and prompting. It would be 
extremely tough to confront witnesses over Video conferencing.  
 
3.25   Speaking on the shortcomings of Virtual Court hearings, a representative of the Bar 
said, 
‘In some cases, there are hundreds of documents which are filed and 
referring to those documents is very difficult. The Judge, who is hearing the 
matter, sometimes ha s a hard copy of the file before him. In many cases, they 
don’t have it. They simply have the pleadings before them. They don’t have 
the documents before them. They don’t have the evidence recorded in the 

25 
 
matter before them. So, how do we address a matter before the Virtual 
Court? In the absence of complete pleadings, complete documents and 
evidence before the Judge, how can we argue? It is not a system which is 
working genuinely and realistically. There is a lot of scope for 
improvement’.  
3.26  The Committ ee is of the view that  digital transformation of the Judiciary has 
important implications for clearing the significant backlog of cases which the 
judiciary is burdened with. Technology may, in fact, be a catalyst for simplifying 
processes and making manual  processes redundant. It will make justice accessible 
and affordable to a large section of the population and help in overcoming physical 
and logistical barriers which prevent many litigants from seeking justice . 
3.27     Virtualized proceedings overcome distance, logistics, delays and costs that currently 
bedevil the Court systems world over. Recently, Justice Chandrachud stated that Virtual 
Courts launched to settle Traffic Challan cases collected 101.74 crores till date, all that 
without the parties having to assemble in the traditional brick and mortar Courtroom. Despite 
infrastructure bottlenecks, over 15 lakh hearings were conducted over videoconferencing 
during the lockdown period. 
3.28 The Committee fully understands that Virtual Courts have their o wn 
shortcomings, however they constitute an advancement over the existing system, and 
therefore, on the overall, they are worth embracing. These current shortcomings might 
be overcome through existing and emerging technologies. Periodical interaction of ba r 
and bench with the technical persons by establishing committees in each 
Courts/Tribunal will help sort out the grievances relating to Virtual Courts and other  
issues then and there. 
3.29 The Committee is of the opinion that a full fledged Virtual Court should be 
piloted in the first instance. This allows the system to be tested in practice which can 
then refined in the light of the feedback received from different stakeholders. It also 
enables the judiciary to identify the type of cases best suited to Virtual Courts. 
3.30 The Committee also recommends Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology to employ globally tried and tested tools such as Immersive tele presence 
technology, augmented reality systems to make virtual hearings more lifelike and 
engaging.  
Integration of Virtual Courts into the Legal Ecosystem. 
3.31 Information and Communication technologies have impacted every facet of human 
life. Global legal systems are increasingly embracing evolving technologies to keep pace with 
the information society. It is time, the Court room which is often regarded as the last bastion 
of antiquated working practices opens its doors to latest technology. Multiple factors such as 
constantly increasing case load, huge pendency of cases, resource constraints, need to improve 
access to justice, need to improve efficiency and effectiveness of Court proceedings, 
increasing demand for transparency and accountability and greater expectations on the ability 
to access information and transact with the Court remotely make a case for Virtual Courts in 
India. 
3.32 In 19 th Century, Justice Benjamin Cardoso said, “New times demand new 
measures and new men” in the field of law or elsewhere. This statement is very much 
relevant to the current situation. The Committee is of the considered opinion that 

26 
 
traditional Courtrooms may well remain necessary for our future, but they are certainly 
not sufficient. There is a need to integrate Virtual Courts into the country’s legal 
ecosystem. 
3.33 To begin with, Judiciary may identify categories of cases that can be tried by 
Virtual Courts. Department of Justice in its written replies to the Committee submitted 
that the following cases may be tried in the Virtual Court -Offences under Motor 
Vehicles Act (Traffic Challan cases), Petty offences where summons can be issued under 
Section 206 of CrPC., Cases registered under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 
Motor Accident Claim Petition cases. The Committee is of the view that all such matters 
where personal presence may be dispensed with, can be transferred from regular Court 
establishments to Virtual Courts. The Committee believes that Virtual adjudication will 
bring massive benefits across the system.  
3.34 In respect of complex cases such as those involving interpretation of Law, facts, 
examination of a large number of witnesses and s o forth, a hybrid model may be 
adopted wherein manual processes such as filing of plaint, vakalatnama, issuing of 
summons etc.. may be automated and digitized and the hearing may be held in a 
physical Courtroom. 
3.35 Since integration of Virtual courts int o the legal ecosystem will have a significant 
impact on all stakeholders, the Committee feels that Members of Bar Associations and 
Bar councils must also be involved in evolving a consensual process. This would avoid 
unnecessary opposition and irritants. 
3.36 The facility of Virtual Courts extended to lawyers should also be considered for 
extension to private litigants who appear in person or have to travel to High Courts from 
different states and cities and places. This would go a long way in strengthening  public 
confidence and improving  perception about the reachability of the judicial system. 
3.37 The concept of Virtual Courts has gained immense ground during COVID -19 
Pandemic times. It is and will remain the new reality and the new normal. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the concept of Virtual Courts may well be 
extended to cover arbitration hearings, conciliation and Summary trials. For instance, if 
national and international arbitrations are allowed to be conducted through  Virtual 
Courts , there will be hardly any requirement for real time travel to distant locations. 
The Committee believes that this move will unlock the Courts and also mitigate the 
inconvenience of attending Courts as long distance travels can be dispensed with and 
proceedings become less expensive as well. 
 
  

27 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-II 
CHALLENGES OF VIRTUAL COURTS 
1. Department of Justice in its written replies to the Committee submitted that  
E-Seva kendras have been established in all the High Courts and in one District 
Court in each state as a part of a pilot project to provide assistance to lawyers and 
litigants ranging from information to facilitation and e filing. The Committee is 
highly ap preciative of this initiative and believes that E-Seva Kendras will go a 
long way in bridging the ‘access divide’ and hopes that such facilitation centres be 
set up in all Court complexes across the country at the earliest. The Committee 
recommends that th e feasibility of involving private agencies/service providers 
who can help people who are not tech savvy in connecting with Courts by taking 
VC equipment to their door steps on payment may be explored.    (Para 2.7) 
 
2. As regards connectivity divide, the Committee recommends the Ministry of 
communications to step up efforts to ensure timely implementation of National 
Broadband mission which envisages broadband access to all so that the services 
provided by indigenous com munication satellites are fully harnessed and the goal 
of Universal broadband access is achieved.       (Para 2.9) 
 
3. The Committee is of the opinion that the Judiciary may also consider such 
innovative solutions as launching mobile videoconferencing facilit ies for the 
benefit of advocates and people living in remote areas.              (Para 2.10) 
 
4. The Committee is of the view that with the advent of Information technology, 
there is not a single facet of human life that is left untouched by it. ICT has also 
transformed the legal landscape in India and the Indian judiciary has come a long 
way from a paper-based era to the one dominated by digital technology and is now 
moving towards cloud based technology. The Committee believes that in coming 
times, technology will emerge as a game changer and advocates would be required 
to use technological skills in combination with their specialized legal knowledge 
and therefore, they should keep up with the changing times.             (Para 2.13) 
 
5. To address ‘skill divide’, the third facet of digital exclusion as mentioned 
previously, the Committee recommends that training and awareness programmes 
should be conducted in all Court complexes across the country including 
Subordinate Courts in order to acquaint advocates with the technology and to 
enable them to acquire skills required for handling digital platforms so that 
advocates operate digital platforms themselves.               (Para 2.15) 
 
6. The Committee also recommends that the Bar Council of Ind ia may introduce 
computer course as one of the subjects in three year/five year courses to enable the 
students to get trained in handling computers and get adapted to the online 
systems while they pursue the Law Course. This will help educate and equip 
budding lawyers with knowledge and skills required for handling digital 
platforms.          (Para2.17) 
 

28 
 
7. The Committee understands how poor quality audio/video, frequent loss of 
connection, disruptions and high latency affects judicial assessment of demeanour,  
emotions and other nonverbal cues and the changing communication dynamics 
which are also important variables in deciding a case. The Committee is of the view 
that improving the quality of Courtroom technology is a necessary pre condition 
for virtualizatio n of Court proceedings. The Committee also recommends that a 
study of Courtroom design be commissioned and customized software and 
hardware to facilitate Virtual Court hearings be developed to suit the needs of 
Indian judiciary.          (Para2.20) 
 
8. The Co mmittee recommends the Department of Justice to step up efforts to 
provide WAN connectivity and superior quality videoconferencing facilities to all 
Court complexes across the country under Phase II of e Courts project more 
ambitiously within the prescribe d timeline.  The Committee recommends that 
Government may explore the feasibility of roping in the private sector to eliminate 
the technical glitches and improve service quality, if need be. The Committee 
appreciates the proposal to establish a centralized  Video conferencing 
infrastructure and hopes that the proposal will be materialized soon.   
            (Para2.24) 
 
9. The Committee recommends that Judiciary may consider promoting harnessing of 
renewable energy in all Court complexes as it entails twin bene fits of 
uninterrupted power supply and positive ecological impact.   (Para2.26) 
10. The Committee notes that world over, Court proceedings are recorded in some 
form or the other. The apex Court has time and again emphasized the significance 
of live streaming o f Court proceedings in promoting openness and transparency 
which in turn reinforce public faith in judicial system. The Committee agrees with 
the observation made by the apex Court that live streaming Court proceedings, 
especially cases of constitutional a nd national importance having an impact on 
public at large or a section of the public will promote transparency and openness. 
The litigant need not come to the Court to watch the proceedings and thus will 
reduce crowding inside the court. The Judiciary may  also consider broadcasting 
virtual hearings of certain specified categories of cases to further the principle of 
open justice and open Court.        (Para2.38) 
11. The Committee thinks that third -party software is not only an unviable option 
but poses a major  security risk as such software programs and applications are 
prone to hacking and manipulation. The Committee recommends the Ministry 
of Law and Justice and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology to 
address data privacy and data security conce rns while developing a new 
platform for India’s judicial system.        (Para2.41) 
 
12. The Committee recommends that Block chain technology should be leveraged to 
improve reliability of evidence and security of transactions and to fortify digital 
security of case files. Proper standardized systems of authentication need to be put 
in place. Online systems should be underpinned by proper procedural safeguards. 
             (Para2.43) 
 

29 
 
13. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology may be approached by the Administrative Ministry to develop 
indigenous Software applications to handle Virtual Court hearings. The Committee 
also recommends to rope in Private IT companies, if need be, to develop Artificial 
intelligence systems capable o f supporting bulk documentation, remote location of 
parties and sophisticated use of graphics.       (Para2.48) 
14. The Committee believes that Legal technology Start ups engaged in innovative 
solutions can play a crucial role in harnessing the unlimited poten tial of technology 
to connect stakeholders in the justice delivery system and in finding solutions that 
are affordable and efficient and therefore recommends the Government to promote 
them.             (Para2.49) 
 
15. The Committee is constrained to note that District and Subordinate Courts lack 
basic infrastructure and are experiencing difficulties in adapting to Virtual Court 
system. The Committee understands that transition from physical Courtrooms to 
Virtual Courtrooms requires massive investment as basic i nfrastructure required 
to support digitized Court hearings such as electronic case files, equipment to 
project documents and images, audio and video, tools to record hearings, 
videoconferencing and reliable WiFi needs to be put in place. Since transition t o 
Virtual Courts requires high initial investment, the Committee desires that 
feasibility of new financing approaches such as PPP model may be examined. The 
committee also feels that since the stake holders are advocates, the Bar council of 
India should ad vise the respective state bar councils to conduct crash classes to 
equip the advocates for handling Online/Virtual Courts. The Bar Council of India 
should also address the problems of advocates hailing from the weaker sections 
relating to acquisition of ne cessary infrastructure to support online Virtual Courts 
in view of the transition having taken place suddenly.     (Para2.53) 
 
16. The Committee is unhappy to note that e Courts Integrated Mission mode project 
is progressing at a tortoise’s pace. Without proper infrastructure in place, Virtual 
hearing of cases is an impossible proposition. Moreover, the Committee feels that 
the benefits of Virtual Courts will percolate down only when all Court Complexes 
are fully ICT enabled. The Committee strongly recommends the Department of 
Justice to take stock of the situation, introspect, identify the bottlenecks and take 
necessary remedial measu res to ensure that the targets are achieved more 
ambitiously in prescribed timeframe.       (Para2.65) 
 
17. The Committee notes that the Apex Court, High Courts and Subordinate Courts 
are at different stages of ICT enablement. Moreover, the world has seen stag gering 
technological changes in the last decade. The Committee feels that there is a need to 
revise the National policy and Action plan for implementation of ICT in the Indian 
Judiciary was brought out in 2005.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
the policy needs to be evaluated and revised in the light of transformation of legal 
landscape in the last fifteen years and a drive towards digital justice.   
             (Para2.66) 
 
18. The Committee believes that ‘Justice delayed is Justice denied’ but ‘Justice hurried 
is also Justice buried’. The Committee is of the view that Virtual Courts is a 
mechanism that will strike a balance between these two extremes and extends 
expeditious Justice to the litigant public without compromising quality . The 

30 
 
Committee fee ls that transfer of certain categories of cases from regular Court 
establishments to Virtual Courts will reduce the pendency of cases which has been 
clogging the wheels of Justice for decades.         (Para3.4) 
 
19. To continue with the functioning of Virtual Courts in all the Courts even during 
non pandemic time, the Committee feels that the present system should be allowed 
to continue on an experimental basis with the consent of all parties for certain 
categories of cases like Appeals etc and final hearings w here physical presence of 
the parties/counsels is not required and online virtual hearing alone is sufficient. 
The expenditure involved in the establishment of a large number of Tribunals 
/Courts can be cut down sizeably. This will also reduce the crowd in  the court and 
cut down other litigation costs and overheads.        (Para3.5) 
 
20. The Committee is also of the opinion that Virtual Courts can be extended 
permanently to various Appellate Tribunals like TDSAT, IPAB, NCLAT etc., 
located across the country whi ch do not require personal appearances of the 
parties/advocates. Permanent Virtual Courts can also be established for hearing 
matters relating to Administrative and other Tribunals at the time of final hearing. 
This will cut down the cost and increase the efficiency in disposal of the cases 
without being unnecessarily being adjourned. The Committee is also of the opinion 
that necessary Amendments may be brought in laws to legalise Virtual Courts and 
its proceedings without being unnecessarily challenged before Courts. 
                                                                                                                              (Para3.6) 
 
21. The Committee believes that Virtual Courts can better promote the principle of 
Distributive Justice. Distributive Justice requires that Court services should be 
accessible to all and that the service should be affordable by all. No member of the 
general pu blic should be disadvantaged by locational or economic handicaps or 
otherwise. The Committee is of the opinion that Digital Justice is cheaper and 
faster. People living in remote and far flung areas can also take part in Court 
proceedings through videoconf erencing without having to spend a fortune to set 
foot in the Courtroom.           (Para3.9) 
 
22. The Committee also feels that at present, there is an enormous gulf between 
knowing one’s rights and being able to enforce them. Only well resourced 
individuals/organizations are able to deploy lawyers and fight for justice. Virtual 
Courts have the potenti al to bridge the gap between people knowing the law and 
being able to enforce their entitlements, thereby creating a level playing field 
between the affluent and the less well off, between those who have always had 
Courts at their disposal and those who ha ve always felt alienated. In the opinion of 
the Committee, Virtual Courts deliver ‘Enforceable Justice’.     (Para3.14) 
 
23. The Committee is of the opinion that introduction of Virtual Courts would result in 
an improvement over traditional Courts as they are more affordable, citizen 
friendly and offers greater access to justice. They yield substantial savings in costs 
for both individual litigants and Courts. Traditional Courts, by and large, are 
accessible to very few people and even then only at disproportio nate expense and 
effort, Virtual Courts can help overcome these injustices.     (Para3.18) 
 

31 
 
24. In the opinion of the Committee, Virtual Courts can better promote the principle of 
Proportionate Justice. The principle of Proportionate Justice requires that the 
expense, speed, complexity and the extent of combativeness of any case should be 
proportionate to the substance and scale of that case. The Committee feels that 
there should be some mechanism to segregate simple cases from complex ones .In 
simple terms, on e should not use a sledge hammer to crack a nut. Petty cases 
should be dealt with swiftly in a reasonable timeframe. Such cases should not 
require cumbersome procedures.        (Para3.20) 
 
25. The Committee is of the view that  digital transformation of the Jud iciary has 
important implications for clearing the significant backlog of cases which the 
judiciary is burdened with. Technology may, in fact, be a catalyst for 
simplifying processes and making manual processes redundant. It will make 
justice accessible an d affordable to a large section of the population and help in 
overcoming physical and logistical barriers which prevent many litigants from 
seeking justice .          (Para3.26) 
 
26. The Committee fully understands that Virtual Courts have their own 
shortcomings, however they constitute an advancement over the existing system, 
and therefore, on the overall, they are worth embracing. These current 
shortcomings might be overcome through existing and emerging technologies. 
Periodical interaction of bar and bench with the technical persons by establishing 
committees in each Courts/Tribunal will help sort out the grievances relating to 
Virtual Courts and other  issues then and there.     (Para3.28) 
 
27. The Committee is of the opinion that a full fledged Virtual Court should be piloted 
in the first instance. This allows the system to be tested in practice which can then 
refined in the light of the feedback received from different stakeholders. It  also 
enables the judiciary to identify the type of cases best suited to Virtual Courts.  
             (Para3.29) 
 
28. The Committee also recommends Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology to employ globally tried and tested tools such as Immersive tele 
presence technology, augmented reality systems to make virtual hearings more 
lifelike and engaging.         (Para3.30) 
 
29. In 19th Century, Justice Benjamin Cardoso said, “New times demand new measures 
and new men” in the field of law or elsewhere. This statement is very much 
relevant to the current situation. The Committee is of the considered opinion that 
traditional Courtrooms may  well remain necessary for our future, but they are 
certainly not sufficient. There is a need to integrate Virtual Courts into the 
country’s legal ecosystem.          (Para3.32) 
 
30. To begin with, Judiciary may identify categories of cases that can be tried b y 
Virtual Courts. Department of Justice in its written replies to the Committee 
submitted that the following cases may be tried in the Virtual Court -Offences 
under Motor Vehicles Act (Traffic Challan cases), Petty offences where summons 
can be issued under  Section 206 of CrPC., Cases registered under Section 138 of 
Negotiable Instruments Act, Motor Accident Claim Petition cases. The Committee 
is of the view that all such matters where personal presence may be dispensed with, 

32 
 
can be transferred from regular Court establishments to Virtual Courts. The 
Committee believes that Virtual adjudication will bring massive benefits across the 
system.            (Para3.33) 
 
31. In respect of complex cases such as those involving interpretation of Law, facts, 
examination of a large number of witnesses and so forth, a hybrid model may be 
adopted wherein manual processes such as filing of plaint, vakalatnama, issuing of 
summons etc.. may be automated and digitized and the hearing may be held in a 
physical Courtroom.          (Para3.34) 
 
32. Since integration of Virtual courts into the legal ecosystem will have a significant 
impact on all stakeholders, the Committee feels that Members of Bar Associations 
and Bar councils must also be involved in evolving a consensual process. This 
would avoid unnecessary opposition and irritants.      (Para3.35) 
 
33. The facility of Virtual Courts extended to lawyers should also be considered for 
extension to private litigants who appear in person or have to travel to High Courts 
from different states a nd cities and places. This would go a long way in 
strengthening public confidence and improving perception about the reachability 
of the judicial system.          (Para3.36) 
 
34. The concept of Virtual Courts has gained immense ground during COVID -19 
Pandemic times. It is and will remain the new reality and the new normal. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the concept of Virtual Courts may well be 
extended to cover arbitrat ion hearings, conciliation and Summary trials. For 
instance, if national and international arbitrations are allowed to be conducted 
through Virtual Courts, there will be hardly any requirement for real time travel 
to distant locations. The Committee believ es that this move will unlock the Courts 
and also mitigate the inconvenience of attending Courts as long distance travels can 
be dispensed with and proceedings become less expensive as well.   (Para3.37)  
 
 
* * * * * 
  

33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

34 
 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH  MEETING 
       
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Monday, the 27th July, 2020 in Committee 
Room No.- 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi – 110001.  Following Members and witnesses were present:- 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral  
3. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
5. Shri Abhay Bharadwaj 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Mohanbhai S. Delkar 
7. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
8. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
9. Shri Malook Nagar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri  Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
           Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director 
           Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
I. Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice) 
1.  Shri Barun Mitra, Secretary; 
2.  Shri G. R. Raghavendra, Joint Secretary; and 
3.  Shri Pravash Prashun Pandey, Joint Secretary. 
II.  Supreme Court of India 
1. Shri Sanjeev S. Kalgaonkar, Secretary-General; 
2. Shri Rajiv Kalra, Registrar; and 
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Goel, Registrar.  
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda 
of the day i.e., recording of oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Justice and 
Secretary-General, Supreme Court of India on the ‘Functioning of Virtual Courts, Case 
Management and Court Management in India’. He also informed the Members of the 
Committee that Reports on different subjects is being prepared and may be presented to the 
House is the ensuing Session of Parliament. 
 

35 
 
3. The Secretary, Department of Justice int roduced his team and made a brief 
presentation on the subject. While making his presentation, the Secretary gave a brief 
overview of the National Policy and Action Plan for Information Communication 
Technology in Judiciary, 2005 and e-Courts project Phase-I & II. He apprised the Committee 
of the achievements under the projects in the areas of hardware and software installations in 
District and Subordinate Courts,  SMS/eMail for case information, facility of e -payment, 
enablement of video-conferencing in jails and courts, e-filing, training programmes on efiling 
for advocates, unique identification of cases through Case Number Record (CNR) and Quick 
Response  (QR) Code, Electronic Case Management System for judges and lawyers, 
establishment of Judicial Service Centers and eService Centers etc. 
 
4. He further added that Model Rules for standardization of video conferencing and e -
Filing are under consideration and software applications were employed for video 
conferencing during the Covid -19 pandemic. He also ad ded that at present virtual courts are 
functioning in only few States/UTs for dealing with traffic offences and the Department 
proposes to extend further its scope and reach in the near future. He then apprised that 640 
Advocate on Records (AoRs) and 1357 litigants are registered with the Supreme Court, 
13,000 advocates are registered with High Court and District Courts for efiling of cases. 
Further, 9,315 cases in Supreme Court, 25,606 in High Courts and 5,514 in Subordinate 
Courts were filed online since March, 2020 after the imposition of lockdown due to Covid-19 
pandemic. The Secretary also appraised the challenges in implementation of eCourts due to 
low internet penetration and poor internet connectivity in certain parts of the country. 
 
5. The Secretary-General, Supreme Court of India apprised the Committee of the 
cognizance taken by the Chief Justice of India on the plight of lawyers and lawyers’ funds 
due to the Covid -19 pandemic. He added that instead of the terms 'virtual courts', the 
Supreme Court of India uses the terms 'courts proceedings through video -conferencing' or 
'tele-conferencing'. He also added that the existing wired video conferencing facility was 
made wireless and also tele -conferencing/telephone was started for judicial procee dings due 
to the situation created by Covid-19 pandemic. 
 
6. He also submitted that for successful operation of video -conferencing/tele-
conferencing, high speed internet connection is required at both the points of connections. At 
present eight to ten Benches of the Court are functioning taking up 20 -30 cases by each court 
per day on an average for which dedicated media rooms have been created for live streaming 
of proceedings. Video Conferencing facilities have been established in Delhi District Courts 
and dedicated lawyer connectivity centers in the Supreme Court premises to facilitate 
lawyers. On the number of cases filed, he appraised that during the lockdown the ratio was 
80% e -filing and 20% physical filing, however, it has increased to 70 percent thro ugh 
physical filing and 30 percent through e-filing after unlocking. 
 
7. The Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised queries relating to problems 
of hearing through video conferencing in District and Subordinate courts; poor internet 
connectivity and power supply, digital divide in the country; functioning of e -Courts; non -
availability of copy of judgment in lower courts on time; registration of advocates for hearing 
through virtual mode; low disposal of cases during the lockdown due to Covid -19 pandemic, 
etc. Some Members were of the view that virtual courts is not an alternative to open court. 
 
8. Members also raised issues like steps taken for live -streaming of proceedings of 
courts to ensure accountability of the Bench and Bar; balance between qu ick delivery of 

36 
 
justice through virtual mode and the open court system; urgent need to commence limited 
physical hearing in District and Subordinate Courts across the country; establishment of Seva 
Kendras in every district and subordinate court complexes;  utilization of lawyers cess 
collected during vakalatnama to alleviate the condition of lawyers because of prevailing 
pandemic; engagement of private -sector to digitalize the entire judiciary and to impart 
training  concerned people on ICT; participation o f private players to use their respective 
corporate social responsibility budget for modernization of justice delivery process; etc. 
 
9. Secretary, Department of Justice responded to certain queries. However, the Chairman 
requested them to send a detailed written replies to all the queries within 15 days’ time. 
10. The Chairman also directed the Secretariat to solicit views of High Court Bar 
Associations across the country and invite Delhi High Court Bar Association, Delhi District 
Courts Bar Associations a nd Bar Council of India to the next sitting for deposition on the 
subject.  
11. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept. 
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
12.      The meeting adjourned at 12.41 PM to meet again at 3:00 PM  on Thursday, the 
7th August, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH  MEETING 
       
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 6 th August, 2020 in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi – 110001.  Following Members and witnesses were present:- 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral  
3. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
5. Shri Abhay Bharadwaj 
6. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
9. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
10. Shri Malook Nagar 
11. Shri Suresh Pujari 
12. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
13. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
           Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
           Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
I. Bar Council of India 
1. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra , Chairman; and 
2. Shri Ved Prakash Sharma, Co-Chairman. 
II.  Delhi High Court Bar Association 
1. Shri Mohit Mathur, President; and 
2. Shri Abhijat, Secretary. 
 
III. Coordination Committee All Delhi District Court Bar Associations 
Shri Y. P. Singh, Chairman  
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee specially the newly nominated 
Members of the Committee. He then apprised Members about the agenda of the day i.e., 
recording of oral evidence of the representatives of Bar Council of India (BCI), Delhi High 
Court Bar Association (DHCBA) and Coordination Committee of Delhi District Court Bar 

38 
 
Associations on the subject ‘ Functioning of e-Courts/ Courts through Video Conferencing/ 
Virtual Courts in India’. 
 
3. The Chairman and Co -Chairman of BCI made a brief presentation on the subject. 
While making their presentation, they highlighted plights of litigants and lawyers in the 
country due to non -functioning of physical courts. They apprised the Committee of the poor 
digital infrastructure, especially low bandwidth, frequent internet disconnections, security of 
the online platform, non -availability/ operation of electronic gadgets, erratic power supply, 
etc. affecting functioning of the e -Courts/ virtual courts in the country. T hey informed that 
around 50 percent lawyers in lower courts do not have laptop/ computers facilities. They 
raised questions relating to the effectiveness and efficacy of virtual hearings and advocated 
for resuming of physical hearing in courts in the count ry in phased manner as soon as 
possible.  
 
4. Chairman, BCI thereafter informed that during the lockdown period,  efficiency of 
virtual courts/ hearing through video conferencing is around 15 to 20 per cent of physical 
courts. He averred that there is absen ce of consultation process by the Law Ministry in 
formulation and implementation of policy relating to functioning of courts.  BCI suggested 
that its representatives along with the representatives of Bar Associations should also be 
involved in various Comm ittees of Courts for better understanding and successful 
implementations of different projects and schemes of justice delivery. 
 
5. President, Delhi High Court Bar Association  submitted that virtual courts or hearing 
through video conferencing may work as a stop-gap arrangement and cannot replace the open 
court hearing. He added that e -Courts/ virtual courts are antithetical to the concept of open 
courts, which has been recognised by legislature and reiterated in various judicial 
pronouncements. He also add ed that extreme dependence of technology in e -Courts/ virtual 
courts creates inequality of access to justice delivery process amongst the litigants and 
advocates. He submitted that managing bulky records/ documents and inspecting and 
ascertaining authentic ity of such documents and signature affixed on those documents are 
difficult in e -Courts/ Virtual Courts.  He also apprised the Committee about the non -
observation of body language of witness by the presiding officers as well as possible tutoring/ 
duress of witness in any trial may impact the delivery of justice in some cases. He was also 
apprehensive that chances of influencing the presiding officers may not be ruled out in some 
sensitive trial. He then apprised the Committee of the low disposal rate of cases in Delhi High 
Court and Delhi District Courts which hovered around 10 percent of the cases disposed of in 
pre-Covid-19 pandemic period.  
 
6. The Chairman,  Coordination Committee of Delhi District Court Bar Associations  
apprised that advocates of District and Taluka courts were deprived of their livelihood due to 
non-functioning of physical courts due to Covid -19 pandemic and strongly vouched for 
resuming physical hearing in Delhi District Courts. 
 
7. Chairman and Members raised issues like problems face d by advocates and litigants 
due to closure of courts; technical issues relating to virtual courts; deprivation of livelihood of 
lawyers; non -availability of internet connections and email of advocates; utilization of 
lawyers cess collection by certain Sat e Government; reasons for under -utilisation of funds 
allocated under the e -Court projects in both phases; adoption of robust technology and 
software applications for improving functioning of virtual courts; definition and legal sanctity 
of virtual courts; serious infrastructural constraints in lower courts, etc.  

39 
 
7.1 Chairman of the Committee expressed his concern over the fact that only 52895 cases 
and 1, 43,495 cases are filed in High Courts and District Courts, respectively, across the 
country, through e -filing between 23 rd March to 15 th July, 2020.   One of the Members 
suggested that the Government should consider starting a pilot project in a city like Delhi or 
Chandigarh where 100 percent cases may be taken through e -Courts/ virtual courts to see its 
outcome before implementing it throughout the country.  
 
8. The witnesses responded to some queries and rest of the issues raised during the 
meeting of the Committee was forwarded to them in writing for their response.   
9. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept. 
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
10.      The meeting adjourned at 04.21 PM. 
 
 
 
 
  

40 
 
XV 
FIFTEENTH  MEETING 
       
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 24 th August, 2020 in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi – 110001.  Following Members and witnesses were present:- 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral  
3. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
5. Shri P. Wilson 
6. Shri Abhay Bharadwaj 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
8. Shri Vinod Lakhamshi Chavda 
9. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
10. Shri Malook Nagar 
11.  Shri A. Raja 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
           Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
           Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
I. Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice)  
  
1.      Shri Anoop Kumar Mendiratta, Secretary ; and  
2.      Shri R.K. Srivastava, Additional Legal Adviser. 
 
II.    Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice) 
 
1.      Shri Barun Mitra, Secretary; and 
2.      Shri Pravash Prashun Pandey, Joint Secretary. 
 
III. Supreme Court of India 
1. Shri A. Ramesh Babu, Addl. Registrar. 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them 
that recording of oral evidence of Secretaries of Departments of Justice and Legal Affairs of 
Ministry of Law and Justice on functioning of e -court/virtual court/hearing through video 
conferencing/tele-conferencing in India has been scheduled for the day.   

41 
 
3. The Chairman constituted a three -Member sub-Committee comprising  S/Shri Vivek 
K. Tankha, P. Wilson and Abhay Bharadwaj  to prepare and present a draft report on virtual 
court to the main Committee for its consideration/adoption, in its next sitting 
(After Arrival of Official Witnesses) 
4. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, submitted tha t virtual hearing during 
COVID pandemic induced lockdown has provided access to justice on urgent matter by the 
court of law.  He apprised the Committee that the direction of Supreme Court issued on 6 th 
April, 2020 provided requisite legal sanctity to hearing through video -conferencing/tele-
conferencing.  He added that virtual hearing has not been adopted uniformly across the 
country by judicial and quasi-judicial bodies due to want of digital infrastructure.  
 5. The Secretary, Department of Justice in his deposition has submitted that the 
overarching Order of Supreme Court issued on 6 th April, 2020 made video -conferencing  a  
viable mode of hearing while physical functioning of  the court was suspended.   He added 
that a Committee comprising of seven senior Judges of Supreme Court constituted  on 18 th 
August, 2020 to prepare action plan to resume graded physical hearing to provide greater 
access to court.   He also stated that miscellaneous matters and ca ses where parties agree for 
exemption of physical hearing, will continue to be taken up through video -conferencing/tele-
conferencing.  Similarly, High Court of Delhi has taken a decision to resume physical hearing 
of one-fourth of the courts in Delhi on a rotational basis.  He submitted that 15 lakh video -
conference hearing have been held by the courts in the country during lock down period. 
6. Members drew attention of the Chair to slip -shod manner of passing the buck from 
one department to another instead of divulging details to the questions sent by the Committee 
Secretariat.  The question relating to plight and practical problems of legal -practitioners, 
fund-availability under   Advocates’ Welfare Funds and its utilisation to further welfare of the 
advocated were not specifically answered by the Ministry.  Members sought clarification 
regarding Advocates’ cess collected under Advocates’ Welfare Fund; disbursement of fund 
therefrom to the needy lawyers; criteria to release money therefrom; information rela ting to 
functioning of Trustee Committee of Bar Councils managing  Advocates’ Welfare Fund; 
Advocates’ Welfare Fund’s Rules and uniformity of rules and software used in video -
conferencing.    
7. The Law Secretary in his response assured the Committee to co llect information 
relating to Advocates’ Cess from the Trustee Committees of different Bar Councils and 
furnish the same to the Committee.  He also informed that litigations on the issue of 
management of advocates’ cess has been filed and pending before Hi gh Courts of Allahabad 
and Telangana.  He added that the Govt. is working upon finalisation of an insurance scheme 
for the advocates.  The Law Secretary suggested that Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) and 
mediation mechanism may be augmented and strengthene d for online disposal of cases in the 
direction of virtual hearing. 
8. The Law Secretary further submitted that open court is a norm in view of Article 
145(4) of the Constitution, Section 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and Section 153 
(B) of Code of  Civil Procedure for the sake of fair and impartial dispensation of justice.  
However, virtual court is a viable alternative when physical court was suspended to provide 
limited access to justice on urgent matters.  The Secretary, Department of Justice  
supplemented by stating that virtual courts have been functional in Delhi, Kochi, Bengaluru, 
Faridabad,  Chennai, which have reportedly disposed of more than 8 lakh cases relating to 
traffic offences and collected fine to the tune of 100 crores, online.  He apprised the 

42 
 
Committee that e -Sewa Kendra, e -filing in all courts  would  be done to upgrade digital 
infrastructure of the court.   
9. Committee Members emphasized uniform rules for virtual courts and uniform 
software for video-conferencing and suggested t he Department to urge NIC to come up with 
indigenous platform for uniformity in the video -conferencing as Zoom, Cisco and VIDEYO 
softwares are fraught with security breach.   Members pointed out mal -functioning of video-
conferencing facility and suggested to provide safeguard for possible misuse of the facility by 
the court.  It was suggested that appellate matters are best -suited for virtual hearing and can 
be tried permanently by virtual mode.  It was also suggested to earmark certain percentage of 
court fee for welfare of advocates.   
10. The Chairman while concluding the Session enjoined the Department of Legal Affairs 
to involve Bar Associations to extend loans to needy legal practitioners under Atam Nirbhar 
Bharat initiative of the Govt.  He also desired that the Department of Justice may play a lead 
role in capacity building of courts by bringing information technology initiative of e -court 
project under its control.  The concept of paper on e-Nayalaya and virtual court can be 
prepared as futuristic policy of the Govt. for the consideration of the Committee. 
11. The witnesses responded to some queries.  The Chairman directed them to furnish 
written replies to the queries raised in the meeting within 10 days. 
12. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept. 
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
13.      The meeting adjourned at 04.32 PM. 
 
 
 
  

43 
 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justi ce met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8 th September, 2020 in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi – 110001.  Following Members attended the sitting:- 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral  
3. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
5. Shri P. Wilson 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Mohanbhai S.  Delkar 
8. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
9. Shri Malook Nagar 
10.  Shri Suresh Punjari 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
12.  Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
       Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
       Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
       Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
       Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed Members of the Committee and apprised them 
the agenda for the day i.e., adoption of following four reports:- 
(i) *Draft One Hundred -second Report on the subject ‘Effectiveness of Vigilance 
Administration in certain Revenue & Banking Institutions and Selected CPSEs’; 
 
(ii) Draft One Hundred -third Report on the subject ‘Functioning of the Virtual 
Courts/ Courts Proceeding through Video Conferencing – Interim Report’; 
 
(iii) *Draft One Hundred -fourth Report on the Action Taken on One Hundredth   
Report of the Committee   on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to the   
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; and 
(iv) *Draft One Hundred-fifth Report on Action Taken on One Hundred -first Report 
of the Committee  on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to the   Ministry 
of Law and Justice. 
3. Thereafter, Members deliberated on the Reports and the Reports were adopted 
without any alterations/modifications. Since both Houses of Parliament were not in Session 
and the present Committee’s term was going to expire on 13 th September, 2020, the 

44 
 
Committee decided to present the above mentioned Reports to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha, before they are presented/ laid before both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing 
session. 
 
4. The Chairman, also apprised the Members that the report on the subject 
‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’ in under preparation and may be adopted after 
its reconstitution. 
 
5. The meeting was then adjourned at 11.30. AM.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________  
*Relates to other matters 