 
 
         
 
 
          PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
          RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO 
137 
   
1313
7137-
-- 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON "DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) " 
PERTAINING TO 
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
(MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE)  
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2023) 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on  11th  December, 2023) 
 

 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs 
 
 
 

 3 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                     4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                           5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                                 6-7 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                         8-9 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                                   10-12 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                        13-48 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                       49-55 
                                                                                    
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
(IV) CHAPTER IV                                                                                                                       56-58                                                                                     
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED   
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                                      59-61                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M. C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
3. Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Additional Director 
4. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
5. Ms. Chinmayee Chakravarty, Assistant Committee Officer 
___________ 
 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred 
Thirty Seventh Report (137th) on Action Taken on One Hundred and Twenty Eighth 
(128th) Report of the Committee on "Demands for Grants (2023-24)" pertaining to the 
Ministry of Law & Justice.  
2. The One Hundred and Twenty Eighth Report of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 
Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha on 15 th March, 2023 and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on the 20th March, 2023.  
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions, furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and Twenty Eighth Report of the 
Committee on 01st August, 2023. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred 
Thirty Seventh Report (137th) and adopted the same in its meeting held on 07 th 
December, 2023. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
11th December, 2023      SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
                                                       Chairman, 
                                                         Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
                                                       Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                               Law and Justice 
 
 
 

 6 
 
ACRONYMS 
A&N Andaman & Nicobar 
BE Budget Estimate 
CJI Chief Justice of India 
CSCs Common Service Centres 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
DFG Demands for Grants 
DISHA Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Justice 
DLSA District Legal Services Authority 
DOJ Department of Justice 
DOLA Department of Legal Affairs 
DOPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FAQs Frequently Asked Questions 
FTSC Fast Track Special Courts 
FY Financial Year 
HC High Court 
ICT Information Communication Technology 
J&K Jammu & Kashmir 
LADCS Legal Aid Defense Counsel System 
LD Legislative Department 
LDC Lower Divisional Clerk 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MOF Ministry of Finance 
MOP Memoranda of Procedure 
NALSA National Legal Services Authority 
NE North East 
NEJK North East Jammu Kashmir 

 7 
NER North Eastern Region 
NITI (Aayog) National Institution for Transforming India 
NJA National Judicial Academy 
NJAC National Judicial Accountability Commission 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PLVs Para Legal Volunteers 
POSCO Act Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 
RE Revised Estimate 
RRs Recruitment Rules 
SC Supreme Court 
SCC Supreme Court Collegium 
SCI Supreme Court of India 
SJAs State Judicial Academies 
SLSA State Legal Services Authority 
UDC Upper Divisional Clerk 
UT Union Territory 
WB West Bengal 
WP(C) Writ Petition (Civil) 
  

 8 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Law & Justice on the recommendations / observations of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice in its One Hundred and Twenty Eighth (126th) Report on "Demands for grant 
(2023-24)", which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15th March, 2023 and laid on 
the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 20th March, 2023. 
2. The Committee had made 28 recommendations/observations in its 128th   
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been catego rized and scrutinized 
under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have 
been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations (3) which have been accepted by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 1.34, 1.38 and 1.39 of the Report. 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has accepted 
those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations (19) which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. in 
respect of paras 1.18, 1.19, 1.20, 1.21, 1.22, 1.28, 1.29, 1.35, 1.43, 
1.44, 1.49, 1.50, 1.58, 2.3, 2.7, 2.8 , 2.12, 3.6 and 4.4 of the Report. 
The Committee is satisfied with the explanations advanced by the 
Department and does not wish to pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations ( 3) in respect of which Committee 
has not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. with regard to 
paras 1.52, 1.53  and 1.54 of the Report. The Committee does not 
accept the reasons given by the Department and reiterates the same. 
Chapter – IV: Recommendations/observations (3) in respect of which final  replies 
of the Government have not been received. The Committee expresses 
its deep concern that it did not receive the replies from the 
Government in respect of Committee's recommendations vide Para 
Nos. 2.11, 3.7 and 3.8. 
 
 

 9 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. For refer ence purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e. of 
128th Report) have been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
--- 
  

 10 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.0 eCourts Mission Mode Project is an important Scheme of the Department 
aimed at improving access to justice using technology. The Government has released 
a total of Rs.935 crores and Rs.1670 crores under Phase -I and Phase -II of the 
Scheme, respectively. The Committee is appreciative of the fact that Phase -II of the 
project has performed exceedingly well. But the Committee in its visits to many of 
the High Courts in the country have found that after the waning of the pandemic 
many of the Judges are not c omfortable working with the virtual/hybrid courts and 
are back to old mode of physical hearings. Thus there is a real danger of 
infrastructure created under this project on the hard -earned public money being 
wasted. Accordingly, the Committee recommends th e Government to approach the 
eCommittee of the Supreme Court and to request them to issue guidelines for making 
full use of e -resources created for virtual/hybrid hearings in the courts, which is not 
only time saving but also economical.           (Para 1.34) 
 
Action Taken 
1.1   As recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, the matter has already been 
addressed to eCommittee, Supreme Court of India. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.2   Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Justice in India 
(DISHA):- 
 
1.2(a)  The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Department under the 
DISHA Scheme which seeks to prioritize citizen -centric justice delivery system by 
integrating access to justice with technology. The four components of the Scheme 
have been curated with the objective of strengthening pre-litigation mechanism (Tele-
Law); developing effective dispensation of pro -bono legal services (Nyaya Bandhu); 
facilitating disposal of pending cases in the courts through a cadre of retired Judges 
(Nyaya Mitra);and empowering citizens through PAN India legal literacy and legal 
awareness.                    (Para 1.38) 

 11 
 
1.2(b)      In this connection, the Committee would like to advise the Department 
that apart from their ongoing efforts, they should make full use  of social media 
platforms like YouTube, Face book, Twitter, etc. through supply of quality content 
on legal literacy and legal awareness to the citizens. These platforms have a wider 
reach, even to the grassroots and are affordable to the citizens. The De partment may 
use animations, talks by experts, etc. by way of making short videos, for educating 
the common public on their rights and also to generate awareness about the 
schemes/programmes of the Department.          (Para 1.39) 
 
Action Taken 
1.3  The Committee appreciates the DISHA scheme of Department of Justice 
and has advised to intensify and scale up its efforts under DISHA in order to generate 
awareness of its various programmes and schemes and ensure wider outreach to the 
citizens. Following has been suggested: - 
 
(a) To make full use of social media like You Tube Facebook Twitter etc to 
provide quality content on legal literacy and legal awareness. 
(b) To make use of animation, talks by experts and make of short videos for 
educating common public. 
 
In view of the above, it is submitted that Use of Information, Education 
and Communication and Technology (IEC and ICT) forms the integral 
component of DISHA scheme. As guided by the Committee Members, efforts 
are being made and with continuous improvements to expand the outreach of 
DISHA scheme to benefit the common public, the following steps have been 
undertaken: - 
 
 A dedicated Social Media team has been positioned in the DoJ who manages 
and handles the content and dissemination of various inf ormation on the social 
media platform, which includes Twitter, Face book, Instagram and You Tube. 
A total of 200+ social media posts, were made on DISHA scheme in FY 2022 -
2023. 
 Letters have been sent to Implementing Agencies and Law Schools mentioning 
the details of social media platforms of DoJ and tag it with social media pages 
of MLJ for relevant legal information.  

 12 
 Recently, DoJ inaugurated its Digital Library that can be accessed on the 
Department of Justice‟s website. Some 800+ IEC material in the for m of 
Books, Pamphlets, posters developed in 16 languages/ dialects has been 
uploaded, to generate legal literacy and legal awareness. 
 DoJ has organized 16 Webinars on different social -legal topics that could be 
made accessible through scanning the QR code and watching these video on 
the DoJ YouTube handle. 
 In addition, Under the Tele -Law programme– DoJ captures the “Voices of the 
Beneficiaries” in which it depicts the journey of the beneficiary in availing the 
benefits under the Tele -Law service. These narr atives highlight the problem 
they were suffering; how did they come to know of seeking a pre -ligation 
advice in their concerned matter; what sources / stakeholders were helpful in 
guiding them to reach these legal aid platforms; were they able to seek the 
advice and how they were able to implement it or found it informative in 
empowering their lives. 
 Special campaign called “Selfie Drive” was launched from the month of 
October 2022 in which daily videos of the frontline functionaries (Panel 
Lawyers, Para Le gal Volunteers; Village Level Entrepreneurs) and 
beneficiaries is captured and posted on the social media platform. Such140 
videos have been uploaded. 
 The All-India Radio platform is being used to broadcast the jingles, developed 
to amplify its various legal services. 
 Dedicated website on Tele-Law; Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono) Legal Services has 
been developed. The website can be accessed in 22 scheduled languages. 
 
 Short films on Tele-Law (including animation) and e- Tutorial on the use of the 
Mobile Applicatio ns (Tele -Law and Probono) has been developed and 
uploaded on the website. 
 DoJ is also working closely with the Prasar Bharti in popularizing its various 
progarmmes through the National/Regional Channels.  
    
 
*** 
 
 

 13 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.0 The State is duty bound to provide easy access to Justice and timely delivery of 
Justice to all its citizen. Adequacy of judicial in frastructure plays a critical role in 
reduction of pendency and backlog of cases in the Courts. But it is an undeniable fact 
that the state of judicial infrastructure in the country is far from being satisfactory. 
Courts are functioning in rented premises with insufficient space and many in a 
dilapidated condition without basic amenities like toilets etc. In such a scenario, the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for Development of Infrastructure Facilities for 
Judiciary is playing a pivotal role in the devel opment of critical infrastructure at the 
State level.                       (Para 1.18) 
 
2.1  From the data provided by the Department of Justice, it can be seen that many 
of the States are utilizing this scheme in the best possible manner and have created 
substantial judicial infrastructure in their States. However, in many of the States 
nothing notable has happened under this Scheme.                     (Para 1.19) 
 
2.2    The Committee observes that the pace of release of funds has slowed down due 
to revised procedural guidelines for release of CSS funds under the new Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS). Due to stringent conditions attached for 
release of funds, most of the States are finding it difficult to get their quota of funds 
despite having huge requirements for funds for their projects both ongoing and new. 
From the data provided by the Department, 11 out of 21 general category States and 5 
out of 8 NE States did not get any funds during 2022 -23 due to such norms. Though 
the Committee is happy to note that the Department of Justice is taking all possible 
measures to ameliorate the har dship  faced by the States in this regard, and to ensure 
that all of them become PFMS compliant, the Committee, however, recommends the 
Department to approach the MoF to get the guidelines on release of funds under the 
CSS relaxed, wherever the States are facing genuine difficulties in the 
implementation of such guidelines.               (Para 1.20) 
2.3  The Committee in January, 2023 visited Assam, Manipur and Tripura to assess 
the judicial infrastructure and to have an on the spot assessment of implementation of 
this Scheme in the North Eastern Region. After deliberating with the concerned State 

 14 
Governments and High Court Judges on this issue, the Committee is constrained to 
note that the status of judicial infrastructure is in very bad shape in the region and 
they are not being able to make full use of this Scheme.         (Para 1.21) 
 
2.4   Apart from general PFMS related issues being faced by all the States/UTs, the 
North-Eastern States have their own issues because of their peculiar topography 
which makes availability of unencumbered land a bit difficult. Also the NE States 
and other hilly States are bestowed with short working season which makes 
movement of men and material difficult over the treacherous terrain and thereby 
making contract implementa tion difficult with increased time and cost overruns. 
Because of limited railways connectivity in the region, the cost of transportation 
becomes much higher, leading to substantial increase in cost of material. Other 
reasons include late receipt of project  proposals and non -receipt of utilization of 
certificates from the respective state governments. It has also been found that in case 
of North-eastern States, their contribution to the scheme though meagre (only 10% 
vis-à-vis 90% of Central share) gets dela yed. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the Department to explore the possibility of providing a better deal in 
terms of enhanced allocation of funds and relaxation of spending norms under the 
Scheme, considering the peculiarities of the NE States. It is further recommended that 
the 10% of the state quota may also be relaxed for the NE States subject to 
subsequent recovery from the concerned state, so that the ongoing projects are not 
stalled for want of such meagre amount of money.          (Para 1.22) 
 
Action Taken 
2.5  As regards relaxation of PFMS guidelines, on earlier occasions, the 
matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance (MoF). However, MoF has made it 
categorically clear that all the States have to become PFMS compliant, as this is a 
reform measure to avoid parking of funds by the states  and also to ensure utilization 
of the funds meant for a scheme, in that scheme only.  After facing initial technical 
problems/hitches, all the States have since on -boarded the Public Financial 
Management System (PFMS) and are making expenditure through PFMS only. 
  
 As regards enhanced allocation to the NER States, as per the laid down norms, 
at least 10% of budget is to be utilized for NER states. Against provision of Rs.89.99 
crore for NER States (within total RE of Rs.848.00 Crore for the entire country 
under CSS for Development of Judicial Infrastructure ), during FY 2022 -23 against 
allocation of Rs.89.99 crore for NER, funds to the tune of Rs.122.50 crore have been 

 15 
released to NER states. Thus, subject t o availability of funds, the Department keeps 
on making efforts to provide enhanced allocation to the NER. The States have 
however, have the flexibility to prepare their design and Schedule of Rates (SOR) 
based on their local requirement and need. Further in the NER region there are 730 
Court Halls and 627 Residential Units of Judges/Judicial Officer covering District 
and Subordinate Courts, are available as on 30 th June, 2023. Moreover, 194 Court 
Halls and 148 Residential Units are under construction.  
  
 Further, as per the guidelines of Ministry of Finance, based on the funding 
pattern being followed in all the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) being 
implemented by the Government, for the above CSS also, Central Share of funds is 
released in prescribed ra tio to all the States/UTs which is 60:40 (Centre : States), 
except 8 NER States and 2 Himalayan States (Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh) 
where the ratio is 90:10 and in UTs it is 100% Central funding. It is owing to the 
difficult terrain of NER States and  other hilly States that the State contribution has 
been kept at only 10% as compared to 40% in other States. The basic issue which 
hampers release of funds to the States, including NER States is non-utilization of the 
funds released earlier. Besides writi ng to the States regularly, the Central Level 
Monitoring Committee of the Department of Justice also held bi -monthly meetings 
on regular basis with the States/UTs during which, all the States and UTs were urged 
to utilize the unspent balance available with them expeditiously. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.6 Assistance to State Governments for establishing and operationalising Gram                         
Nyayalayas: 
 
2.6(a)  Assistance to State Governments for establishing and operationalising 
Gram Nyayalayas is a small Scheme with a financial outlay of Rs.50 crore from 
2021-22 to 2025 -26. Further, the concept of Gram Nyayalayas has failed to take off 
in most of the States which are not keen to operationalise it due to their local 
problems. Only 264 Gram Nyayalayas are functional out of 476 notified. Though, 
there are instances where some States have operationalized their Gram Nyayalayas 
without any Central assistance.                                  (Para 1.28)   
             
2.6(b)   In view of the above, the Committee recommends the Government to 
evaluate the utility of continuing such a Scheme and to divert the funds earmarked for 

 16 
this Scheme to the CSS for Development of Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary.  
                    (Para 1.29)               
 
Action Taken 
2.7  In keeping with the directions of the Government, process has been 
initiated for 3rd Party evaluation of the Gram Nyayalaya scheme. After following the 
open tender process, one firm has been shortlisted for undertaking the above study 
and is going to be awarded this study very soon. The firm is expected to furnish its 
final report by mid August,2023. In addition, a sum of Rs.10.00 Crore was allocated 
under the Gram Nyayalaya scheme during the FY 2022 -23, out of which in order to 
meet the demand of funds of few States under the Judicial Infrastructure  Scheme, in 
the last month of the financial year, the amount of Rs.9.20 Crore was re -
appropriated towards the Infra requirements of the Judiciary. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.8 The phase-II of the eCourts Mission Mode Project ended on 31.03.2022. There 
has been no allocation for the Phase -III since then and for 2023 -24 also there has 
been no allocation. The Committee has been apprised that though the Phase -III has 
been finalized by the eCommittee of the Supreme Court, it has yet to receive the 
approval of the Union Cabinet. However, the Government has announced Rs.7,000 
crores for eCourts Phase-III in the Union Budget 2023-24. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to get necessary approvals for Phase III on priority and 
approach the MoF for further allocation on priority.      (Para 1.35)
  
Action Taken 
2.9 The Detailed Project Report (DPR) of the e -Courts Project Phase -III was 
approved by eCommittee , Supreme Court of India, in its full meeting held on 
21.10.2022 under the chairmanship of Hon‟ble Chief Justice of India, Dr. Justice 
D.Y. Chandrachud. The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Note for e -Courts 
Project Phase-III was prepared. The meeting o f the Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) was held on 23.02.2023. The Cabinet Note for the Phase -III of the Project was 
prepared and the same has also been approved by the Hon‟ble Minister of Law & 
Justice. Cabinet Note was circulated to all concerned Mini stries/Departments for 
consultation and after receiving the comments and framing of responses by the DoJ, 
the Cabinet Note was sent to Cabinet Secretariat which referred to ETG (Empowered 
Technology Group) headed by Principal Scientific Adviser to Hon‟ble PM for its 

 17 
approval. ETG approved the proposal in its meeting held on 21.06.2023 and presently 
the proposal is under the advanced stage of approval/consideration of Cabinet.  
2. The Name of the Scheme, Budget Head/Line has been opened / incorporated in 
the Detailed Demand for Grants of the Ministry of Law & Justice for the year 2023 -
24. After approval of the Scheme, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
shall be making available the requisite funds for the Financial Year 2023 -24 as per 
DPR (Detailed Project Report).  
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.12 VACANCIES IN THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE: - 
2.12(a) The Department even after 12 years of its separation from the Ministry 
of Home Affairs and becoming independent, is still dependent on the MHA for all its 
man power requirements. From the above table it can be seen that the vacancies in 
the Department is staggering. Accordingly, in the last DFG Report, the Committee 
had recommended that the Department of Justice should be given full autonomy in 
case of personnel management and all cadre controlling authorities, including DoPT, 
were asked to post all encadred posts directly to the Department of Justice. However, 
even after a year of the said recommendation the DoPT and MHA are yet to furnish 
their reply on the issue.                  (Para 1.49) 
 
2.12(b)   The Department of Justice is one of the better performing Departments. 
The Department in their submission has informed that they are facing huge 
difficulties in the smooth functioning of the Department du e to acute staff shortage. 
Accordingly, the Committee reiterates the above recommendation that the 
Department should take up this matter with the highest level and action taken replies 
may be furnished to this Committee within three months time.           (Para 1.50) 
 
Action Taken 
2.13    The instant recommendations relating to "Vacancies in the Department of 
Justice" contained in Para 1.49 and Para 1.50 of 128th  Report of the Department - 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee (DRPSC) on Demands for Grants of the 
Department of Justice for the year 2023-24, has its genesis in the recommendations of 
the DRPSC made vide Para 3.2 of its 116th  Report on Demands for Grants of the 
Department of Justice for the year 2022 -23. This recommendation made in 116th  
Report of the DRPSC was reiterated by the DRPSC in its 

 18 
recommendations/observation made vide para 4.2 and Para 4.4 of 123rd Report on 
Action Taken Report of DOJ.  
 
2.  To comply with the above said observations, the recommendation of the 
Parliamentary Committee was brought to the notice of DoPT, the Nodal Department 
for filling up the vacancies in the Departments/Ministries of the Government and  the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), the cadre controlling authority in respect of the 
staff posted to the Department of Justice vide O.M No.15011/9 3/2018-Jus(AU) 
(4135) dated 10.05.2022 requesting them to provide the Action  Taken Report (ATR) 
in the matter. In this regard, a D.O. No.15011/166/2018 -Jus (AU) dated 10.05.2022 
of the Additional Secretary (A&A) was also sent to the Joint Secretary (A), M inistry 
of Home Affairs. Further, a Reminder has also been issued to DoPT and MHA vide 
O.M of even number dated 30.05.2022 requesting them to provide the Action Report 
(ATR) in the matter so that the consolidated Action Report (ATR) of the Department 
of Justice may be submitted to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat for consideration of the 
Hon'ble Committee. 
 
3.  DoPT and MHA were again requested vide this office O.M. No. 
15011/93/2018-Jus (AU) (4135) dated 29.03.2023 and 27.03.2023 respectively to 
examine the matter and provide Action Taken Report in this regard. 
 
4. In compliance with the recommendations/observations, the DoPT vide its 
O.M.No.25/03/2022-CS.I(P) dated 26.04.2023, addressed to MHA and the 
Department of Justice, has informed that under the existing guidelines, creation of a 
separate cadre Unit for the Department of Justice  by bifurcating from the main cadre 
Unit  is subject to fulfillment of certain criteria and has requested MHA and 
Department of Justice to examine the proposal and submit their No Objection along 
with requisite details for creation of  a separate cadre  for the officials  the 
Department of Justice. Thereafter , the  M/o Home Affairs has  also examined the 
case  and informed,  vide OM No. A -43020/78/2022-Ad. (part-I) dated 05.06.2023 , 
that  M/o Home Affairs  has  „No Objection”  for  delinking  of CSS,CSSS  
 
and CSCS cadres of the Department of Justice from the M/o Home Affairs and the 
same has been communicated to the DoPT vide Id: Note No. A -43020/2/2011-Ad.I 
(A) dated June,2011.  I n its No objection Certificate M/o Home Affairs has also 
emphasised  that  it will   not  be in  a position to spare administrative staff  for the 
Department of Justice  as it has to cater to the requirement of 15 sub cadre units  and 
overall shortages were felt everywhere. 

 19 
 In view of the de-linking position as stated above by the MHA in No Objection 
Certificate dated 15.06.2011, the reply of DOJ is under process and will be sent to 
DoPT shortly. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.14 FINALIZATION OF MEMORANDA OF PROCEDURE (MOP) FOR 
APPOINTMENTOF SC/HC JUDGES :- 
 
2.14(a)  The Committee observes that the Supreme Court and the 
Government have failed to reach a consensus on revision of the Memorandum of 
Procedure (MOP) for appointment of Judges to the constitutional courts, though the 
same is under consideration of both for about seven years now. The Committee 
expects the Government and the Judiciary to weed out their differences and to 
finalize the revised MOP, which is more efficient and transparent, in terms of the 
Supreme Court observation cited above.         (Para 1.58) 
 
Action Taken 
2.15 Hon‟ble Supreme Court while hearing WP(C) 13 of 2015 in NJAC matter 
issued detailed Order on 16 -12-2015 on supplementing the Memorandum of 
Procedure (MoP) and laid down that Government of India may finalize the 
Memorandum of Procedure by supplementing it in consultation with the Chief Justice 
of India. It was laid down that the Chief Justice of India will take a decision based on 
the unanimous view of the Collegium comprising of four senior most puisne Judges 
of the Supreme Court.  The order stated that the y shall take the following factors into 
consideration such as eligibility criterion, transparency in the appointment process, 
secretariat, complaint mechanism and miscellaneous matter considered appropriate 
for ensuring transparency and accountability incl uding interaction with the 
recommendees, the Collegium of the Supreme Court without sacrificing the 
confidentiality of appointment.         
  
              In pursuance of the above orders, the Government of India, after due 
diligence sent the revised MoP to Hon'ble Chief Justice of India on 22.3.2016 and the 
response of the Supreme Court Collegium on the said revised draft MoP was received 
on 25.05.2016 and 01.07.2016. The views of the Government in response to the 
views of the SCC were conveyed to the Hon ‟ble  CJI on 03.08.2016. Subsequent 

 20 
comments of SCC on the views of Government on the draft MoP were received on 
13.03.2017.   
       
                 Thereafter, the Supreme Court in a judgment dated 04.07.2017 in a Suo -
Motu Contempt proceedings against a  Judge of Calcutta High Court brought out the 
system‟s failure of not providing an appropriate procedure for making assessment of 
the personality of the contemnor at the time of recommending his name for elevation 
as High Court Judge inter-alia highlighting the need to revisit the process of selection 
and appointment of Judges to the Constitutional Courts. The views of the 
Government on the relevant points were conveyed to Supreme Court of India vide 
letter dated 11.07.2017.  
 A two-judges Bench of Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 28.03.2018 in 
Criminal Appeal No. 470 of 2018, brought out deficiencies in the system and 
emphasized the need to improve the process of appointment of Judges to the 
Constitutional Courts.  
 
 In another case, while hearing a matter involving M/s PLR Projects Pvt Ltd. vs 
Mahanadi Coalfield Ltd. and Ors [Transfer Petition (civil) no: 2419 of 2019] 
regarding issue of appointment of High Court Judges, the three -judge Bench of the 
Supreme Court, vide order dated 20.04.2021, laid down  additional timelines in 
respect of the time taken by the Government in processing the proposal for 
appointment of Judges of High Courts. However, these timelines are not yet a part of 
MoP. 
  
 The Supreme Court, while hearing another case  No. WP(C) 1236 o f 2019 on 
the matter of appointment of retired judges at sittings of High Courts under Article 
224A of the Constitution of India, vide its judgment dated 20.04.2021 has laid down 
fresh criterion for their appointment. After detailed deliberation, Governmen t has 
submitted its views to the Chief Justice of India on 18.08.2021 to supplement para 
24 of existing MoP which provides for the appointment of retired judges at the 
sitting of High Courts under Article 224A. The issue is still under consideration of 
the Supreme Court. While sending the proposal for supplementation of MoP on the 
criteria fixed in Supreme Court order dated 16.12.2015 in W.P.(C) 13 of 2015 in 
NJAC matter, Government has made suggestions including the need for a Screening-
cum-Evaluation Committee at the Supreme Court and High Court levels to assist the 
Collegiums of Supreme Court and High Courts, respectively.  It was proposed that 
the Committees may screen and evaluate relevant material on the suitability of the 
prospective candidates and wo uld act as a facilitator. The decision to make 

 21 
recommendations will continue to be exercised by the respective Collegiums of the 
Supreme Court and High Courts. However, the Supreme Court did not agree to set 
up such Committees. 
  
 In its recent communication dated 06.01.2023 to the Chief Justice of India, the 
Government has emphasized the need to finalize the MoP in view of various judicial 
pronouncements and inter-alia suggested that the Search-cum-Evaluation Committee 
in respect of appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court and Chief Justices of High 
Courts should consist of a representative nominated by Government of India. 
 
 As mentioned above, the Supreme Court orders dated 16/12/2015 lays down 
that the Government may finalize the Memorandum of Procedu re (MoP) by 
supplementing it in consultation with the Chief Justice of India. Government of India 
has been sending requests to the Supreme Court of India to send its views, as stated 
in the above paras. 
 
 In view of above, it would be seen that the Governm ent has been taking 
necessary actions to ensure finalization of MoP and has sent a number of suggestion 
on supplementing the MoP. No action is therefore, pending on part of the 
Government. The Government is dedicated towards finalizing the MoP in order to 
make the appointment process more transparent, objective and efficient. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.16  NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY:          
 
2.16(a) As informed by NALSA the Legal Aid Defence Counsel Scheme (LADCS) 
engages full -time experienced lawyers to exclusively devote their effort to provide 
legal aid, assistance and representation to the beneficiaries in criminal matters. This is 
a paradigm shift in the manner in which the legal aid is provided in the country, 
whereas earlier cases were as signed to the empanelled lawyers who also had a private 
practice. The Committee appreciates such scheme and hope that it will improve the 
quality of legal aid to the beneficiary. It is also expected that competent and dedicated 
lawyers are empanelled throu gh a transparent selection process for manning this 
Scheme             (Para 2.3) 
 
Action Taken 

 22 
2.17(i) Realising the need to ponder over the reforms required in the Legal Aid 
Movement of India a new model of Legal Services Delivery, the „Legal Aid Defense 
Counsel System‟ (LADCS), in line with public defender system, has been introduced 
by NALSA. As envisaged, LADCS involve full time engagement of lawyers with 
support system, dealing exclusively with legal aid work in criminal matters at every 
stage starting from the pre-arrest, arrest & remand stage to the conclusion of trials 
and appeals etc. It will enhance the availability and accessibility of Legal Aid in a 
timely manner and help in creating a mechanism to provide qualitative and competent 
legal services in a professional manner to underprivileged and disadvantaged section 
of the society. 
 
  2.17( ii). As far as competent and dedicated lawyers to be empanelled through a 
transparent selection process for manning this Scheme is concerned, it is submitted 
that Selection Procedure has been devised as under : - 
 
ii (a). After due publicity including public notice, applications will be invited and a 
fair, transparent and competitive selection process shall be adopted by DLSA under 
guidance of SLSA. Legal Aid Defence Counsels shall be engaged on contract basis in 
each place/district initially for a period of two years with a stipulation of extension on 
yearly basis on satisfactory performance. The performance of each human resource 
shall be assessed in every six months by SLSA in consultation with DLSA 
concerned. Selection of Chief Legal Aid Defense Counsel, Deputy Chief Legal Aid 
Defense Counsels, Assistant Legal Aid Defense Counsels will be purely based on 
merit, taking into account the knowledge, skills, practice and experience of 
candidates. The selection shall be carried out by Selection committee under the 
Chairmanship of the Principal District &Sessions Judge (Chairman, DLSA) as 
envisaged in NALSA (Free and Competent Legal Services) Regulations 2010, 
subject to final approval by the Executive Chairman, SLSA. In the selection 
committee at least three senior most judicial officers posted at HQ, dealing mainly 
criminal cases, preferably sessions cases, will also be included. No person with 
conflict of interest shall be part of selection process. After approval by the Executive 
Chairman, SLSA, engagement contract will be executed between the Secretary 
DLSA and the person so engaged. The eligibility criterions are as follows:- 
 
I. Qualifications for Chief Legal Aid Defense Counsel : - 
 
a. Practice in Criminal law for at least 10 years 
b. Excellent oral and written communication skills, 

 23 
c. Excellent understanding of criminal law 
d. Thorough understanding of ethical duties of a defence counsel 
e. Ability to work effectively and efficiently with others with capability to 
  lead 
f. Must have handled at least 30 criminal trials in Sessions Courts, 
aforesaid condition of handling of 30 criminal cases can be relaxed in 
appropriate circumstances 
g. Knowledge of computer system, preferable 
h. Quality to lead the team with capacity to manage the office 
 
II. Qualifications for Deputy Chief Legal Aid Defense Counsel: - 
a. Practice in Criminal law for at least 7 years 
b. Excellent understanding of criminal law 
c. Excellent oral and written communication skills 
d. Skill in legal research 
e. Thorough understanding of ethical duties of defence counsel 
f. Ability to work effectively and efficiently with others 
g. Must have handled at least 20 criminal trials in Sessions Courts, may be 
relaxed i n exceptional circumstances, by Hon‟ble executive Chairman, 
SLSA 
h. IT Knowledge with proficiency in work 
 
III. Qualification for Assistant Legal Aid Defense Counsel : - 
a. Practice in criminal law from 0 to 3 years 
b. Good oral and written communication skills 
c.  Thorough understanding of ethical duties of defence counsel 
d.  Ability to work effectively and efficiently with others 
e. Excellent writing and research skills 
f. IT Knowledge with high proficiency in work 
 
IV. Qualification for Office Assistant : - 
a. Educational Qualification: Graduation 
b. Basic world processing skills and the ability to operated computer and 
skills to feed data 
c. Good Typing speed with proper setting of petition 
d. Ability to take dictation and prepare files for presentation in the Courts 
e. File maintenance and processing knowledge 
 

 24 
 
V        Qualification for Receptionist-cum-Data Entry Operator : - 
a. Educational Qualification: Graduation 
b. Excellent verbal and written communication skills 
c. Word and data processing abilities 
d. The ability to work telecommunication systems (telephones, fax 
machines, switchboards etc.) 
e. Proficiency with good typing speed 
 
Note: Qualifications may be reasonably relaxed in case of exceptional candidates or 
circumstances with the approval of the Executive Chairman SLSA. 
 
            As on 25.06.2023, 443 LADCS/Districts are functional across the country as 
per information received from the State Legal Services Authorities (SLSAs). Further, 
as per information received from the SLSAs, details of selection of Human Resources 
in LADCS are as under:- 
               
                    Selection of Human Resource (as on 31.03.2023) 
Chief LADC Deputy LADC Assistant LADC Supporting Staff 
 
308 
 
445 802 94 
 
         
State-wise details of the selection of Human Resources in LADCS is given at 
Annexure‟A‟ below;-  
 
  „Annexure-„A‟ 
S.No. Name of SLSA 
Selection of Human Resource as on 31.03.2023 
Chief  Deputy Assistants Supporting 
Staff 
1 Andhra Pradesh 9 9 7 0 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
0 0 0 0 
3 Assam 15 27 59 0 

 25 
4 Bihar 0 0 0 0 
5 Chhattisgarh 23 32 50 0 
6 Goa 1 1 3 0 
7 Gujarat 7 7 15 4 
8 Haryana 4 12 26 0 
9 Himachal 
Pradesh 
5 15 26 22 
10 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
3 9 9 0 
11 Jharkhand 15 38 72 0 
12 Karnataka 13 13 13 0 
13 Kerala 12 29 57 0 
14 Madhya 
Pradesh 
0 0 0 0 
15 Maharashtra 23 45 134 0 
16 Manipur 0 0 0 0 
17 Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 
18 Mizoram 4 2 2 12 
19 Nagaland 0 0 0 0 
 
20 Orissa 12 24 33 0 
21 Punjab 7 11 17 0 
22 Rajasthan 34 12 43 5 
23 Sikkim 2 4 4 0 
24 Tamil Nadu 29 34 43 0 

 26 
25 Telangana 33 53 69 48 
26 Tripura 0 0 0 0 
27 Uttar Pradesh 40 47 86 0 
28 Uttarakhand 4 0 3 1 
29 West Bengal 8 17 29 0 
30 A&N Islands 0 0 0 0 
31 Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 
32 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
* Proposal for allotment of identified space for 
setting up of LADCS is sent to the Building 
Committee of the Hon‟ble Bombay High Court. 
33 Daman & Diu 1 0 1 0 
34 Delhi 3 3 0 0 
35 Lakshadweep         
36 Puducherry 1 1 1 2 
37 Ladakh 0 0 0 0 
  Total 308 445 802 94 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.18 The Committee in its 116thReport while referring to the fact that per capita free 
legal aid spending in India is perhaps the lowest in the World and had recommended 
a substantial increase in the Grant -in-aid given to NALSA. It is a harsh reality that 
the prevalent social and economic disp arity in the country is eroding the democratic 
objective of 'justice for all'. As majority of our population lack legal awareness and 
necessary means to approach the courts, they are compelled to suffer in silence. Legal 
aid is not a charity but an obligat ion of the State and right of the Citizen, it should be 
provided in the true spirit envisaged in the Constitution.             (Para 2.7) 
 

 27 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.19 (1) National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) provides court based free 
legal services to the eligible persons as well as organizes various legal services 
programmes through various modes like legal awareness camps, street plays, legal 
empowerment camps, legal  services clinics at various places, Lok Adalats, 
Mediation, capacity building programmes, legal awareness through virtual modes etc.  
Therefore, it is not possible to ascertain per capita spending for the free legal 
services.  
2. The details of activities  / programmes undertaken by Legal Services 
Authorities under the aegis of National Legal Services Authority can be broadly 
categorised as follows:  
I. Legal Aid and Advice 
II. Legal Services Outreach Activities 
III. Promotion and Implementation of ADR Mechanisms 
IV. Implementation of Victim Compensation Schemes 
 
I. Legal Aid and Advice: 
 
Free Legal aid and assistance in the form of representation, drafting of notices, 
replies and legal advice is being provided by Legal Services Institutions at all levels 
free of cost to the eligible persons.   
 
(i) Assigning Panel Lawyers to Legal Aid Seekers :- 
The legal assistance is also provided to legal aid seekers  by assigning panel 
lawyers to them for representation before the courts and for drafting petitions 
and notices. The following is the statistical overview reflecting such assistance 
for the year 2022-23: 
 
 
 
 
 
2022-23  Persons provided 
Panel Advocates 
Persons benefited 
through Advice/ 
Counseling 
Persons benefited 
through other 
services 
Total  

 28 
2,91,410 6,39,230 2,84,129 12,14,769 
 
(ii)  Legal Services at Pre-Arrest, Arrest and Remand Stage ;-  
NALSA prepared a protocol in 2019 for providing access to justice to suspects 
and arrestees. The protocol spells out a framework for providing legal assistance at 
pre-arrest, arrest and remand stages. The protocol is expected to fulfill the following 
objectives:- 
 
 
a. To provide legal assistance to needy suspects and arrestees during interrogation 
and other early stages of investigation. 
b. To decrease the vulnerabilities of suspects and arrestees. 
c. To assist in avoiding unnecessary arrests. 
To assist the arrestees in filing bail applications and furnishing bail bonds.   
 
FREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE AT PRE-ARREST, ARREST AND REMAND 
STAGE 
 
Year suspects 
provided 
legal 
assistance 
at pre-
arrest stage 
at police 
station 
such 
suspect
s not 
arrested 
by 
police 
arrestees 
provided legal 
assistance at the 
police station 
before producin
g them before 
courts 
legal 
assistance 
provided  a
t remand 
stage 
Number of 
bail 
application
s filed at 
remand 
stage 
Number 
of cases 
in 
which 
bail 
granted 
  
2022  14756 4601 14397 140288 44220 31390  
 
(iii)  Legal Aid Defense Counsel System (LADCS) : -  
NALSA has adopted Legal Aid Defense Counsel System consisting of lawyers 
exclusively dealing with legal aided cases, in 12 districts on a pilot basis for 2 
years.2097 cases have been handled by the LADC Offices from January, 2021 to 
December,2021. 
Some of the perceived advantages of Legal Aid Defense Counsel System vis -a 
vis assigned counsel system may be mentioned as follows: 
a. Availability and accessibility of Legal Aid Defense counsel; 
b. Effective and efficient representation by seasoned lawyers; 
c. Timely and effective Client Consultations; 

 29 
d. Effective monitoring of legal aided cases; 
e. Professional management of legal aid work in criminal matters; 
f. Enhanced responsiveness leading to updating of legal aid  seekers about the 
progress of their cases; 
After evaluating the pilot project of LADCS, it has been decided to implement 
the LADCS Project in each of the district throughout the country. In first phase 
NALSA has implemented LADCS in 365 districts of 22 St ates/UTs and in the 
remaining districts it will be implemented this year.  
 
(iv)  Front Office:- 
Front Offices/ Consultation Offices are manned by the panel lawyers and one 
or more PLVs available during office hours. In the case of court based legal servic es, 
such lawyers shall after consideration of the application, forward the same to the 
Committee set up under regulations 7 and for other types of legal services, the panel 
lawyers in the front offices may provide such legal services. The panel lawyers in the 
front office shall render service like drafting notice, sending replies to lawyers, noting 
and drafting applications, petitions etc.    
 
(v)  Tele-Law Reaching the Unreached:- 
Under the programme the services of panel lawyers of Legal Services 
Authorities will be availed to provide legal advice and consultation through the use of 
tele/ video conferencing facilities available at the Common Services Centers or 
directly through the citizens tele law mobile application and in person at front offices  
of District Legal Services Authorities (DLSAs) and State Legal Services Authorities 
(SLSAs). 
 
II Legal Services Outreach Activities:- 
The legal services outreach programmes are being conducted by the Legal 
Services Authorities for making people aware of their rights and entitlements, 
providing legal advice and assistance and enhancing their capacities so as to make 
them capable of realizing their rights.  The following tools are used for legal services 
outreach activities.- 
 
(i)      Legal Awareness Programmes:- 
 
Legal illiteracy is one of the barriers to access to justice to people who are not 
aware of their entitlements under the welfare laws and schemes of the Central and 
State Governments. To make people aware of their entitlements as well as their duties 

 30 
under law, legal awareness programmes are  held across the country by Legal Service 
Authorities on various laws and schemes relating to children, labourers, victims of 
disaster, SCs and STs, persons suffering from disability etc. Legal Services 
Authorities have also prepared booklets and pamphlets in understandable language on 
various laws which are distributed amongst the people.  
 
Legal Awareness Programmes organized and Persons participated   during the period 
2022-23  
Years No of Programmes Organised No. of Persons attended  
 2022-23  4,90,055 6,75,17,665 
  
(ii)       Legal Services / Empowerment Camps:- 
 
With a view to reaching  out to the vulnerable sections of the society, NALSA 
has devised, formulated and implemented through Legal Services Institutions a 
Module for Legal Services Camps which marks a departure from the traditional 
approach of spreading ge neral legal awareness and orchestrates a model of true 
empowerment with the foundation of need based analysis and focused action. The 
Legal Empowerment Camps not only target the  weak and the marginalized sections 
of the society but also those who are living in the far flung areas and remotest corners 
of the country. The objective with which these camps are organized is to bridge the 
gaps of information and access to citizen‟s rightful entitlements. Through these 
camps, efforts are  made to identify the poor,  weak and marginalized people and 
connect them to their entitlements under the law and the welfare schemes.   The 
framework for organising Legal Empowerment Camps was approved in December 
2017. Since then, these camps are being organised across the country.  
The camps are organized to achieve the three fold objective of spreading 
awareness about various welfare legislations and schemes, identify target 
beneficiaries and also to reach out to people individually and address their legal 
problems. The details of these camps during the year 2022 are as follows: 
 
   Year 2022  
No. of camps organised 38,540 
No. of beneficiaries in all camps 1,15,10,207 
  
 (iii)     Legal Services Clinics :- 
 

 31 
Legal Services Clinics are established across the country in many places  like 
colleges / universities, JJBs, observation homes, villages, community centers, jails, 
etc. with the aim of facilitating access to the legal services institutions for people who 
face geographical, social and other barriers. These clinics are manned by  Panel 
Lawyers and Para Legal Volunteers. The details of Legal Services Clinics during 
2022-23 are as follows: - 
 
(iv)  Legal Literacy Clubs: - 
 
Towards realizing the common goal of equal access to justice, Legal Services 
Authorities are striving to equip  children with legal literacy and rights awareness. To 
kindle this vision of an empowered future generation, Legal Literacy Clubs have been 
opened across the nation.   A total of around 18,745such clubs are functioning in 
schools across the country till date.  
 
(v)  Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Justice (DISHA):- 
 
Department of Justice and National Legal Services Authority have collaborated 
under the Scheme of DISHA. The Department of Justice has introduced a Scheme on 
Access to Justice titled “Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to 
Justice” for a period of five - years (2021 -2026). It aims to secure “Justice” to the 
people of India as enunciated in the Preamble and under Articles 39A, 14 and 21 of 
the Constitution of India. It widens the outreach of its Tele -Law, Pro Bono Legal 
Services (Nyaya Bandhu) and Legal Literacy and Legal Awareness programmes both 
qualitatively and quantitatively. It further aims to create awareness and dissemination 
through use of technology and developing simplified Information, Education and 
 Years 2022-23  
Categories Legal Services 
Clinics 
Number of persons provided 
legal assistance 
Law Colleges/ Universities 1,093 37,351 
Villages 4,134 2,82,140 
Community Centres 776 88,638 
Courts 904 1,16,563 
Jails 1,177 2,64,593 
JJB/CWC/ Observation Homes 439 29,280 
For the people of North-East 64 1,170 
Others  3,124 1,94,729 
Total 11,711 10,14,464 

 32 
Communication (IEC) material for the masses. There are three foll owing component 
of the said scheme:- 
 
a. Tele-Law Reaching the Unreached: 
 
Under the programme the services of panel lawyers of Legal Services 
Authorities will be availed to provide legal advice and consultation through the use of 
tele/ video conferencing facilities available at the Common Services Centres or 
directly through the citizens tele law mobile application and in person at front offices 
of District Legal Services Authorities (DLSAs) and State Legal Services Authorities 
(SLSAs). 
 
b. Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono Legal Services): 
 
Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono Legal Services) aims to create a pan India 
framework for dispensation of pro bono legal services. Under it Advocates interested 
to volunteer their time and services register on the Nyaya Bandhu Mobile App 
(available in Android/iOS/UMANG platform) and provide legal assistance to the 
persons eligible to avail free legal aid under Section 12 of Legal Services Authorities 
(LSA) Act, 1987 and registered on the Nyaya Bandhu App. 
 
c. Legal Literacy and Legal Awareness:- 
 
Department of Justice and NALSA  under DISHA Project,  the concerned 
DLSAs has identified 112 Aspirational Districts across  27 States to conduct Legal 
Literacy and Legal Awareness Programmes and for the purpose, DLSAs are required 
to identify the villages of respective district, any specific group and potential laws on 
which awareness has to be conducted in aspirational districts and also to involve 
District Collector/Magistrate for integrating the Integrated Legal Services Delivery 
Programmes with other r un government schemes at the district/ state level.   The 
respective SLSAs are also requested to prepare a compendium of State/District 
Scheme entitlements for the same. 
 
Promotion and Implementation of ADR Mechanisms 
 
(i) Lok Adalats:- 
 

 33 
Lok Adalats have added an important dimension to justice dispensation system 
of India. Based on a conciliatory principle, Lok Adalat helps avoid persistence of 
animosity between the litigant parties. It can infuse a spirit of amity and peace 
amongst the contenders. Details of Lok Adalats are as follows:  - 
a. National Lok Adalats:- 
Under the aegis and conceptualization of NALSA, National LokAdalatsare 
being held    across the country. Cases settled included matters relating to NI Act, 
Bank Recovery cases, Labour Dispute cases, Servic e matters, Criminal 
Compoundable matters, MACT, etc. Details of National LokAdalats held during 
2022 and 2023 (till February) are as follows: 
  
 Pre-litigation Cases 
disposed of 
Pending Cases 
disposed of 
Total Cases 
disposed of  
2022 3,10,15,215 1,09,10,795 4,19,26,010 
2023 (till Feb.23) 1,76,04,677 30,57,454 2,06,62,131 
 
b. State Lok Adalats: - 
 
These are held by State Legal Services Authorities at their own level keeping 
in view of local facts and circumstances. Details of State Lok Adalats held during 
2022-23 are as follows:- 
 
Year 
Pre-litigation 
Cases disposed of 
Pending 
Cases  disposed of 
Total Cases disposed 
of  
2022-23  94,939 7,56,370 8,51,309 
 
 
c. E-Lok Adalats (Virtual / Online Dispute Resolution):- 
 
Each year, thousands of people throng to the Lok Adalats to settle their cases 
that are either pending or at a pre -litigation stage. However, in the scenario of 
pandemic when protocols of public health and social distancing were being followed, 
it was difficult to conduct such  face-to-face settlement of disputes. As most offline 
services remained closed, online services became the need of the hour. In order to 
adapt to these challenges, the Legal Services Authorities innovatively leveraged 
technology and introduced E-Lok Adalats. 
The main objective of the E-Lok Adalats was to improve people‟s accessibility 
to this ADR forum during the pandemic and reduce the burden on courts by settling 
not only the pending cases but also cases which are at the pre -litigation stage. 

 34 
Another objective was to implement a cost effective and time saving mechanism of 
dispute resolution for the effected parties.  
E-Lok Adalat has been conceptualized in a way that it facilitates party 
interaction and the exchange of information, allowing an opportunity to effectively 
solve a dispute. Pre -Lok Adalat sessions are held to identify cases fit for settlement 
and to facilitate settlement between the parties.   
So far, E -Lok Adalats have been organized in 28 States and UTs including 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,  Delhi, Rajasthan, J&K, West Bengal, Manipur, 
Odisha, Uttarakhand,Haryana, Karnataka, Gujarat, Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Sikkim, Goa, Tripura, Mizoram, Meghalaya ad Kerala, In total 
4,32,87,428 cases have been taken up and 70,84,125 cases have been disposed of. 
Note: The figures of E -Lok Adalats are shown separately for information but 
included in National and State Lok Adalat.  
 
d. Permanent Lok Adalats (Public Utility Services) :- 
 
Permanent Lok Adalats for Public Utility Services have been established under 
Chapter VI-A of Legal Services Authorities Act to resolve disputes relating to public 
utility services at Pre -litigation level. 1,71,138 cases were settled in Permanent Lok 
Adalats during 2022-23.   
 
(ii) Mediation:  - 
Mediation is another method of alternative dispute resolution mechanism is 
being promoted by Legal Services  Authorities.92,446cases were settled through 
Mediation during 2022-23.  
 
 
 
Mandatory Mediation in commercial disputes: 
 
The concept of Pre -litigation Mediation was introduced in Commercial 
disputes by way of an amendment in 2018 in the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 
(hereinafter as „Act‟).   Section 12A of the Act makes it mandatory for a party to 
exhaust the remedy of mediation by initiating court proceedings under the 
Commercial Courts Act, with limited exception of cases where urgent relief is being 
sought.  

 35 
The Central Government vide its notification dated 03.07.2018 issued under  
Section 12A(ii) of the Act has notified the State and District Legal Services 
Authorities, constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, to conduct 
pre- institution mediation and settlement under Chapter III(A) of the Act. The 
procedure to be followed in such mediation proceedings is set out in the Commercial 
Courts (Pre-Institution Mediation and Settlement) Rules, 2018 (“Rules”). Details of 
applications processed under mandatory Mediation in commercial disputes are as 
follows: - 
 
 
I. Implementation of Victim Compensation Schemes  ;- 
Legal Services Authorities award compensation to the victims under u/s 357 A 
Cr. P. C. as per the Victim Compensation schemes prepared by State Governments. 
These schemes implement the concept of payment of compensation by the State to 
the victims of crime . During 2022 -23, compensation of Rs. 3,47,80,37,352/ - was 
awarded under Victim Compensation Scheme. 
 Recently, NALSA under the leadership of Hon'ble Executive Chairman, 
NALSA and Chief Justice of India (Designate) had launched a Nationwide Legal 
awareness and outreach programme campaign namely - (i) “ Empowerment of 
Citizens through Legal Awareness and Outreach ” & (ii) 
“Haq_humara_bhi_to_hai@75”, which was conducted from 31 st October, 2022 to 
13th November 2022.  
(i) “ Empowerment of Citizens through Legal Awareness and Outreach ” – A Pan 
India Campaign for bridging the gap between the institutions and the underprivileged 
by spreading legal awareness and ensuring delivery of legal entitlements to eligible 
beneficiaries. 
During the 2 -week period, the Legal Ser vices Authorities has organised 
awareness & outreach activities reaching each and every person residing in the rural, 
tribal and far -flung areas of the country. This campaign will be a cooperative effort 
entailing the various stakeholders participating in the initiatives to raise awareness of 
the rights, entitlements, and remedies of individuals. Its objective is to strengthen the 
No. of applications 
received for 
mediation 
No. of application where 
mediation remains non-
starter 
No. of application 
where parties reached a 
settlement 
46,412 41,898 1,449 

 36 
Legal Services Network as a whole and demonstrate how the legal system operates . 
The Campaign focused on:  
a) Spreading Awareness about Welfare Laws & Schemes enacted for 
 empowerment of people. 
b) The Constitution of India- Fundamental Rights and Fundamental Duties. 
c )   Free Legal Aid & Services provided by the Legal Services Institutions. 
d)  Digital initiatives for approaching institution - The VidhiChatbot, 
 WhatsApp chatbot, Legal Aid Case Management System, Legal 
 Services Management System, Online Mediation Portal among others. 
e )   Rights and remedies available under various laws. 
(ii) “Haq_humara_bhi_to_hai@75” – A Campaign for providing basic legal 
assistance to persons confined in prisons and child care institutions to commemorate 
the 75thyear of Independence. 
This campaign was organised simultaneously with the „Empowerment of 
Citizens through Legal Awareness and Outreach ‟ during the said period to specially 
focus on the persons confined in prisons and children in child care institutions. The 
campaign focused on the following objectives:- 
a. That person is represented by a lawyer at the t rial or for filing of appeals 
for bail or against conviction. 
b. Providing free legal counselling or services or assistance as required in a 
person‟s case including drafting and filing of appropriate applications, etc. 
c. That the concerned person has been provided with updated information 
regarding status of their cases and facilitate communication with lawyers 
(private and legal aid lawyers). 
i. That In case of convict, whether entitled to pre -mature release, if yes 
processing of application etc. 
ii. That In case  of UTP, eligible for release under UTRC or otherwise on 
bail etc. 
d. If  the person is in need of any urgent medical assistance. 
e. That the child lodged in child care institution is represented by a lawyer. 
f. That the child is aware of the status of his/her case. 
g. That the child is in contact with his/her guardians. 
 

 37 
4. Apart from the above, NALSA has been taking steps to provide speedy and 
cost effective justice through free legal aid services. The following steps have been 
taken to ensure that the eligible persons get free legal services at the earliest:- 
 
I. NALSA has created a web portal to file Applications through online for getting 
legal assistance.  The applicant may file the applications either directly to State Legal 
Services Authority/District Legal Ser vices Authority/High Court Legal Services 
Committee/Supreme Court Legal Services Committee from where the applicant 
requires legal assistance.  The applicant has the option to file application directly to 
NALSA and in that case the said application is tran sferred to the concerned Legal 
Services Institutions for appropriate action i.e. to provide legal assistance.  
Thereafter, the concerned Legal Services Institution has to update the action taken 
report. The online web portal for filing legal aid applicatio ns has also been made 
more inclusive and a legal aid application can now be filed in Ten (10) languages i.e. 
English, Hindi, Marathi, Telugu, Tamil, Malayalam, Gujarati, Bengali, Odia and 
Kannada. 
 
  II.  NALSA has launched Legal Services Mobile App for Android and IOS version 
on 8th         August, 2021 and on 09 th November, 2021 respectively. It will facilitate 
following functions: 
 
a)   Any citizen may apply for seeking legal assistance, legal advice and for 
 redressal of other grievances through Mobile App.  
 b)    Any citizen may track his application submitted for legal aid & advice 
 and other grievances.                
c )   Reminder can be sent and clarifications can be sought through Mobile 
 App. 
 d ) Any victim of crime or applicant can apply for victim compensation 
 through the Mobile  App.  
 e )  Application for pre -institution mediation in commercial matters or 
 application for mediation may be filed through this Mobile App. 
 
Besides above, Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs), Helpline assistance and 
assistance through e-mail are also provided in the Mobile App.   
 
5. Presently, the number of Legal  Services Institutions at  Taluk level to Supreme 
Court level are as under:- 
 

 38 
National 
Legal 
Services 
Authority 
State 
Legal 
Services 
Authorities 
District 
Legal 
Services 
Authorities 
Taluk 
Legal 
Services 
Committees 
Supreme 
Court Legal 
Services 
Committee 
High Court 
Legal 
Services 
Committees 
1 37 703 2341 1 39 
 
6. It is further submitted that as per recommendation vide Para 2.18 of 116th 
Report of the Committee, the Grants -in-aid to NALSA were substantially increased 
to Rs.190 crore in the RE 2022 -23 from Rs.170.00 Crore in BE 2022 -23. Further, 
Rs.200.00 Crore has been allocated to NALSA in BE 2023-24. 
 
Activities wise break up of expenditure incurred by SLSAs during the year 2022 -23 
is given in Annexure-„B‟ below;- 
           
 
Annexure-B 
Activity-wise Expenditure incurred by SLSAs during 2022-23. Amount in Rs 
Legal Aid and Advice: 51,61,16,096 
Fees for panel lawyers for legal aid cases assigned to them 19,36,70,719 
Honorarium to Remand and duty lawyers but other than retainer 
lawyers. 7,38,35,034 
Honorarium to lawyers for jail visits / police station and others, if 
any. 4,52,19,937 
Entire expenses on Legal Aid Defence Counsel System. 18,48,73,425 
Other incidental expenses in providing Legal aid, assistance and 
advice 67,49,518 
Miscellaneous expenses 69,54,564 
Expenses related to Court based legal representations 48,12,899 
Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR): 32,01,20,396 
Lok Adalats 
 Honorarium for Lok Adalat Benches / Staff as per NALSA 
Regulation 25,31,93,704 
Other Administrative expenses in organisation of Lok Adalats 
including publicity for NLA. 6,69,26,692 
Mediation: 1,93,76,271 
Expenses for mediation and honorarium to mediators. 1,54,40,234 

 39 
Expenses for mediators training programmes. 27,19,094 
Other miscellaneous expenses incidental to Mediation activities. 12,16,943 
Awareness & Outreach Activities: 20,80,44,756 
(i)   Legal Awareness Programmes 51,041 
Payments to lawyers/resource persons of such programmes. 3,28,71,215 
Payments to para legal volunteers 8,66,09,756 
Organizational expenses 3,84,81,921 
Awareness through media, radio, television, community media, 
social media etc. 65,73,347 
Advertisement & publicity expenses on any media 95,01,657 
(ii)  Outreach Activities 34,321 
Organisational expenses of Legal services Camps including pre-
camp activities 1,09,92,771 
I.E.C. materials including pamphlets, booklets, videos, short-films 
etc. 1,23,19,622 
Utilization and publicity through mobile vans. 29,79,125 
 
Incidental expenditure in organisation of awareness & 
outreach activities etc. 76,29,981 
Others 43,06,06,421 
(i)  Front Offices at SLSAs, DLSAs and HCLSCs 
 Fee for Retainer Lawyers, whether engaged on Monthly & daily 
basis. 8,63,15,756 
Para-Legal Volunteers, if deputed in front offices of DLSAs 7,18,05,470 
Payment related to helpline, internet charges and official mobile 
numbers used to provide legal services. 49,18,823 
(ii)  Capacity Building Programmes including organisation 
expenses & honorarium to resource persons 16,84,775 
(iii) Legal Services Clinics (LACs) at Mandal, Taluk, Village 
Panchayat etc. 
 Payment to para- legal volunteers. 11,22,80,914 
Honorarium of Lawyers, if visiting such clinics. 2,19,27,045 
(iv) Jail Legal Aid clinics, Taluka Legal services Committees, 
LACs in JJBs etc. 
 Honorarium to para-legal volunteers. 3,53,03,173 
Administrative expenses of clinics and TLSCs. 93,75,895 

 40 
(v) Entire Expenses in organising seminars / meets / 
consultations, etc. 1,36,21,033 
(vi) Audit and other fees to Auditors. 59,64,778 
(vii) All other miscellaneous expenses incidental and related to 
legal aid to poor programme, if not provided otherwise. 6,74,08,760 
TOTAL 1,49,42,63,941 
 
Further, NALSA vide Letter No. G/38/2021-NALSA(Part File) dated22.05.2023 has Revised 
the percentage 
(%) limit of Head wise expenditure of SALSAs/DLSAs/HCLSC i.e. Plan of Action for 
using GOI Grants by NALSA for the F.Y.2023-24 which is given in Annexure-„C‟ below:-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
       
               Annexure-C                                                                                                                                                                             
Heads for Budget allocation and expenditure from NALSA Grant from the FY 
2023-24 onward 
S.No. Activities Expenditure 
ceiling in 
percentage 
(%) w.r.t. 
Budget 
(1) Legal Aid and Advice: 
(a) Fees for panel lawyers for legal aid cases assigned to them. 
 
 
50% (b) Honorarium to Remand and duty lawyers but other than retainer 
lawyers. 
(c) Honorarium to lawyers for jail visits / police station and others, if 
any. 
(d) Entire expenses on Legal Aid Defence Counsel System. 
(e) Other incidental expenses in providing Legal aid, assistance and 
advice 
(f) Miscellaneous expenses 
(g) Expenses related to Court based legal representations 
(2) Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR): 
Lok Adalats 
(a)Honorarium for Lok Adalat Benches / Staff as per NALSA 
Regulation. 
 
 
 
 

 41 
(b) Other Administrative expenses in organisation of Lok Adalats 
including publicity for NLA. 
25% 
 
 
 
Mediation: 
(a)Expenses for mediation and honorarium to mediators.  
(b)Expenses for mediators training programmes.  
(c) Other miscellaneous expenses incidental to Mediation activities.  
(3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Awareness & Outreach Activities:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25% 
Legal Awareness Programmes 
(a) Payments to lawyers/resource persons of such programmes. 
(b)  Payments to para legal volunteers 
(c)  Organizational expenses 
(d)  Awareness through media, radio, television, community media, 
social media etc.   
(e) Advertisement & publicity expenses on any media 
Outreach Activities 
(a) Organisational expenses of Legal services Camps including pre -
camp activities 
(b) I.E.C. materials including pamphlets, booklets, videos, short -films 
etc. 
(c) Utilization and publicity through mobile vans. 
(d) Incidental expenditure in organisation of awareness & outreach 
activities etc. 
(C) Others 
(i)  Front Offices at SLSAs, DLSAs and HCLSCs 
(a)        Fee for Retainer Lawyers, whether engaged on Monthly & 
daily basis. 
(b)        Para-Legal Volunteers, if deputed in front offices of DLSAs 
(a) Payment related to helpline, internet chargesand official mobile 
numbers used to provide legal services. 
(ii)  Capacity Building Programmes including organisation 
expenses &   honorarium to resource persons  
(iii) Legal Services Clinics (LACs) at Mandal, Taluk, Village 
Panchayat etc. 
(a)Payment to para- legal volunteers. 
(b)Honorarium of Lawyers, if visiting such clinics. 
(iv) Jail Legal Aid clinics, Taluka Legal services Committees, 
LACs in JJBs etc. 

 42 
(a) Honorarium to para-legal volunteers.  
 (b)Administrative expenses of clinics and TLSCs.  
(v) Entire Expenses in organising seminars / meets / consultations, 
etc. 
(vi) Audit and other fees to Auditors. 
(vii) All other miscellaneous expenses incidental and related to 
legal aid to poor programme, if not provided otherwise. 
 
  

 43 
Government of India 
Department of Justice 
Ministry of Law &Justice 
National Legal Services Authority 
                        
  26,  Man Singh Road, Jaisalmer House, 
                                                                                                       New Delhi-110011    
F. No.G/38/2021-NALSA(Part File)                                                                    
Dated:22nd May,2023 
 
To. 
         The Member Secretaries, 
         All the State Legal Services Authorities, 
 
Sub :  Revision of percentage(%) limit of Head wi se expenditure of 
SALSAs/DLSAs/HCLSC from the Financial Year 2023 -24 (w.e.f. 1 st 
April,2023) onwards- Amendment in the Guidelines issued on 31st March,2022 
by NALSA-reg. 
 
Sir / Madam, 
 
  Kindly refer to this Authority‟s Letter dated 31 st March,2022 wherein the Head 
wise expenditure limit for SALSAs/DLSAs/HCLSC from the Financial Year 2022-34 
(w.e.f. 1st April,2022) onwards was fixed as per following criteria :- 
 
i. Legal Aid and Advice: (30%), 
ii. Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR): (20%), 
iii. Mediation: (5%), 
iv. Awareness and Outreach Programmes ; (20%), 
v. Other: (25%),  
 
2. Considering the expenditure to be incurred on LADCS and the request received 
from SLSAs time to time to re -formulate the Head wise expenditure limit,the 
Competent Authority has been pleased to grant permission to revise Head wise 
expenditure limit from the Financial year 2023 -24 onwards (Annexure -C) as 
under: - 
 
i.    Legal Aid and Advice: (50%), 

 44 
ii.   Alternate Dispute Resolution and Mediation: (ADR): (25%), 
iii.    Awareness and Outreach Programmes and  Other ; (50%), 
 
3. You are requested to aforesaid revised percentage (%) limit to all such Legal 
Services institutions to whom NALSA funds are further distributed under your 
jurisdiction for Legal Aid and Programmes for compliance. 
            
 With regards. 
 
 Encl:As above .                                                                                                                                                                 
Yours Sincerely, 
                                                                                                                                          
-Sd- 
                                                                                                                           (Yajuvender Singh)  
                        Director, NALSA 
 
              
 
  

 45 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.20  Thus there is an urgent need to give a major impetus to strengthen the 
legal aid movement in India by empowering the institutions like NALSA. 
Accordingly, the Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation that Grant -in-aid 
to NALSA should be substantial ly increased and for BE 2023 -24 they should be 
provided with the amount projected by them to the MoF i.e. Rs. 400 crores, in order 
to carry out activities planned by them for the year 2023 -24. Without adequate 
budgetary provisions the ongoing and 35 newly implemented schemes/activities of 
NALSA would fail to take off. The Department of Justice and NALSA should 
approach the MoF again and pursue the matter vigorously.          (Para 2.8) 
   
Action Taken 
 
2.21(1) It is submitted that Legal Aid Defence Counsel system (LADCS)was 
approved in the year 2019 to be introduced on pilot basis for a period of two years in 
17 districts and the same was introduced in 12 districts. Thereafter it was launched in 
365 districts of 22 States/UTs, and in the second phase, the SLSAs were asked to 
implement the LADCS in the remaining districts by 31stMarch, 2023. The Legal Aid 
Defense Counsel office has started functioning in 396 Districts as on 30thApril, 2023 
and the remaining districts are under process to make the same functional. 
 
2.   Evaluation is being done for "LADCS" Scheme in Pilot 12 Districts. 
However, it is stated that the LADCS functional in these districts are with minimum 
staff strength. In the 2nd phase, 365 LADCS in 22 States were inaugurated but they 
were not functional at that time. Till April, 2023, 396 LADCS in the districts have 
been made functional with minimum staff strength. The LADCS are still in the 
process of stabilization. Although, the reports are being collected for the purpose of 
performance evaluation which can be done on half yearly basis. 
 
3.  NALSA demanded funds to the tune of Rs.400.00 crores for the 
Financial Year 2023-24 for all its activities, including LADCS against which 
Rs.200.00 crore has been allocated to NALSA in the BE 2023-24. The matter 
regarding additional budget requirement for LADCS was also taken up in the Central 
Authority meeting of National Legal Services Authority held on 16thApril, 2023 
which was also attended by Secretary, Department of Expenditure who assured that 
Department of Expenditure will try for the release of some additional funds at 
Revised Estimate stage. It was further resolved in the meeting that steps will be taken 

 46 
to collect a comparative data (post and pre implementation of LADCS) from four 
districts across the country with the assistance of NLU, Delhi or an expert agency and 
thereafter NALSA will  submit a detailed proposal giving details of one - time non-
recurring fund requirement along with y-o-y recurring fund requirement with 
justification for additional funds to cater to the targeted number of LADCS aimed by 
NALSA. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.22  The Committee further recommends the NALSA to take proactive steps 
to fill up the vacant posts, in accordance with their respective RRs, on regular basis 
and not to allow piling up of unfilled vacancies.           (Para 2.12) 
 
Action Taken 
2.23 It is submitted that NALSA is making efforts to fill the vacancies. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.24  NATIONAL JUDICIAL ACADEMY, BHOPAL:    
2.24 (a) The mandate of the National Judicial Academy is strengthening the 
administration of Justice through Judicial Education, Research and Policy 
Development. Considering its mandate and infrastructure at its disposal, the 
Committee is of the view that the poten tial of the institution has remained 
underutilized over the years. There is a need to significantly enhance its performance 
to make it an institution of eminence.               (Para 3.6) 
         
Action Taken 
 
2.25  The National Judicial Academy conducts programmes for the Justices 
from High Courts and Judicial Officers of the country to strengthen the judicial 
system in India. In addition to the above:- 
(i) The National Judicial Academy has executed MOUs with other nations 
(Bangladesh, Myanmar, Bhutan &Maldives) on behalf of the Government of India, 
Ministry of External Affairs for providing Judicial Education and Capacity Building 
of Judges/Judicial Officers of the concerned countries. The Academy has also hosted 

 47 
programmes for the Fede ral Judicial centre, Washington, USA in collaboration with 
CEELI, Prague at Bhopal. 
 
(ii) The Academy has conducted and continues to hold special events for Officers 
of SEBI, Presiding officers of Debt Recovery Tribunals, National Institute of Mental 
Health and  Neurosciences (NIMHANS) , Members of Central Administrative 
Tribunals and also for Member of other Quasi -Judicial Authorities as well as IAS, 
IPS probationers during their training. 
 
(iii) The following statistics indicate the comparative growth progress in the  
number of trainings and participants of regular programmes for Judges during the 
academic years from 2019-20 to 2022-23 ( till 31.03.2023):- 
 
S. No. Academic Year Total number of 
programmes 
Total number of 
participants 
1 2019-20   53 1891 
2 2020-21(COVID-19 
Period) 
28 956 
3 2021-22(Online 
Mode) 
55 2094 
4 2022-23(till 
31.03.2023) 
60 2512 
 
 
The available infrastructure of the Academy is being thus utilized at optimum  
level for regular training of Judges, Judicial Officers and special programmes as 
above. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.26 SUPREME COURT OF INDIA: 
 
2.26 (a) The SCI has been allocated Rs. 437.15 crores for BE 2023 -24. The 
Registry has informed that the variation in BE 2023 -24 over RE 2022-23 (7.81%) is 
mainly due to allocation of Rs. 35 Cr in BE 2023 -24 under the head IT (now Digital 
Equipment and Information, Computer, ICT equipment) as against Rs. 20 Cr in RE 
2022-23. From the above table it may be seen that the expenditure trend of the SCI 
has remained quite efficient as they have been able to timely utilize the funds 

 48 
allocated to them over the years. The Co mmittee however expects the Government 
to allot the SCI the funds requirement projected by them, so that the activities 
initiated by them are completed on time. (Para 4.4)                                    
 
Action Taken 
2.27  The Assistant Registrar-cum-DDO, Supreme Court of India vide Letter 
No.F9/RS/Budget /2022/SCI (C) dated 10.04.2023 has informed that in 128 th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2023-24), the figures of Budgetary Allocations pertaining to 
the Supreme Court of India, Demand No .67 (Chapter IV, Page No.40) have been 
checked and verified which are found to be correct. 
 
 
*** 
  

 49 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.0  Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for setting up of Fast Track Special 
Courts (FTSC) for trail of cases related to rape and POCSO Act:-  
 
3.1  (a) As per the data provided by the Department, the Committee observes 
that the pace of registration of rape and POCSO Act cases is much more than their 
disposal rate. Resultantly, as on 31.12.2022, more than 3.5 lakh cases of rape and 
POCSO Act are still pending across the country in various courts. Further, being a  
CSS scheme, State's contribution is also required in prescribed share; further, the 
consent of State Governments is also required for setting up of FTSCs in the States. 
Despite repeated requests, interventions at various levels, the Department is still 
awaiting consent from the State Government of West Bengal, which has been 
allocated 123 FTSCs. Also, some other States have not operationalized all the FTSCs 
allocated to them. Besides this, one of the major reasons being non -availability of 
Judicial Officers to man these FTSCs.            (Para 1.43) 
 
3.1 (b)    In view of the above factors which are plaguing the Scheme, the 
Committee, recommends that in addition to establishment of more FTSCs, the 
Department should also study and suggest how systemic improv ement may be 
brought about to overhaul the entire system of FTSCs. The Committee further 
recommends the Department to explore the best practices in other countries where 
FTCs are functional and have been able to dispose of cases in a time bound manner 
and to bring about the required changes in our system to make it more efficient.  
                      (Para 1.44) 
 
Action Taken 

 50 
3.2 (a) Since inception of the scheme, this Department is making all efforts to 
achieve the target to establish 1023 FTSCs. To ach ieve the goal set by the 
Government, various efforts such as Video Conferences, DO letters at the highest 
level of HMLJ to Chief Ministers/ Chief justices and taking up the issue with 
CMs/CJs in conferences held at Delhi and Law Minister‟s Conference at Ke vadia 
have been made. As a result of constant pursuance, West Bengal government has 
given consent for setting up of 07 (seven) exclusively POCSO Fast Track Special 
Courts in the state.  
  
(b) Department of Justice is continuously reviewing the scheme. In addition to in-
house research and data analysis, the Third Party evaluation of the Scheme is also 
being done periodically by an Independent Agency. The latest evaluation of the 
Scheme was done by IIPA in 2023. The report containing 
suggestions/recommendations made by the Evaluating Agency have been presented 
before Expenditure Finance Committee in the last meeting held on 15.06.2023. The 
suggestions/recommendations made by the Evaluating Agency on the entire system 
of FTSCs along with DoJ‟s comments will be  submitted before the Cabinet for 
approval. 
(c) In order to assess the functioning of these FTSCs, the Department of Justice has 
created a dashboard to record data from the FTCSs functioning in different 
States/UTs. The Data is collated at the High Court l evel and is recorded for 
assessment of the functioning of the FTSCs.  
Further observation of the Committee: 
3.3 The Committee observes that despite Department‟s best efforts, consent from 
various State Governments for setting up FTSCs in their respective States are 
pending. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation  made to 
explore the best practices followed in other countries where FTCs are functional 
so that all cases are disposed off in a time bound manner.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
 
VACANCY OF JUDGES IN HIGHER JUDICIARY : - 
 

 51 
3.4 From the above table it can be seen that as on 31.12.2022, vacancies in the 
High Courts stands at 30% of the total strength. Six High Courts have vacancies of 
40% and above and another six have vacancies in the range of 30 % to 40%. Though 
the situation has improved over the last year, the vacancies at the High Court level 
are quite significant.              (Para 1.52) 
 
Action Taken 
3.5 Filling up of vacancies in the High Courts is a continuous, integrated and 
collaborative process requiring consultation and approval from various constitutional 
authorities. Government is committed to filling up of vacancy expeditiously in time -
bound manner. With the continued efforts of the Government and the Judiciary, 165 
fresh appointment of Judges in various High Courts has been made in year 2022, 
which is a record for most number of appointments in a year. In the year 2023, as on 
20.04.2023, 43 fresh appointments of judges has been made in various High Courts.  
 
 As on 20.04.2023, against a sanctioned strength of 1114 judges in the High 
Courts, 782 judges are working in various High Courts, leaving 332 vacancies. At 
present, 117 proposals for appointme nt of judges in various High Courts are under 
various stages of consideration, whereas recommendation against 215 vacancies is 
yet to be received by the respective High Court Collegiums. However, for the first 
unfilled vacancy where name is yet to be recom mended by the High Court, dates 
back to 01/07/2014 (date of occurrence of vacancy) in Jharkhand High Court. 
 
 
 
 
 It may be mentioned here that appointments are made only after approvals 
from various Constitutional Authorities have been obtained. As per the  existing 
Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of judges of High Courts, initiation of 
proposal for appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court vests with the Chief 
Justice of India, while initiation of proposal for appointment of Judges in the High 
Courts vests with the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court. The Chief Justice 
of the High Court is required to initiate the proposal for filling up of vacancies of a 
Judge in a High Court six months prior to the occurrence of vacancies. However, 
this timeline is hardly adhered to by the High Courts. The primary onus of filling up 
vacancies in the High Court lies with the High Court Collegium. The Government 

 52 
appoints Judges of High Court who are recommended by the Supreme Court 
Collegium (SCC).   
 
Further observation of the Committee: 
3.6 The Committee observes that as per Memorandum of Procedure 
prevailing at present, the Chief Justice of the High Court is required to initiate 
the proposal for filling up of vacancies of a Judge in a High Court six months 
prior to the occurrence of vacancies.  However, this timeline is not at all adhered 
to by the High Courts , which is the  primary reason for unfilled vacancies . The 
Committee, therefore, recommends  that to fill up the vacancies in time, the 
timeline which is  prescribed may strictly  be adhered to..  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.7 In Gujarat and Rajasthan the High Court is functioning with its half strength. In 
smaller states like Manipur, Tripura etc. where the bench strength is small, high 
levels of vacancies leads divisional benches not being constituted for want of judges 
and if  there is some retirement or elevation or transfers the working of such High 
Courts are brought to a standstill. In the High Court of Tripura, where the Committee 
visited in the month of January, 2023, out of the sanctioned strength of 5, only 2 
Judges wer e in -position, including the acting Chief Justice, making it difficult for 
them to constitute a divisional bench. Thus, the peculiarities  of the smaller High 
Courts should be kept in mind while making appointment.      (Para 1.53) 
 
 
Action Taken 
3.8  So far in the year 2023, 5 judges have been appointed in the Gujarat 
High Court and 9 judges in the Rajasthan High Court. Further, recommendation for 
appointment of 1 Judicial Officer, in Gujarat High Court has been made by the 
Gujarat High Court Collegium vi de minutes dated 7 th February, 2023. The same is 
under various stages of processing. Whereas the Rajasthan High Court is 
concerned, the proposal for appointment of 1 Advocate as judge of Rajasthan High, 
as recommended by the Supreme Court Collegium is unde r consideration. Other 
than the two proposals in Gujarat and Rajasthan High Court stated above, the 
Government is yet to receive recommendations from the respective High Courts 
for remaining vacancies. 

 53 
As on 20.04.2023, in Gujarat High Court, against a san ctioned strength of 52 
judges, 31 judges are working. In the Rajasthan High Court, against a sanctioned 
strength of 50 judges, 33 judges are working. There are 21 vacancies in the Gujarat 
High Court (40%) and 17 vacancies in the Rajasthan High Court (34%).  
It may be appreciated that as per the existing Memoranda of Procedure for 
appointment of judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, initiation of proposal 
for appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court vests with the Chief Justice of 
India, while initiatio n of proposal for appointment of Judges in the High Courts 
vests with the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court. The Chief Justice of the 
High Court is required to initiate the proposal for filling up of vacancies of a Judge 
in a High Court six months prior to the occurrence of vacancies. However, this 
timeline is hardly adhered to by the High Courts. The primary onus of filling up 
vacancies in the High Court lies with the High Court Collegium. The Government 
makes appointments only after approvals from  various Constitutional Authorities 
have been obtained. 
 
Further observation of the Committee 
3.9 The Committee notes that the  situation of the smaller High Courts  like 
Manipur, Tripura etc,  is very different from the rest of the High Courts of the 
Country.  In these High Courts, where the bench strength is very small, 
transfers and retirements lead to acute shortage of judges and hence the entire 
judicial mechanism and justice administration  comes to a standstill. This leads 
to piling up of pending cases in the se Courts for unknown duration of time and 
litigants of these small states waiting for justice are left totally helpless in such a 
scenario. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department may impress 
upon the Chief Justice  of the concerned High Court/  who oversee the se Courts 
to initiate the process of appointment of judges  six months prior to  occurrence 
of vacancies, so that the Government is able to make the appointments  on time 
and the courts can run smoothly. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.10 Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Department of Justice to fix all 
the bottlenecks responsible for delays in the appointment of Judges at the High Court. 

 54 
Only recently appointments in the Supreme Court were done on a fast pace and it is 
functioning with full strength now. The appointments to High Courts also deserve 
same treatment and the vacancies must be filled with same zeal.       (Para 1.54) 
 
Action Taken 
3.11 Filling up of vacancies in the High Courts is a continuous, integrated and 
collaborative process requiring consultation and approval from various constitutional 
authorities. Government is committed to filling up of vacancy expeditiously in time -
bound manner. With the continued efforts of the Government and the Judiciary, 165 
fresh appointment of Judges in various High Courts has been made in year 2022, 
which is a record for most number of appointments in a year. In the year 2023, as on 
20.04.2023, 43 fresh appointments of judges has been made in various High Courts.  
 
As on 20.04.2023, against a sanctioned strength of 1114 judges in the High Courts, 
782 judges are working in various High Courts, leaving 332 vacancies.  
 
Further, appointments are made only after approvals from various Constitutional 
Authorities have been obtained. As per the existing Memoranda of Procedure for 
appointment of judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, initiation of proposal for 
appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court vests with the Chief Justice of India, 
while initiation of proposal for appointment of Judges in the High Courts vests with 
the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court. The Chief Justice of the High Court 
is required to initi ate the proposal for filling up of vacancies of a Judge in a High 
Court six months prior to the occurrence of vacancies. However, this timeline is 
hardly adhered to by the High Courts. The primary onus of filling up vacancies in 
the High Court lies with th e High Court Collegium. The Government appoints 
Judges of High Court who are recommended by the Supreme Court Collegium 
(SCC).   
   
 Government is committed to filling up of vacancies expeditiously in time -bound 
manner. 
 
Further observation of the Committee 
3.12 The Committee applauds the fact that appointments to the Supreme Court 
are being done on a faster pace and it is functioning with full strength now. Also, 
with the continued efforts of the Government and the Judiciary, 165 fresh 

 55 
appointment of Judges in various High Courts ha ve been made in year 2022, 
which is a record for most number of appointments in a year . However, as 
evident from the same reply above, a s on 20.04.2023, against a sanctioned 
strength of 1114 judges in the High Courts, 782  judges are working in various 
High Courts, still leaving  a large gap of  332 vacancies. The Committee desires, 
efforts may be made to fill up the rest of the vacancies also at the earliest, like it 
is being done in the case of Supreme Court. 
 
 
*** 
  

 56 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN RECEIVED:  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
4.1 MANPOWER REQUIREMENT AT NALSA:- 
4.1 (a) The Committee notes that NALSA's activities have increased manifold 
since its inception and it is actively engaged in taking the legal aid movement in India 
to every nook and corner. However, its existing sanctioned staff strength of 34 only is 
too low considering its mandate and reach. Accordingly, the Committee recommends 
the Government to sanction additional 40 posts as requested by them.      (Para 2.11) 
 
Action Taken 
4.2 It is submitted that NALSA is working on the proposals and would be 
submitting the same to Department of Justice in due course. The Department of 
Justice will accordingly act on it as per due process. 
 
Further observation of the Committee: 
4.3 As NALSA is still working on the proposals of the Committee and would 
be submitting the same to Department of Justice in due course, Committee 
recommends that once Department of Justice acts on the proposals, the 
Committee may be apprised of the same.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
4.4 The Committee notes that the Academy trains only Judges and officers of the 
Supreme Court. It is felt that the resources of the Academy may also be used for the 
betterment of other stakeholders like Lawyers. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the Academy to consider training the La wyers also, for which they may 
charge appropriate fee.                (Para 3.7) 

 57 
 
Action Taken 
4.5 The infrastructure available with the Academy is being optimally utilized by the 
Academy to conduct training programmes for Hon'ble Chief Justices, Justices of the 
High Courts, Judicial Officers of the entire country, foreign judges in line of MOUs 
and also for officers, Chairpersons and members of the quasi-judicial authorities: 
 
 It is pertinent to mention here that the Governing Council of the Academy in 
its meeting held on 05.04.2019 resolved that the State Judicial Academies shall 
engage in the Capacity Building of Law Graduates prior to their enrollment as 
Advocate. Accordingly, all the State Judicial Academies were informed with regard 
to the resolution passed by the Governing Council. 
   
However, the suggestions of the Committee will be placed in the ensuing meeting of 
the Governing Council. 
 
 Further observation of the Committee 
4.6 As the suggestions of the Committee have not yet been placed before the 
Governing Council of the Academy, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendations and requests the Department to send their reply to this 
Committee on the action taken by them once the proposal is placed before the 
Council and a decision is taken on it. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION                                     
 
4.7 The Committee also notes that the academic positions in the Academy are 
very few and as on date only 17 academic positions are filled. Accordingly, there is a 
need to fillup the vacant posts on priority and asses the need for enhancement of 
academic position. It is further suggested that the NJA should consider inviting noted 
academicians from abroad as resource persons to further enrich the academic content 
offered by them.               (Para 3.8) 
 

 58 
Action Taken 
4.8   The process of filling -up the academic positions of Research Fellow has been 
initiated. For some of the posts (Additional Director [Training &  Research], 
Professor and Assistant Professor) the process will be initiated shortly. 
   
 The Academy is inviting eminent academicians, sitting & retired Judges from 
Supreme Court and Chief Justice, Justices from the High Courts as resource persons. 
The suggestion of the committee to invite noted academician from abroad as resource 
persons will be placed in the ensuing meeting of the Governing Council. 
 
Further observation of the Committee: 
4.9 As the suggestion of the Committee to consider inviting noted 
academicians from abroad as resource persons to further enrich the academic 
content offered by them has not yet been placed before the Governing Council of 
the Academy, the Committee reiterates its recommendations and requests the 
Department to inform this Committee on the action taken by them once the 
proposal is placed before the Council and a decision is taken on it. 
 
      ******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 60 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
V 
FIFTH MEETING  
 The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM on Thursday, 07.12.2023, in 
Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Malook Nagar 
(viii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(ix) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
(xv) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1.      Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
3. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
2.           At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the meeting 
of the Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. 
consideration and adoption of the following draft reports of the Committee: 
(i) *     *      * 

 61 
(ii) *     *      * 
(iii) *     *      * 
(iv) 137th Report on Action Taken on 128 th Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) pertaining to Department of Justice ; 
(v) *     *      * 
(vi) *     *      * 
(vii) *     *      * 
 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted all the draft Reports and decided to 
present those Reports to  both Houses of  Parliament on 11th December, 202 3.  The 
Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri P . Wilson  and Shri 
Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar  to present the R eports in Rajya Sabha and Shri 
Malook Nagar  and in his absence  Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  for 
laying the reports in Lok Sabha.  
4.   *     *      * 
5.      The meeting adjourned at 4.30 PM. 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
7th December, 2023                                                                               DIRECTOR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
*Pertains to other matters 
 
 
 
 
 