 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2020 / Bhadra 1942 (Saka) 
  
ONE HUNDRED SECOND REPORT 
ON 
EFFECTIVENESS OF VIGILANCE ADMINISTRATION IN  
CERTAIN REVENUE & BANKING INSTITUTIONS AND  
SELECTED CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES  
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 (Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 (Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 
REPORT NO. 
102 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

CS (P & L) - 203 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2020 / Bhadra 1942 (Saka) 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF VIGILANCE ADMINISTRATION IN  
CERTAIN REVENUE & BANKING INSTITUTIONS AND  
SELECTED CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES  
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 (Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 (Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
   PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) - (iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (iv) - (v) 
3. ACRONYMS    (vi)  
4. REPORT 1 - 26 
(i) CHAPTER I :                
BACKGROUND  
 
(ii) CHAPTER II       
VIGILANCE ADMINISTRATION IN CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES (CPSES)  
AND PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS (PSBS) 
                                                                                                  
(iii) CHAPTER III                                                                                                           
VIGILANCE ADMINISTRATION IN CENTRAL GOVERNMENT BODIES 
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE                                                                 27-33 
5.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 34-46 
  
6.   ANNEXURE 47-77 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav                   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
3. Shri Prabhat Jha 
4. Shri Majeed Memon 
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil 
6. Shri D. Raja 
7. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
9. *Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. #Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Tariq Anwar 
12. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan 
13. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
14. Shri Sharadkumar Maruti Bansode 
15. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhury  
16. Adv. Joice George 
17. Shri Radadiya Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai  
18. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
19. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
20. Adv.  M. Udhaya Kumar 
21. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi 
22. Shri Bhagwant Mann 
23. Shri B.V. Naik 
24. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Dr. A. Sampath 
27. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah  
28. Shri V. Panner Selvam 
29. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli 
30. Adv. Anshul Verma 
31. @Vacant 
  
                                                 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 30th November, .2017 vice Shri Anand Sharma who resigned w.e.f. 10th November, 2017. 
@  Vacancy caused due to changed the nomination of Shri Santosh Kumar  w.e.f. 3rd November, 2017.  
# Nominated w.e.f. 7th March, .2018 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva who resigned w.e.f. 21st February, 2018. 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav                   Chairman 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
3. Shri Prabhat Jha 
4. Shri Majeed Memon 
5. Shri D. Raja 
6. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
8. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
 
  LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Tariq Anwar 
12. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan 
13. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
14. Shri Sharadkumar Maruti Bansode 
15. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury  
16. Shri (Adv.) Joice George 
17. Shri Pralhad Venkatesh Joshi 
18. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
19. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi 
20. Shri Bhagwant Mann 
21. Shri B.V. Naik 
22. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
23. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
24. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya  
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Dr. Anirudhan Sampath 
27. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah  
28. Shri V. Panneer Selvam 
29. Shri M. Udhayakumar 
30. Shri Anshul Verma 
31. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral 
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
4. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
6. Shri P. Wilson 
7. *Shri Abhay Bharadwaj 
8. *Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
9. *Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy 
10. *Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Pradan Baruah 
12. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
13. Shri Vinod LakhamshiChavda 
14. Shri MohanbhaiSanjibhaiDelkar 
15. Shri P. P. Mohammed Faizal 
16. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
17. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua 
18. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
19. Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone 
20. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
21. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Chirag Paswan 
24. Shri Suresh Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
____________ 
*Nominated w.e.f. 23rd July, 2020 
 (iii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee on 
its behalf, do hereby present the One Hundred Second Report on the Subject ‘ Effectiveness 
of Vigilance Administration in certain Revenue & Banking Institutions and Selected CPSEs’. 
2. The Committee undertook a study-visit to Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata from 26th to 
31st August, 2018 and made appraisal of vigilance mechanism of select PSUs/PSBs and held 
wider consultation with their top management and CVOs . The Committee heard the 
representatives of Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) , D epartment of Public 
Enterprises (D PE) and Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) in its meeting held on 1 st 
October, 2018. The Committee then held an internal discussion on the subject on 19 th 
November, 2018. The Committee thereafter heard the views of the  Central Board of Direct 
Taxes (CBDT), Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC), Department of 
Personnel & Training (DoPT) and Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) on the subject in its 
meeting held on 10th January, 2020.   
3. The Committee undertook a nother study-visit to Hyderabad, Bengaluru and Mumbai 
from 14th to 18 th January, 2020  and made appraisal of vigilance m echanism of select 
PSUs/PSBs and some Central Government bodies . The Committee had interaction with the 
representatives  Andhra Bank ;  Electronics Corporation of India Limited ( ECIL); National 
Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (NMDC)  and  Mishra Dhatu Nigam LTd. 
(MIDHANI) at Hyderabad, Canara Bank;  Bharat Electronic Ltd.; Hindustan Aeronautic Ltd. 
(HAL) and  Indian Space Research Organisation ( ISRO) at Bengaluru, Union Bank; Bank of 
Baroda;  Bank of India ; Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd.  (ONGC);  IRCON and 
Rashtriya Chemical Fertilizers (RCF) at Mumbai.   
4. While considering the Subject, the Committee took note of the following 
documents/information placed before it:- 
(i) Background Note on the subject furnished by the Department of Personnel 
& Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; 
(ii) Replies of the DoPT, CVC , CBDT  and CBIC to queries raised by the 
Chairman and Members during the meetings on the subject; 
(iii) Replies to the questionnaire of the Committee and queries raised by the 
Chairman and Members during the study visits of the Committee; 
(iv) CVC’s Vigilance Manual 2017; and 
(v) Annual Reports of CVC.  
5. The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the representatives of the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments, PSUs/ PSBs and Central Government Bodies for 
furnishing necessary information/  documents and rendering valuable assistance to the 
Committee in its deliberations.  
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 

7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 8th 
September, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         BHUPENDER YADAV 
8th September, 2020                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

ACRONYMS 
 
ADG    Additional Director General 
CAT     Central Administrative Tribunal 
CBDT    Central Board of Direct Taxes 
CBI     Central Bureau of Investigation 
CBIC     Central Board of indirect Taxes and Customs  
CISF     Central Industrial Security Force 
CMD    Chairman cum Managing Director 
CPP     Central Public Procurement Portal 
CPSE     Central public Sector Enterprise 
CSR    Corporate Social Responsibility 
CVC     Central Vigilance Commission 
CVO     Chief Vigilance Officer  
DFS     Department of Financial Services 
DGoV              Directorate General of Vigilance 
DoE     Department of Expenditure  
DoPT    Department of Personnel and Training 
GeM     Government e Marketplace 
GSAT     Geostationary Satellite 
IEM     Independent External Monitor 
IIM     Indian Institute of Management 
IO     Inquiry Officer 
IP     Integrity Pact 
IRS     Indian Revenue Service 
ISRO     Indian Space Research Organization 
KYC     Know Your Customer 
MD     Managing Director 
MHA     Ministry of Home Affairs 
NPA     Non Performing Asset 
ONGC     Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
PIDPI  Public Information Disclosure and Protection of Informer’s 
Resolution 
PMO     Prime Minister’s Office 
PO     Presenting Officer  
PSB     Public Sector Bank  
PSU     Public Sector Undertaking  
RDX     Research and Development Explosive 
S&T     Science and Technology 
SOP     Standard Operating Procedure 
TDS     Tax Deducted at Source 
TPE      Third Party Entity 
VO      Vigilance Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 

1 
 
Chapter I 
BACKGROUND 
1. Good Governance is perceived , world over, as the antidote to corruption and robust 
vigilance is undeniably a tool that promotes Good Governance. Vigilance administration in 
any organisation is essentially a management function, like finance, personnel, marketing, 
material, contracts etc. If the vigilance administration is effective in an organisation, it helps 
in securing intended results from the other segments of the organization as well. 
1.1 The dictionary meaning of vigilance is watchfulness and alertness. It is an oversight 
mechanism comprising preventive and punitive measures, which aims to implement anti -
corruption measures, detecting irregularities, analysing and finding out reasons of su ch 
irregularities or taking effective systemic improvements/measures to curb it and identifying 
public servants responsible for misconduct and ensuring punitive actions. 
Evolution of Vigilance Administration: 
1.2 Anti-corruption measures of the Central Government are responsibility of: 
(i) Administrative Vigilance Divi sion (AVD) in the Department of Personnel & 
Training (DoPT); 
(ii) Central Vigilance Commission (CVC); 
(iii) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI); 
(iv) Vigilance units in the Ministries / Departments of Government of India, Central 
Public Sector Enterprises and other autonomous organisations; 
(v) Disciplinary authorities; and 
(vi) Supervisory officers. 
1.3 The Administrative Vigilance Division (AVD) was set up in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, in August 1955, to serve as a central agency to assume overall responsibility for anti -
corruption measures. With the establishment of the Central Vigilance Commission, a good 
part of the functions performed by the Administrative Vigilance Division are now exercised 
by the Central Vigilance Commission. Therefore now the Administrative Vigilance Division 
(now in DoPT) is responsible for the formulation of policies of the Central Government in the 
field of vigilance, integrity in public services, and anti -corruption and to provide  guidance 
and coordination to Ministries/Department of Government of India in matters requiring 
decisions of Government. 
1.4 The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) was established in 1964 by the 
Government of India as an Integrity Institution  to supervise vigilance administration in the 
country.  The Commission functions through a well established vigilance administration set 
up, regulations and manuals.  The Commission has been given statutory status by enactment 
of CVC Act, 2003 for functional autonomy an d insulation from external influences.  The 
Commission is vested with powers to undertake direct inquiries, call for any information 
from the Central Government and exercise superintendence over the functions of CBI in 
offences related to Preve ntion of Corruption Act, 1988. The jurisdiction of the CVC extends 
to Group “A” level officers of the Central Government and such level of officers in the 
Corporations, Government Companies, Societies and other Local Authorities of the Central 
Government as notif ied b y the Central Government. The vigilance cases of other 
officers/officials are handled by the respective cadre authorities, organizations, etc.  The 

2 
 
Commission, however, also has powers to inquire into any individual case in respect of 
employees other than those within its normal jurisdiction.  
Role and Functions of CVOs: 
1.5 The Chief Vigilance Officers in all departments/organisations  are appointed after 
prior consultation with the Central Vigilance Commission and no person whose appointment 
in that capacity is objected to by the Commission may be so appointed.  The CVO act as an 
extended arm of the Commission in the Department/Organiz ation concerned and represent 
the Commission in respect of all vigilance matters including that of the junior officers, who 
are not covered under the normal jurisdiction of the Commission.   
1.6 The CVOs are required to provide assistance to the Head/Chief  Executive of the 
Department/Organization concerned in all matters relating to vigilance administration by 
providing appropriate advice/expertise to them as well as to establish effective systems and 
procedures, in order to plus systemic failures/loopholes .  The CVOs are also required to 
ensure speedy processing of vigilance matters, especially disciplinary cases.  The 
Commission has a system of obtaining monthly reports and annual reports from the CVO on 
all aspects of anti -corruption measures and vigilanc e administration activities undertaken in 
the organization/department for effective monitories of cases.   
1.7 The Commission also invites the CVOs individually to discuss important issues 
specific to their organization.  The Commission also conducts regul ar training modules for 
CVOs for enhancement of skills in anti -corruption tasks.  Presently a majority of Public 
Sector Enterprises, Public Sector Banks and Insurance Companies and few Government 
Departments have full -time CVOs while others have part -time CVOs, who are officers of 
appropriate level from within the organizations concerned. 
1.8 Vigilance functions to be performed by the CVO are of wide sweep and include 
collecting intelligence about the corrupt practices committed, or likely to be committed by the 
employees of his organization; investigating or causing an investigation to be made into 
verifiable allegations reported to him; processing investigation reports for further 
consideration of the disciplinary authority concerned; referring the matters  to the CVC for 
advice wherever necessary, taking steps to prevent commission of improper 
practices/misconducts, etc. Thus, the CVOs’ functions can broadly be divided into three 
parts, as under: 
(i) Preventative vigilance; 
(ii) Punitive vigilance; and  
(iii) Surveillance and detection. 
1.9 While ‘ surveillance’ and ‘punitive action’  for commission of misconduct and other 
malpractices is certainly important, the ‘preventive measure” to be taken by the CVO are 
comparatively more important as these are likely to reduce the nu mber of vigilance cases 
considerably. Thus, the role of CVO should be predominantly preventive. 
Preventive Vigilance: 
1.10  The CVO is expected to take following measures on preventive vigilance side: 
(i) To examine in detail the existing Rules and procedures of the Organisation 
with a view to eliminate or minimise the scope for corruption or malpractices; 

3 
 
(ii) To identify the sensitive/corruption prone spots in the Organisation and keep 
an eye on personnel posted in such areas; 
(iii) To plan and enf orce surprise inspections and regular inspections to detect the 
system failures and existence of corruption or malpractices;  
(iv) To maintain proper surveillance on officers of doubtful integrity; and  
(v) To ensure prompt observance of Conduct Rules rela ting to integrity of the 
Officers, like (a) The Annual Property Returns;  (b) Gifts accepted by the 
officials; (c) Benami transactions ; and (e) Regarding relatives employed in 
private firms or doing private business etc. 
Punitive Vigilance: 
1.11 The CVO is expected to scrutinize reports of Parliamentary Committees such as 
Estimates Committee, Public Accounts Committee and the Committee on Public 
Undertakings; Audit Reports; proceedings of both Houses of Parliament; and complaints and 
allegations appearing in the press; and to take appropriate action thereon. Predominantly, the 
CVO is expected to take following action on the punitive vigilance aspects: 
(i) To ensure speedy processing of vigilance cases at all stages. In regard to cases 
requiring consultation with the Central Vigilance Commission, a decision as to 
whether the case had a vigilance angle shall in every case be taken by the 
CVO who, when in doubt, may refer the matter to his administrative head, i.e. 
Secretary in the case of Ministries/Departments  and Chief Executive in the 
case of public sector organisations; 
(ii) To ensure that charge -sheet, statement of imputations, lists of witness and 
documents etc. are carefully prepared and copies of all the documents relied 
upon and the statements of witnes ses cited on behalf of the disciplinary 
authority are supplied wherever possible to the accused officer alongwith the 
charge-sheet; 
(iii) To ensure that all documents required to be forwarded to the Inquiring Officer 
are carefully sorted out and sent promptly; 
(iv) To ensure that there is no delay in the appointment of the Inquiring Officer, 
and that no dilatory tactics are adopted by the accused officer or the Presenting 
Officer; 
(v) To ensure that the processing of the Inquiry Officer's Reports for final orders 
of the Disciplinary Authority is done properly and quickly; 
(vi) To scrutinise final orders passed by the Disciplinary Authorities subordinate to 
the Ministry/Department, with a view to see whether a case for review is made 
out or not; 
(vii) To see that proper assistance is given to the C.B.I. in the investigation of cases 
entrusted to them or started by them on their own source of information; 
(viii) To take proper and adequate action with regard to writ petitions filed by 
accused officers; 
(ix) To ensure that the Central Vigilance Commission is consulted at all stages 
where it is to be consulted and that as far as possible, the time limits 
prescribed in the Vigilance Manual for various stages are adhered to; 

4 
 
(x) To ensure prompt submission of returns to the Commission; 
(xi) To review from time to time the existing arrangements for vigilance work in 
the Ministry/Department for vigilance work subordinate officers to see if they 
are adequate to ensure expeditious and effective disposal of vigilance work; 
(xii) To ensure that the competent disciplinary authorities do not adopt a dilatory or 
law attitude in processing vigilance cases, thus knowingly otherwise helping 
the subject public servants, particularly in cases of officers due to retire; 
(xiii) To ensure that cases against the public servants on the verge of retirement do 
not lapse due to time -limit for reasons such as misplacement of files etc. and 
that the orders passed in the cases of retiring officers are implemented in time; 
(xiv) To ensure that the period from the date of serving a charge -sheet in a 
disciplinary case to the submission of the report of the Inquiry Officer, should, 
ordinarily, not exceed six months. 
Surveillance and Detection: 
1.12 The CVO has to  conduct regular and surprise inspec tions in the sensitive areas in 
order to detect if there have been instances of corrupt or improper practice by the public 
servants. He should also undertake prompt and adequate scrutiny of property returns and 
intimations given by the public servants unde r the conduct rules and proper follow up action 
where necessary. In addition, he should also gather intelligence from its own sources in 
whatever manner he deems appropriate about the misconduct/malpractices having been 
committed or likely to be committed. 
1.13 CVO has to  invariably review all pending matters, such as investigation reports, 
disciplinary cases and other vigilance complaints/cases in the first week of every month and 
take necessary steps for expediting action on those matters 
1.14 The CVO has to arrange quarterly meetings to be taken by the Secretary of the 
Ministry/Department or the Chief executive for reviewing the vigilance work done in the 
organization. He should also arrange periodical meetings with the officers of the CBI to 
discuss matt ers of mutual interests, particularly those arising from inquiries and 
investigations. 
1.15 The CVO has to also ensure that monthly reports, quarterly progress reports, Annual 
Reports of the work done on vigilance matters is furnished to the CVC in time.  
1.16 The Committee understands that the hallmark of good governance is a clean and 
transparent administration which can only be ensured by a strong vigilance administration.
 The Committee also noted that the primary responsibility for maintenance of purity , 
integrity and efficiency in the organization vests in the Secretary of the Ministry concerned, 
or the head of the Department, or the Chief Executive of the Public Sector Enterprises. In 
order to assist such authorities all the departments/organizations h ave been provided with 
Vigilance Units headed by CVO.  The CVO acts as a special assistant/advisor to the chief 
executive and reports directly to him in all matters relating to vigilance. He heads the 
Vigilance Division of the organization concerned and pr ovides a link between his 
organization and the Central Vigilance Commissioner and his organization and the Central 
Bureau of Investigation. 
 

5 
 
Chapter II 
VIGILANCE ADMINISTRATION IN CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES 
(CPSEs) AND PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS (PSBs) 
 
2. CPSEs account for public invest ment of more than Rs. 1 2 lakh c rores, spread over 
320 Enterprises. The original purposes, for which these Enterprises were set up, varied and 
included such objectives as: 
(a) Setting up of  infrastructure for rapid industrial growth; 
(b) Creation of additional employment opportunities; 
(c) Facilitation of balanced regional development; 
(d) Generation of surplus funds for further investment for  economic development; 
and 
(e) Reduction of disparities in income and wealth through  prevention of 
concentration of economic power in private hands. 
2.1 Over the years, the focus has shifted towards providing greater autonomy and 
ensuring greater transparency within the functioning of these enterprises.  Current thinking 
stresses the impor tance of these units becoming self -reliant and profitable ventures and 
building themselves around their strengths to face competitive challenges from the private 
sector. In the ultimate analysis, the vigilance function should not be organised so as to detr act 
from, impair, or inhibit commercial decision making within these Enterprises. 
2.2 However, t oday the PSEs in the country play a significant  
role in the economic and social development of the country. Further, their functions ranges 
from monopolistic nature like Railways, Atomic Energy, Life Insurance etc. to highly 
competitive fields like Banking , Insurance, Heavy Engineering,  etc. These undertakings are 
not just  regarded as large commercial undertakings judged on their comme rcial results but 
have wider objectives than commercial concerns of the private sector. They deal with  
tax payers’ money and are therefore accountable to the Parliament. They are subject to public 
criticism and criticism in the press. Unli ke the private co mmercial organization where 
individuals count more, in these public undertakings, the systems have to work more than 
individuals. Under such  circumstances, there is a need for a strong vigilance organization in 
the PSEs with a set of rules to regulate the conduct of the employees of these undertakings. 
Committee’s Study-visits for appraisal of Vigilance Administration in PSUs and PSBs: 
2.3 In the course of examination of the Subject , the Committee undertook a study -visit to 
Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata from 26 thto 31 st August, 2018 and to Hyderabad, Bengaluru 
and Mumbai from 14 th to 18 th January, 2020 and made an appraisal of the vigilance 
administration of several PSUs and PSBs. Detailed study tour reports of both the study visits 
of the Committee are placed at Annexure I and Annexure II.  
2.4 In the presence of officers from the concerned Ministries/Departments and DoPT, t he 
Committee had interaction with the representatives of the PS Us and PSBs on the subject. 
Detailed presentation s were made by them inter-alia highlighting their internal vigilance 

6 
 
mechanism, steps taken by them in strengthening vigilance administration, spreading 
awareness about vigilance amongst their stakeholders etc.  
2.5 The Committee was informed about the initiatives taken by the PSBs & PSUs  for 
strengthening preventive vigila nce viz., holding meetings on aspects of preventive vigilance 
with Branch Managers and Zonal Officials; conduction of  inspection in all branches; 
investigation of complaints & initiation of appropriate remedial Action; enhancing vigilance 
awareness and co mpliance level among the employees through CVO’s Monthly magazines 
and sharing of information through whatsapp Group to reach out  to all Managers and other 
officials of the PSBs/PSUs. 
2.6 The Committee was further informed as to how t echnology is being lev eraged to 
being about  transparency & reduc e corruption in the PSBs  viz. whistle blower portal 
(Intranet); off Site Monitoring System; implementation of controls in Core Banking Solution 
(CBS) for various Delegation of powers of the Branch officials, modifi cation in repayment 
schedule; issuance of Solvency Certificate through Finacle System etc.; concessions module 
for Trade Finance through Finacle System.  
2.7 The Committee was also informed that some PSBs /PSBs have implemented Integrity 
Pact and appointed Independent External Monitors (IEMs) to strengthen preventive vigilance. 
Quarterly Structured Meetings of IEMs with CVO & concerned Executives are conducted 
and Action Taken Report on the Minutes of the meetings is reviewed. Bank s and PSUs are 
also affecting rotational transfers as per the directions of CVC in respect of o fficers who are 
continuing beyond 3 years from the sensitive seat / post and not necessarily from the station. 
It was further informed that the Annual Confidential Reports of CV O is written by the MD & 
CEO and sent to the DFS, Ministry of Finance for review and for onward submission of the 
same to CVC as accepting authority. CVO and Vigilance Department officials also undergo 
periodical training for skill development. 
 
2.8 Some PSBs requested that the threshold limit for inv estigation of fraud cases by CBI  
may be increased from the present level of outstanding of Rs.3.00 Cr to a higher level which 
may be about Rs. 10 Cr or above. Further, it was also suggested that the realizable value of 
primary & collateral securities and probable cash recovery from other sources, if any, may be 
allowed to be deducted from the outstanding balance and on the remaining amount, up to 
about 50% provision may be made. This would enable Bankers to decl are such accounts as 
Fraud without delay.   
2.9 The Committee was also made to understand that there are instances where 
unscrupulous borrowers/middlemen raise high value credit by fudging financial statements, 
excess valuation of Primary & Collateral securities, obtaining clear legal opinion on defective 
documents in collusion with financial consultants/CA/Valuers/Advocates as the case may be. 
As Bankers generally depend on such professionals’ advice for decision making, it is 
suggested that in all such ca ses, if the loans and advances turn NPA solely due to above 
reasons/ irregularities, Bank officials may not be held accountable for the accounts turning 
into NPA. Further, legal framework s to be strengthened to take punitive action on such 
professionals by  implicating them in the CBI cases. Such measures may deter them from 
doing unscrupulous activities.  
2.10 The Committee was also informed that i n the recent past many frauds have come to 
the notice of Banks due to improper certification done by the TPEs a nd the Banks have failed 
to hold them accountable. To ensure accountability of TPEs, it was requested that a Code of 

7 
 
Conduct and a legally enforceable agreement should be executed by all these TPEs, so as to 
bring in better ethics and accountability on their part. 
2.11 Following points were also highlighted by PSUs/PSBs in their presentation: 
(i) The Committee was apprised by the top management of the PSUs/PSBs that their 
focus has shifted from punitive to preventive vigilance. They have leveraged 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for this purpose which inter-
alia includes online tende ring, bill tracking, e -procurement, e -auction, online 
filing and tracking of complains, etc. The Committee was also apprised that 
because of these steps, taken over the years, number of vigilance cases has gone 
down significantly. 
(ii) Further, as a part of pre ventive vigilance, ‘vigilance awareness weeks’ are 
organized regularly and the employees, clients, vendors, public etc. are made 
aware by holding seminars/lectures and publicizin g it through workshops, radio, 
whatsapp and SMS, etc. 
(iii) Notice Board has been displayed in all the Units, to sensitize the Public not to give 
bribe and to intimate demand of bribe to the Competent Authority. 
(iv) Vigilance activities and Vigilance related issues are being published through in -
house magazine. 
(v) Surprise inspections and audit of satellite offices are done on regular intervals to 
check any fraud at the cutting edge level.  
(vi) Various Complaints were referred to CVC, CBI, PMO, etc. Provision for internal 
and external audit including internal inspection of all Offices of PSUs and PSBs. 
(vii) Provision for property returns obtained from employees annually. 
(viii) Establishment of robust online grievance reporting and redressal mechanism 
adopted by all PSUs/PSBs including development of in -house data vigilance 
module. 
(ix) All procurements as per CVC gui delines. E-Tendering process as well as Reverse 
Auction system in place. 
Interaction with the representatives of the Government and CVC on the subject: 
2.12 The Committee held intensive deliberations with the  officials of  DoPT, CVC, DFS 
and Department of Public Enterprises on the subject. Views of the Government and CVC on 
various issues identified by the Committee, pertaining to the Subject , are summarised as 
under:  
(i) Recent initiatives undertaken by CVC to bring out transparen cy  
in Governance: 
(a) Leveraging Technology to Prevent Discretion and Corruption : C VC had 
adopted the strategy  ‘Leveraging Technology to Prevent Corruption’ since 
2004, wherein organisations are persuaded to adopt e -governance 
measures and computerise on priority all those activities which are 

8 
 
vulnerable to corruption.  Improv ing vigilance administration by 
leveraging technology, advocated by the Commission, h as been reported 
as a best practice by Organisation for Economic Co -operation and 
Development (OECD), Paris in 2009. Today, almost all procurements of 
Rs. 2 lakhs and above are made through e -procurement portal (now CP 
Portal and GeM) or by reverse auction  by the Central Government 
Departments / organisations which has brought in greater transparency and 
also reduced discretion as well as reduced cost of procurements. 
 
(b) Integrity in public procurement  - Integrity Pact : Since December, 2007, 
CVChas been  promoting the concept of Integrity Pact which involves 
signing of a pact between the procuring organisation and the bidders that 
they will not indulge in corrupt practices in the tendering, award and the 
execution of the contract. Public procurement being the g overnment 
activity most vulnerable to corruption has been a priority concern of the 
Commission.  Integrity Pact is intended to make public procurement 
transparent by binding both parties to ethical conduct. IP covers all 
activities related to the contract from pre-selection of bidders, bidding and 
contracting, implementation, completion and operation.  Independent 
External Monitors are nominated by the Commission to monitor the 
adherence to the pact by the two sides. Ministry of Finance, DoE, has also 
in Jul y, 2011, directed Ministries/Departments of the Govt. for 
implementation of Integrity Pact. More than 160 organisations including 
the Ministries conducting major procurements have adopted the Integrity 
Pact. Commission also recommends various reforms in pu blic 
procurement system from time to time to the government. 
(ii) On inordinate delay in completion of disciplinary proceeding: 
CVC has observed that a number of factors contribute to delay in completion of 
disciplinary proceedings, particularly in departmental inquiries. The Departmental 
inquiry is often delayed due to  lack of monitoring by D isciplinary Authority, non-
availability of documents, delay in inspection of documents, frequent adjournments, 
non-attendance of witnesses, court stay, change of IO/PO, etc. 
 
Normally, a vigilance case needs to be completed within a period of eighteen 
months (i.e. from the stage of complaint to  finalisation of disciplinary proceedings). 
The Commission has been issuing instructions for timely completion of disciplinary 
proceedings from time to time. It has also prescribed a schedule of time -limits vide 
its Circular dated 23.5.2000, subsequently r evised through ‘Model Time Limits’ 
published in para 7.47.2 of Vigilance Manual 2017,for various stages of activities 
right from receipt of complaint, its investigation, decisions by competent authorities 
as well as the conduct and finalisation of discipli nary proceedings against public 
servants.  All these activities are to be completed in eighteen months.  CVOs are 
required to submit monthly/quarterly reports in prescribed format. CVOs are 
required to submit monthly/quarterly reports in prescribed format. Besides this, the 
CVC regularly reviews the progress of disciplinary proceedings pending with the 
organisations / departments through Annual Review meetings which is also attended 
by the Secretaries /Chief Executives of the Departments/Organisations apart from 
the CVOs. 

9 
 
(iii) On previous Bank frauds: 
 
a) In matters of commission of frauds in a bank involving any culpability of 
staff/officers, the CVO is required to determine staff accountability, 
identify the pattern of fraud, and suggest preventive measures to curb  
recurrence of a particular modus operandi in individual cases of fraud. 
After fixing staff accountability, appropriate disciplinary action is 
recommended by the CVO under the relevant rules/regulations applicable 
to the staff/officers. In matters involvin g criminality either by staff or 
outsiders, reporting to concerned investigating agency is to be made by the 
designated administrative authorities in consultation with the CVO. The 
Commission has not come across any specific matter where the CVO has 
failed in his duties warranting any formal disciplinary proceedings. 
However, a few CVOs were found lacking in discharge of their functions 
have been reverted from the post of CVO. 
 
b) Frauds unearthed in Banks in the  recent past were the combined outcomes 
of syste m failure, mis -judgement as well as commercial lapses. For 
strengthening the vigilance system in banks to avert system failures, the  
Commission has been advocating  Standard Operating Procedures in 
various areas of management. To bring down the incidence of  mis-
judgement, the Commission has been advising improvement in the training 
provision for officials at various levels and also for job rotation from time 
to time so that officers are tuned to work in different areas of operations. 
To reduce the commercial  lapses affecting the banks and insurance 
companies, Commission has been advocating strict adherence to KYC 
norms, due diligence, proper monitoring, etc. 
 
(iv)    On Integrity Index: 
The Central Vigilance Commission has undertaken an initiative to develop an 
Integrity Index applicable to a wide range of Public Sector and Government 
Organizations. The development of Integrity Index is in line with the CVC’s 
broader strategy and emphasis on preventive measures. This is an exercise by the 
organizations for self -assessment of its policies, procedures and compliances. The 
Index will facilitate and help organizations to identify areas where they are doing 
well and areas where there is a scope for  improvement. To begin with , 25 Public 
Organizations have been selected from different sectors for assessment. The 
responsibility to conceptualize, study and develop a framework for Integrity Index 
was given to IIM Ahmedabad. Based on the data provided by the selected 
organizations, IIM –Ahmedabad has finalised the pilot project and submitted the 
final report to the CVC which is under examination. The report also contains the 
way forward for further expansion of the project.  
 
(v)    Filling of CVOs posts in CPSEs: 
The posts of CVO, which are full -time, are filled through DoPT. Appointments of 
CVOs in 113 CPSEs are processed through DoPT. There are some PSUs, which are 
smaller in size including newly set up PSUs, wherein full time CVOs are not yet in 
place and i t is for the administrative Ministries concerned to take appropriate steps 
for creating posts of CVOs and filling them up. 

10 
 
Regarding filling up of vacant posts, a common online application form for Central 
Staffing Scheme and CVOs has been introduced making it easier for officers to 
apply. Cadre Controlling Authorities of All India Services and Organized Group -A 
Services are b eing addressed from time to time to nominate officers for Central 
Deputation.  
(vi) On Whistle-blowers policy: 
The Whistle-blowers Protection Act, 2011 (17 of 2014) is yet to come into force. At 
present, the Commission is discharging its functions under the pro visions of Public 
Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informers Resolution, 2004 (PIDPI) and 
subsequent amendment made in 2013. Para 6, 7and 7A of PIDPI Resolution 
authorises the Commission, the designated agency, to take such action as deemed fit 
or give suitable directions to the concerned public servant or the public authority if a 
Whistle-blower aggrieved of victimisation or a witness requiring protection, makes 
an application in this regard or the designated authority forwards the same. 
Various Publi c-Sector Organisations have also introduced internal Whistle -blower 
mechanism in their organisations which are functional.  So far, the Commission has 
not faced any impediments in implementation of the PIDPI Resolution. The CVC 
had also taken up the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to provide 
security cover to the genuine Whistle -blowers. In this regard, MHA had taken up 
the issue with State Governments for necessary requirement.  
Findings of the Committee: 
Focus on Preventive Vigilance 
2.13 During interaction with managements of certain PSUs during Study Visit and CVC in 
Delhi, the Committee was apprised that the focus has shifted from punitive to preventive 
vigilance. Certain measures are in place for internal surveillance to check misconduc t of 
employees within the organization. During the visit representatives of various PSUs/PSBs 
informed the Committee that online tendering, bill tracking, e -procurement, e -auction, 
online filing and tracking of complaints, online grievance reporting and redressal mechanism 
etc. are carried out under preventive vigilance administration. The Committee feels that the 
possibility of involving employees associations and trade unions in strengthening 
preventive vigilance should also be explored.  
2.14 The Committ ee notes that CVC in its report ‘TOP 100 BANKING FRAUDS’ 
presented a sector-wise analysis of frauds and their general modus operandi, loopholes 
in the existing system and suggested systemic improvements to plug them. The 
Committee impresses upon the Ministries concerned to ensure that organizations 
under their jurisdiction carry out systemic improvements suggested by the 
Commission and strengthen fraud prevention mechanism to reduce the incidence of 
frauds. 
Integrity Pact 
2.15 Integrity Pact is a tool of preventive vigilance administration, which is enforced since 
December, 2007 and involves the signing of a pact between the procuring organisation and 
the bidders that they will not indulge in corrupt practices in the tendering, award and the 
execution of the contract. Public procurement being the government activity most vulnerable 
to corruption has been a priority concern of the Commission.  Integrity Pact is intended to 

11 
 
make public procurement transparent by binding both parties to ethical conduct. IP  covers 
all activities related to the contract from pre -selection of bidders, bidding and contracting, 
implementation, completion and operation. 
2.16 The Committee appreciates the constant endeavour of Central Vigilance 
Commission to bring in transparency,  equity and competitiveness in procurement and 
contracting through promoting the adoption and implementation of integrity pact. The 
Committee notes that multiple benefits like improved transparency, image and 
reputation as an ethical organization;  reduced external interference, frivolous lawsuits 
and complaints from vendors;  speed up the Tenders Procurement Process; etc.  have 
been accrued to ONGC, which is the first organization in In dia to implement Integrity 
Pact. The Committee therefore recommends that I ntegrity Pact is implemented in all 
government agencies/organization and it is strengthened as a tool of robust preventive 
vigilance mechanism.  
Integrity Index 
2.17 Integrity Index is an extension of Integrity Pact. The Central Vigilance Commission 
had un dertaken an initiative to develop an Integrity Index applicable to a wide range of 
Public Sector and Government Organizations. The development of the Integrity Index is in 
line with the CVC’s broader strategy and emphasis on preventive measures. This is an  
exercise by the organizations for self -assessment of its policies, procedures and 
compliances. The Index will facilitate and help organizations to identify areas where they 
are doing well and areas where there is a scope for improvement.  
2.18 To begin with 25 Public Organizations have been selected from different sectors for 
the assessment. The responsibility to conceptualize, study and develop a framework for 
Integrity Index has been given to IIM Ahm edabad. Based on the data provided by the 
selected organizations, IIM –Ahmedabad has finalised the pilot project and submitted the 
final report to the CVC which is under examination.  The Committee hopes that Integrity 
Index is progressively extended  to cover all G overnment organizations and it is 
implemented in a manner that it promotes a healthy competition among the 
organisations to climb up the ladder. 
Training of Vigilance Officers 
2.19 During interaction with the CMDs/CVOs of various PSUs/PSBs , a need was felt for 
the enhancement of training provisions for Vigilance Officers. CVOs and Vigilance Officers  
have neither exposure nor experience in the field of vigilance at the time of their 
appointment, thus there is a need to thoroughly train them on various aspects of vigilance 
administration. T he current training arrangements available to them have proved to be 
inadequate. Especially with the advancement of technology, the incidences of frauds and 
other areas of vulnerability have increased considerably.  
2.20 In view of the above, the Committee feels that there is a dire need to revamp the 
current training apparatus of CVOs and VOs in PSUs/PSBs by promoting awareness 
about latest technologies. The Committee, accordingly, recommends  CVC to prepare 
extensive training framework/modules for CVOs and VOs of PSUs/PSBs by giving due 
regard to their specific areas of operations.  The Committee also recommends CVC to 
revamp the existing training programme so as to enable CVOs and vigilance officials to 
keep pace with changing times with focus on advanced technology and forensics. 

12 
 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) 
2.21 CVC, in their submission before the Committee on the subject  on 1st October, 2018, 
has informed that for strengthening the vigilance system in banks  and to avert systemic 
failures, the Commission has been advocating adopti on of  Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) in various areas of management. To bring down the incidence of mis -judgement, the 
Commission has been advising the  CVO concerned for improving the training provision for 
officials at various levels and also for job rotation from time to time so that officers are 
tuned to work in different areas of operations. To reduce the commercial lapses affecting 
banks and insuran ce companies, the Commission has been advocating strict adherence to 
KYC norms, due diligence, proper monitoring, etc.  
2.22 The Committee is in complete agreement with the views of the Commission, and 
recommends that learning from the abovementioned short  comings diagnosed by the 
commission, proactive steps are taken by PSUs/PSBs to avert recurrence of such 
frauds in future.  The PSUs, PSBs and Insurance Companies should put in place SOPs 
for all their activities, by clearly defining role, function and del egation, at all levels in 
the organization, leaving a minor or no role for use of discretion. 
2.23 The Committee also observes that most scams and financial frauds unearthed in 
the country in recent times are transnational in character and involved round t ripping 
of funds. Round tripping usually involves several layers of financial transactions and a 
maze of companies, banks and foreign investors, thus presenting a formidable 
challenge for the investigators to establish the money trail. In view of rising in cidence 
of transnational crimes, the Committee recommends the investigating agencies to 
create a pool of dedicated investigators with significant expertise in forensic audit.  
Centralised Database of Suspicious Entities  
2.24 The Committee observes that in majority of bank frauds, the borrowers diverted the 
funds by opening current accounts with other banks, which are not members of the 
consortium and which are not lenders of the borrower. The Committee also notes that 
financing and technology based frauds and frauds based on fake identity, fake KYC 
documents, fake financial statements and fake property documents have emerged as bigger 
challenges in the banking sector. Therefore, the Committee is of the considered view that 
a Ce ntralised Database containing details of suspicious entities, fraudsters and their 
general modus operandi be created by collating data available with individual 
organizations, regulators, investigating agencies as seamless sharing of such 
information among all the stakeholders concerned will bring down cases of all nature. 
CSR for Vigilance 
2.25 During the deliberations of the Committee with PSUs, it was observed that pilferage 
of goods at source and during transportation has been a big concern. The Committ ee was 
made to understand that the said pilferage is done in connivance of local officers and with 
the involvement of local people. On inquiry, the management had expressed its helplessness 
and termed these kinds of incidents as  a law and order problem. Bu t the Committee thinks 
that a major cause of pilferage of Coal from the mining site by the local population is their 
abject poverty. A large number of unemployed population at the production site of any PSU 
is not at all a good sign for the growth of that PSU. 

13 
 
2.26 The Committee is of the view that Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), 
through which companies give back to the society , has the potential to uplift the living 
standards of the local population. But , usually,  companies spend the amount 
earmarked for CSR activities  towards the development of their local township and 
infrastructure and for the benefit of the employees of the organisation and a very 
insignificant part of it is spent for the development of neighbourhood. The local 
population is by and large, deprived of benefits of CSR activities. The Committee feels 
that once the Company’s CSR funds are streamlined towards the upliftment of local 
population, the activities such as pilferage might come down. 
Incentives for Vigilance Officers 
2.27 During interaction with  PSUs/PSBs, the Committee learned that the y are finding it 
hard to attract and retain talented Vigilance Officers in their organisations. Thus, it has been 
suggested that Vigilance Officers should be provided  with some incentives to work in the 
Vigilance Department. Vigilance Officers are drawn from within the organization and on 
their selection/appointment as Vigilance Officer s they are diverted from their core area of 
work. In the prevailing scenario, the role of Vigilance Offi cers in the organization has 
assumed greater significance and therefore, an organisation requires talented and motivated 
Vigilance Officers for improving effectiveness of Vigilance Administration.  
2.28 DoPT in their written submission has informed that ou t of 36 vacant posts of CVOs, 
31 posts are located outside Delhi, for which only limited number of officers had shown 
interest. As officers are not finding posts of CVO outside of Delhi rewarding enough, the 
posts are laying vacant for want of sufficient a pplications. The Committee , therefore 
recommends that a provision for special allowance may be made for the CVOs, 
especially for those posted outside Delhi to effectively attract and retain talent. 
2.29 Further, the representatives of various bodies brought to the notice of the 
Committee the plight of the officers working in the vigilance department. The 
Committee notes that officers working in Vigilance face delicate situation when they 
return to parent department as they have to work with colleagues against whom they 
handled Vigilance case(s). This may affect their functioning and judgement in 
investigation. Hence, the Committee suggests CVC to ensure that at least 50% of the 
sanctioned strength of vigil ance Department is drawn on deputation from other 
organization as far as practicable. 
Whistle-Blowers Protection Policy 
2.30 The Hon'ble Supreme Court in a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 539/2003 filed after the 
murder of Shri Satyendra Dubey, a whistle-blower, directed that a machinery be put in place 
for acting on complaints from whistle-blowers till a law is enacted. The Law Commission of 
India had in its 179 th report, inter alia, recommended formulation of  a specific legislation 
titled ‘ The public Interest D isclosure (Protection of Informers) Bill, 2002 ’ to encourage 
disclosure of information regarding corruption or mal -administration by public servants and 
to provide protection to such complainants.  
2.31 In pursuance of the directions, the Government of India on 29 th April, 2004 notified 
the Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informers Resolution (PIDPI), 2004 which 
gave powers to the Commission to act on complaints from whistle -blowers. As per the 
Resolution, Central Vigilance Commission is the  designated agency and CVOs of the 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India are the designated authorities (w.e.f. 

14 
 
14.8.2013) to receive and act on the written complaints/disclosure. In 2007, the report of the 
Second Administrative Reforms Commission also recommended that a specific law needs to 
be enacted to protect whistleblowers. Finally, The Whistleblowers protection Bill was 
introduced in the Parliament in 2011 which finally became an Act in 2014. 
2.32 As per extant guidelines, the complainants ar e required to adhere to certain guidelines 
mentioned in the PIDPI resolution to keep their identity secret. For instance, the complaint 
should be forwarded in a sealed envelope and addressed to the Secretary of the Commission. 
Also, the envelope has to be superscribed ‘Complaints under The Public Interest 
Disclosure’. The text of the complaints should also be carefully drafted so as not to give any 
details or clue as to his/her identity. However, the Committee is of the view that there is a 
little awareness  about the procedure of filing complaint under PIDPI Resolution 
among the public. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to raise 
awareness about PIDPI Resolution through massive public outreach campaigns and 
wide publicity in the print, elect ronic media and also in social media which has 
emerged as a powerful participatory medium of communication in recent times. 
2.33 Further, the said Resolution, inter alia, provides for the protection of whistle-blowers 
from harassment, besides keeping the identity of whistleblowers concealed. However, it has 
been felt that persons who report  corruption or wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of 
discretion which causes demonstrable loss to the Government or commission of a criminal 
offence by a public servant need statutory protection as protection given to them by the said 
Resolution of the Government of India would not suffice. Accordingly, the Whistle Blowers 
Protection Act, 2014 was enacted and was notified on 12th May, 2014.  
2.34 Consequently, it wa s felt that the  Act required amendments aimed at 
safeguarding against disclosures affecting sovereignty and integrity of India, security 
of the State, etc., before it is brought into force, the Government  introduced the 
Whistle Blowers Protecti on (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in the Lok Sabha which was 
passed by the Lok Sabha on 13 th May, 2015. The said Bill was transmitted to the Rajya 
Sabha. However, due to dissolution of 16 th Lok Sabha, this amendment Bill needs to be 
re-introduced in the House.  The Committee hopes that the Whistle Blowers Protection 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015 may be introduced in the House without any further delay and 
passed by both the Houses.  
Information Sharing to Curb Fraud  
2.35 During interaction with PSBs, the Committee was informed that multiple financing, 
technology based frauds, frauds based on fake identity, fake KYC documents, fake financial 
statements and fake property documents have become bigger challenges for them. To 
overcome these challenges, the PSBs suggested seamless sharing of information at all levels, 
amongst all stakeholders, viz. Banks, creditors, regulators, investigating agencies, other 
financial institutions etc. Such information sharing may be done on -line, with in -built 
confidentiality and trust, which will help in bringing down cases of all such nature. In order 
to achieve this, the Committee recommends to employ such novel technologies as Block 
Chain technology, Artificial Intelligence etc. to leave miniscule opportunity for misuse 
by unscrupulous elements . The Gove rnment and the CVC should work together with 
the RBI and Banks to overcome such types of frauds by strengthen ing the existing 
system. 
\ 

15 
 
Accountability of Third Party Entities (TPEs) 
2.36 The PSBs apprised the Committee that Banks have to depend upon the certifications 
of Third Party Entities (TPEs), viz. Advocates, Valuers, Chartered Accountants, 
Transporters, and Warehouses for dispensing various credit facilities. In recent times many 
frauds have come to the notice of Banks due to improper certification done by the TPEs and 
the Banks have failed to hold them accountable.  To ensure accountability of TPEs, the 
Committee recommends that a Code of C onduct and a legally enforceable agreement 
should be executed by all these TPEs, so as to bring in better ethics and accountability 
on their part. 
  

16 
 
Chapter III 
VIGILANCE ADMINISTRATION IN CENTRAL 
GOVERNMENT BODIES 
 
3. The Committee examined the effectiveness of Vigilance administration in Central 
Government bodies namely, Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) and Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC).  Chairman, CBDT and Chairman (in-charge), CBIC 
appeared before the Committee in its meeting held on 10th January, 2020. 
Vigilance Set Up in CBDT 
3.1 Chairman, CBDT made a detailed presentation before the Committee on 10th January 
2020 elaborating the vigilance set up in CBDT . He apprised the Committee that CBDT has a 
separate vigilance set up which is headed by the Director General of Income Tax (Vigilance) 
who is also the Chief Vigilance Officer of the organization.  
3.2 He further apprised that a number of initiatives were taken by CBDT to strengthen 
preventive vigilance, some of them are c omputerization of all the pr ocesses related with 
taxation; Computer Aided Selection of Cases for Scrutiny (CASS) system; online issuance of 
certificates for TDS; making assessments faceless, no interaction between the tax payer and 
the tax officials. These initiatives are called E-Assessment and E-Appeal. 
3.3 He also added that o ne Central Inspection Team has been set up in the Vigilance 
Directorate for quick investigation into complaints of serious nature and Vigilance 
Inspections. Further, systems studies are being conducted by Zonal ADGs on critical 
functional areas to identify loopholes and areas vulnerable to corruption and suggest systemic 
improvements. Th e officers posted in sensitive posts are transferred out on a  regular basis. 
Efforts are made to ensure that no officer continues in such posts for more than three years at 
a stretch.  
3.4 The Committee is appreciative of the actions taken by CBDT to improve 
preventive vigilance in the Department particularly in ter ms of elimination of human 
interference and maximum use of technology. The Committee, however, observes that 
overdependence on these technological tools give rise to new forms of corruption which 
do not require in -person interaction such as digital bribery , blackmail on the basis of 
data, unauthorised access to digital information of taxpayers that corrupt tax officials 
may have.  
3.5 The Committee feels that technology may also lead to complexity of official 
procedures and processes  as officials and tax ev aders who understand technology and 
systems may exploit it to their evil design. Lack of digital literacy or technological 
illiteracy also brings in middlemen having technological knowhow to use the 
vulnerabilities of the service seekers to extort bribes.  The Committee, therefore, feels 
that the CBDT should not fall prey to techno utopianism as  technology is merely an 
advanced tool and is not a final solution to eradicate corruption in departments under 
the purview of CBDT and it is not always true that if  human interference is reduced, 
corruption might go down as it is human beings only who operate these technological 
tools who on occasions may turn fallible.  
3.6 The Committee is of the view that corruption is a big challenge in this country 
and it should be dealt with through various mechanisms. A robust vigilance mechanism 

17 
 
should be put in place as the level of corruption increases where surveillance and 
enforcement by public authority is weak. CBDT may consider appointing officers from 
other organisations on deputation in vigilance units of their organisation for a 
particular period as this would ensure relative impartiality of vigilance officers.  
Besides, a service condition may be added in the Departments under purview of CBDT 
that officers who resign or retire from their services may not join private sector.  
3.7 The Committee notes that CBDT has rolled out faceless e-assessment scheme with the 
intention to eliminate personal interaction between a tax payer and tax officers. The replies to 
the tax notices can be prepared and submitted online without visiting the tax office. CBDT 
has now made it mandatory for tax officers to take recourse to e -communications for  all 
limited and complete scrutiny cases. Earlier, the e -assessment was carried by the Assessing 
Officer but now the role of Assessing Officer shall be limited to only imposition of penalty 
,collection and recovery of demand etc,, and assessment shall be c arried out by the National 
e-Assessment Centres. The Committee notes that, historically, personal interaction 
between tax officer and tax payer has been a major avenue for corruption. The 
Committee feels that faceless assessment will minimize opportunities  for corruption by 
eliminating physical interface and person-to-person contact in the scrutiny assessments. 
The Committee appreciates CBDT for making all out efforts to ensure corruption free 
tax administration. 
3.8 The Committee was also informed that there was a very tedious process of refunds in 
the IT Department. The Committee recommends that a time frame should be put in place 
for refunds as it will ease things for assesses and if no refunds are made in the time 
frame, stern action should be taken against officers concerned. 
3.9 The Committee is aware that the officials who are charged with corruption take 
undue longer time in submitting replies against their charge sheets. The Committee is of 
the view that the time frame should be strictly followed in these cases and a clause 
should be added that those who do not reply to their charge sheets in given time frame 
may be considered guilty of charges made.  
3.10 Chairman of CBDT , while making presentation before the Committee briefed about 
the steps take n to ensure punitive vigilance in the organization. He made the following 
submission: - 
 “As far as punitive vigilance is concerned……we carried out a massive 
exercise of examining the antecedents of the officers and officials who were 
not discharging their  duties efficiently and properly.   We had to resort to 
the provisions of Rule 56(j) and we prematurely retired almost 57 officers.  
Out of those 57 officers, 30 officers belonged to Group 'A' service and the 
rest were from Group 'B' and Group 'C' services .  It is not that we are 
concentrating only on the staff or the junior officers.  We are taking a very, 
very comprehensive view of the entire administrative setup within our 
organization…...so that the functions get discharged very efficiently and in 
a manner in which they ought to be discharged.” 
 
3.11 CBDT has also furnished details of punitive action taken by CBDT in vigilance cases 
which are given below in the table: 

18 
 
Summary of Conviction Cases 
 
Total Dismisse
d 
100% 
pension & 
gratuity 
withheld 
Abated Under 
advanced 
stages of 
finalization 
Proceedin
gs are 
under 
way 
52 18 3 02 11 18 
 
 
3.12 CBDT has also furnished the details of cases involving officers/officials where 
disciplinary proceedings involving vigilance matters have been finalized during the last five 
years which are given in the table below: 
Year Total 
cases 
Major Penalty Minor Penalty No 
Action 
 No. of 
officials 
against 
whom 
proceed-
ings 
finalized  
Cut 
in 
pens-
ion  
Dismi-ssal 
/ Removal 
/Compu-
lsory 
Retirem-
ent 
Reduc
t-ion 
in 
Lower 
time 
Scale/ 
Rank 
Other 
Major 
penalt-
ies 
Total of 
major 
penalt-
ies 
Minor 
penal-
ties other 
than 
censure/
warn-ing 
Censure/
Warning  
Total 
of 
minor 
penalt-
ies 
Cases 
which 
were 
found to 
be not 
fit for 
taking 
action 
2019* 33 1 4 5 0 10 4 8 12 11 
2018 86 8 25 8 3 44 6 8 14 28 
2017 51 12 10 2 1 25 2 4 6 20 
2016 23 6 3 - - 9 - - - 14 
2015 33 16 3 1 - 20 - - - 13 
*Figures till September 2019. 
3.13 The Committee appreciates the punitive action taken by CBDT to compulsorily 
retire ‘ dead wood ’ from the Department as  corrupt, errant and non - performing 
officials are burden to the organization and the exchequer. The Committee understands 
that this move was in line with Prime Minister’s Independence Day address at the Red 
Fort last year, where he announced that the ‘black sheep’ in the tax administration who 
may have misused their power by harassing honest taxpayers or taking excessive action 
for minor pr ocedural violations will be removed. This action is also in line with the 
objectives of incumbent Government to clean -up the bureaucracy. The Committee 
recommends that more punitive action is required to be done to improve the image of 
CBDT and a massive exercise should be undertaken in this regard.  
Behavioural Ethics 
3.14 Taxpayers are law abiding citizens of this country and sometimes they feel harassed 
or helpless against rude or arbitrary behaviour of officers who treat them as petty criminals . 
They complain mostly about the rudeness in communication, cancellation of appointment 

19 
 
time, passing on accountability to another officer, raids during unusual time, harassment, 
misconduct and high -handedness of officers and staff. A Member of the Committe e during 
the meeting made following submission in regard to behavioral issues:- 
            “I still want to know whenever you have search operations, we keep hearing 
because I represent a broad spectrum of clients also and even friends I come 
to know, you can have a search operation that is your right, nobody can stop 
that because Section 132 gives you that position, but do you adhere to good 
behavioural norms in those search operations?  It is because what I keep 
hearing always is not what I think should happen.  I am not being very 
critical because I always feel assessee is your asset.  It is like, in courts if, 
there were no clients, there would be no need for Judges and lawyers.  But, 
we treat our clients as if we are the bosses and they are the subject s.  The 
same attitude I find with the Tax Department.  You don't treat your assessee 
as if you are there because of him.  This is our colonial hangover which 
continues to govern us whether it is Judiciary and whether it is Government 
Departments.  That is the one point I am making and that is something to do 
with the ethics that the Chairman was talking about; the behavioural ethics.” 
3.15 Another member of the C ommittee was also critical of the misconduct and rude 
behaviour on the part of income tax officials. He made the following submission:- 
              “From the papers which have been circulated to us, we are not able to get 
anything about the treatment to the assesses.  It is about your officials only.  
You have to treat the assesses with great honou r and respect.  That is not 
found in the Income -Tax Department.  Everyone has got dignity.  They 
have to be treated with utmost dignity.  There is a constitutional guarantee.  
But I find that the tax -papers are treated like accused.  Please have a 
slogan or logo saying that the tax-payers are friends.  They are the persons 
who are giving sources to this country.  I know your limitations of raids 
during nights.  You cannot enter a home during night.  But very often we 
find that your officers enter into the r esidence of the tax -payer during 
night.  You know that right to sleep is a Fundamental Right.  The Supreme 
Court has said it in very clear terms.  I want to know what actions have you 
taken against the officials who enter the houses of the tax -papers durin g 
nights.” 
3.16 The Committee appreciates CBDT for making an all -out effort to augment tax 
collection in the country and bring tax evaders into the tax net. The Committee, 
however, feels that the Department should treat assesses as their assets and follow good 
behavioural norms while conducting searches and raids. Tax Departments across the 
world have changed their stance towards taxpayers in terms of dealing with them which 
is to treat them as partners and clients rather than as tax evaders. The Department  
should adopt corporate etiquettes of service industry and transform into a service -
oriented organization. 
3.17 The Committee is of the view that i nstead of high -handed, arrogant and rude 
conduct, the income tax sleuths should be well behaved and deal with  the public with 
efficiency as well as decency as they are clients and partners of the department. Search 
operations during odd hours in night should also be avoided if there are no compelling 
reasons to do so. The department should have a policy of zero t olerance towards rude 
and arrogant conduct on the part of tax officials with taxpayers and for this the officials 

20 
 
should be imparted training in soft skills so that they could be courteous  and polite  
while dealing with taxpayers. The Committee recommends t hat errant officials should 
be penalized if they resort to such actions even after repeated complaints and warnings. 
The need for remedy could not be more urgent.  
3.18 Filing Income Tax returns is a cumbersome process, full of technicalities and 
therefore challenging. Sometimes, due to the complex nature of online forms, errors 
may creep in inadvertently. The Committee feels that law abiding taxpayers should be 
given an opportunity to rectify their returns. 
Misuse of Income Tax Department 
3.19 It is alleged that the Income Tax Department raids on persons considered close to 
opposition parties and such kind of allegations are made against almost all regimes that 
happen to be in power at the Centre. It is often heard and alleged by the opposition partie s 
that the Income Tax Department was politically being  misused as a ‘revengeful’ arm of those 
in power to target political opponents especially during the elections. 
 
3.20 This issue was raised in the meeting of the Committee held on 10 th January 2020. A 
Member of the Committee while raising this issue stated that there was an impression in the 
country that search operations or notices had a political slant. Another Member of the 
Committee opined that the Income Tax officials are just pawns in the hands of those in power 
who act on their behest. He was also of the opinion that a law should be enacted which 
prohibits them from being rewarded with political or bureaucratic offices post retirement.  
 
3.21 The Committee is of the opinion that CBDT should always conduct its work in a 
neutral, non -partisan and non -discriminatory manner so that the Department could 
gain respect in the eyes of the general masses for its political neutrality and no one could 
accuse them of working under political pressures. Working of  enforcement agencies 
under pressureof those in power creates crisis for institutional autonomy and against 
the very spirit of the concept of political neutrality of bureaucracy which may endanger 
the very fundamentals of democracy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
Vigilance Set Up in CBIC 
 
4. Directorate General of Vigilance (DGoV) is the apex body under the Board for 
vigilance administration in CBIC. It is headed by the Principal Director General of Vigilance , 
who functions as the full time CVO of CBIC. DGoV is an attached o ffice of CBIC in the 
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. CBIC has informed that several initiatives have 
been taken to strengthen preventive vigilance in the Board. DGoV undertakes surprise checks 
of sensitive formations through zonal units by assigning minimum number of surprise checks.  
4.1 It has been further informed by CBIC that Zonal Units of DGoV conduct s Vigilance 
Audits of their jurisdictional Commissionerates. During these audits, it is verified whether the 
systems and procedures laid down under various Rules/regulations/notifications etc. are being 
scrupulously followed. In addition to Vigilance Section which deals with the complaints 
against officers, special focus is given to determine the presence of vigilance angle in the 
critical areas like investigation, adjudication, refund, drawback and audit in the 
Commissionerates.  
 
4.2 Vigilance Directorate has been enhanced by creation of three new zones to strengthen 
preventive vigilance and officers under CBIC are being rotated between s ensitive and non -
sensitive posts on a regular basis. The Department of Revenue has appointed an Independent 
External Monitor (IEM) for Department of Revenue, CBIC and CBDT. It has also been 
decided that contracts of procurements of services in excess of Rs .50 lakhs, procurement of 
goods in excess of Rs.1 crore, and construction projects in excess of Rs.50 lakh shall be 
overseen by IEM.  
4.3 CBIC has also informed the Committee about application of  advanced technologies to 
bring in transparency and also to reduce human intervention in the Board. They informed 
about Risk Management System (RMS) technology which ensures clearance of about 85% 
consignments without assessment and examination and now only selected consignments are 
taken up for scrutiny and examination. Further the Indian Customs EDI Gateway (ICEGATE) 
introduced 24x7 e -filing, e-payment, electronic message exchange and helpline & combined 
with the Indian Customs EDI System (ICES), is the engine for effective handling of nearly ten 
million export and import documents annually as also 24x7 clearance of cargo. 
4.4 CBIC further informed about several other online mechanism s instituted  to reduce  
human intervention and also to improve vigilance administration in the Board. Some of them 
are E -SANCHIT, ICE TRAK, E -Payment of Duty, ICEDASH, E -Sealing, Advance 
Passengers Information System (APIS), Direct Port Delivery (DPD) Direct Port Entry (DPE), 
Single Window Interface for Facilitating Trade (SWIFT), etc.   
4.5    Regarding preventive vigilance set up in pl ace at ports in the country, the Chairman, 
CBIC in the meeting of the Committee held on 10th January 2020 submitted as under:- 
“almost one crore of containers come into the country.  We are transacting 
almost one crore  of containers but we hardly examine five per cent to ten per 
cent of that because almost seventy per cent to seventy -five per cent of the 
containers coming at any port in the country would go outside without 
examination. We have red flag indicators.  We h ave found out, depending on 
the profile of the party who is importing, where the goods are coming from, 
what type of goods are coming. We have profile based on that one.  We have a 

22 
 
very robust mechanism of red flag in the consignments and we have got a ris k 
management system which automatically gives whether the consignment has to 
be examined or not.  So, what happens is this. When the goods come in, they 
need to be examined unless the system says that it has to be examined.  
To that extent, the interaction or the discretion of the officer concerned would 
be reduced so that he would not be able to make out any mischief out of that 
particular activity which he is holding onto. Further, we have also done 
something called direct p ort delivery.  That means for the ship itself, the 
container would go into a truck or a train and it can be cleared. I mean there is 
no human intervention in that one.  Similarly, on export side also, we are 
giving something like direct port export but whe n these additional facilities are 
being given, we need to control that some bad elements do not bring goods into 
the country which are not supposed to come into the country without payment 
of duty or goods which can create a problem for the security of the  country.  
For that, we have been installing scanners across the country.  Across the 
major ports, we have installed scanners which also get scanned.  That scanner 
library is also being consulted by the officer in -charge so without a human 
intervention per se in the field we are able to control the way the goods are 
moving in.” 
4.6 The Committee takes note of the submission of CBIC in regard to the steps taken 
to strengthen preventive vigilance in the Department as well as at ports, airports etc. 
through ma ximum use of advance technology and reducing human intervention. The 
Committee appreciates that the CBIC has taken various measures such as ICEGATE, 
E-SANCHIT, ICETRAK, E -Payment of Duty, APIS, DPE, SWIFT etc. to streamline 
fast movement of goods and servi ces and to ensure robust preventive mechanism in the 
organisation.  
4.7 The Committee also notes that there are scanning and examination facilities at 
ports of our country in which only 5-10 per cent of the total containers per consignment 
are scanned and are picked up randomly by the system for scanning as ports have 
limited capacities for scanning. The Committee recommends that full -body or drive -
through scanners should be installed in a phased manner at all the ports in such a way 
that trucks or other vehicles carrying containers can simply pass through these scanners 
and get fully scanned as has been done at some integrated check posts and ports in the 
country. This will ensure 100 per cent scanning.  The Committee believes that after 
installation of the full body or drive through scanners at all the ports, the smuggling of 
concealed drugs, weapons and other contraband through the ports will be curbed. This 
will put an end to smuggling and subsequent revenue losses and criminal and terrorist 
activities.  
4.8 The Committee is also aware of the limitations of  scanners as they are manned 
by fallible officials who may fall prey to bribery as had happened during Mumbai bomb 
blast of 1993 in which some customs officials including an IRS officer had aided and 
abetted illegal imports of RDX and other weapons for the Mumbai bomb blast. In view 
of this, the Committee recommends that a f ool proof vigilance set up should be put in 
place and stern actions should be taken action corrupt officials in a time bound manner 
as the involvement of corrupt officials in import or export of illegal items may not only 
cause revenue loss but also pose threat to national security. The Committee also 

23 
 
recommends that CBIC may also appoint officers on deputation from other 
organisations in their vigilance units as they , being outsiders, may act in non -partisan 
manner during their limited tenure. 
4.9 With regard to punitive vigilance, CBIC has informed about the punitive action taken 
by it in vigilance cases. Summary of break - up of final orders issued by CBIC in respect of 
Group ‘A’ officers during the last five years is as per table shown below: 
S.No. Year Final order 
issued 
Major penalty 
imposed 
Minor 
penalty 
imposed 
 
Exonerated Abated 
1 2015 31 
 
8 2 21 0 
2 2016 35 
 
10 6 16 3 
3 2017 18 
 
8 1 8 1 
4 2018 26 
 
7 5 8 6 
5 2019 25 
 
5 5 12 3 
Total 135 
 
38 19 65 13 
 
4.10 Summary of   break -up of final orders issued in respect of Group B and Group C 
officers during the last five years is as under: 
 
S.No. Year Final 
order 
issued 
Major 
penalty 
imposed 
Minor 
penalty 
imposed 
 
Exonerated Death 
case 
Dismissal 
1 2015 242 99 50 
 
75 1 15 
2 2016 328 174 53 
 
89 3 10 
3 2017 232 115 41 
 
66 2 9 
4 2018 222 82 47 
 
72 3 18 
5 2019 248 88 66 
 
73 6 15 
Total 1272 558 257 375 15 67 
 
4.11 On the issue of  officers of CBIC who have gone on to appeal in courts after being 
compulsorily retired on account of malpractices under 56 (J). The Special Secretary then 
replied as under:- 
“CBIC has retired 22 Group -B officers and 15 Group -A officers. Normally, 
they have gone to CAT as a first appeal. Not everybody has gone, but some 
30-40 per cent of them have gone. CAT has categorically told them to exhaust 
the departmental remedy. The departmental remedy is Section 56(j) before a 
committee headed by the Secretary assi sted by two Joint Secretaries. There, 
the ground is explained and aggrieved would contest the ground on which they 

24 
 
have been retired. Based on the arguments, the committee recommends. 
Thereafter, it goes to the Finance Minister. The Finance Minister passes  an 
order. In all the cases, the Finance Minister has rejected wherever they have 
applied for reconsideration. Against the reconsideration also, the people have 
gone to CAT. I would say that the cases may be pending at some level. 
Nobody, so far, has got any benefit from any court. “ 
 
4.12 The Committee is pleased to note that several steps have been taken by CBIC to 
punish errant, corrupt or non -performing official s of the organisation s under its 
purview. The Committee also notes that CBIC has compulsoril y retired such officials 
who g ave a bad image to the organisation. This action is also in the line with the 
objectives of incumbent government to clean -up the rot in the bureaucracy. The 
Committee recommends that more punitive action is required and a mass ive exercise 
should be taken up in this regard at the earliest as it will give a strong message to other 
officials.  
Behavioural Ethics 
4.13 Indian tourists who come back from their foreign holidays often complain of being 
harassed or mistreated at our air ports as if they are smugglers. These tourists are law abiding 
citizens of our country and they get fed up with rude or arbitrary behaviour of officers who 
treat them as smugglers. They complain mostly about the rudeness and arrogance on the part 
of official’smisconduct and high -handedness of officers and staff of customs department  
while communicating  during searches. One Member of the Committee during the meeting 
raised this issue . Another member of the C ommittee was also critical of the rude and 
unprofessional behaviour on the part of CBIC officials at airports.  
4.14 The Committee is aware of the fact that CBIC is helping the Government in 
terms of collection of taxes and being an important enforcement organization their 
invaluable contribution to the country, cannot be denied. However, the Committee is of 
the view that the officials should project an image of professional taxmen with etiquettes 
of service industry and instead of arrogant and rude conduct, they should be well 
behaved and deal with t he public politely. The CBIC should have a policy of zero 
tolerance towards rude and arrogant conduct of tax officials and they should be 
imparted training in soft skills so that they could be courteous and polite while dealing 
with general public. The err ant officials should be penalized if they resort to such 
actions even after repeated warnings. 
4.15 The Committee, therefore, recommends  that the officials of CBIC should treat 
common Indian citizens returning from foreign tour as well as foreign tourists visiting 
India courteously and in a professional manner while performing their core job of 
searching for illegal contrabands. Indecent and feudal behaviour while conducting 
searches at airports dents the image of the department.  
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Vigilance Set Up in ISRO 
5. The Indian Space Research Organisation is the space agency of Government of India 
and has its headquarters in Bengaluru . The Committee visited Bengaluru during its study 
visit to Hyderabad, Bengaluru and Mumbai from 14 th to 18 th January, 2020 to ma ke an 
appraisal of the vigilance administration of several PSUs and PSBs. 
5.1 ISRO was established in 1969 . It comes under  the Department of Space, which 
reports to the Prime Minister of India. ISRO has a part time CVO. The Chief Vigilance 
Officer, Department of Space heads its Vigilance Division, however, the Joint Secretary 
(Administration) of the Department is designated as part time Chief Vigilance Officer of 
ISRO and is responsible for the overall vigilance administration of the Department. Ever y 
ISRO Centre/Unit has a Vigilance Wing headed by Vigilance Officer who reports to CVO. 
5.2 With regard to preventive vigilance, Joint Secretary (Administration ) informed the 
Committee that all p rocurement in ISRO is done through respective Committees and there 
are different Committees to deal with tenders of different values. Surprise inspections are 
conducted at ISRO Centres/Units by the vigilance officials. Intelligence inputs on security 
and vigilance matters are collected from CISF and utilized as inpu ts to strengthen vigilance. 
The Department implements rotation transfer policy in certain administrative areas which are 
vulnerable to corruption. Rotation of S&T personnel posted in different technical domains at 
ISRO Centres/Units is not always feasible.  The Committee has been apprised that ISRO is 
exploring the feasibility of implementing integrity pact in various types of procurement 
contracts as the Department’s procurement mostly consists of sophisticated technical items. 
5.3 On the issue of punitive vigilance, she informed that a Group ‘A’ officer of 
Semiconductor Laboratory, Chandigarh was imposed minor penalty of censure for 
procedural irregularity in 2016 in processing of contract after due consultation with CVC and 
three s anctions for prosecution were issued in 2017 by the Department and the matter is 
presently sub-judice in court. ISRO also informed that it has introduced e-payment and e-
procurement to bring in transparency and rule out scope for corruption. 
5.4 At the outset, the Committee congratulated ISRO on successful launch of India’s 
communication satellite GSAT -30 on 17 th January, 2020. The Committee was happy 
that ISRO, which is established in 1969, has been a source of pride for India. It has not 
only bagged achievement which others countries are yet to, it has also put India on the 
world map of space missions. 
5.5 On vigilance setup, the Committee  is of the view that corruption is a complex 
phenomenon involving officials, organizations both public and priv ate and public at 
large. Its roots may lie in an organization but the ramifications may extend beyond the 
boundaries of that organization. Therefore, the Committee recommends the 
Government to create an interface between the vigilance units of Central Gove rnment 
and its authorities, CPSUs, CPSBs and other bodies owned and controlled by the 
Central Government. The Committee is hopeful that such a platform will facilitate 
exchange of best practices, information and experiences. 
 
 
 

26 
 
General Recommendations: 
6.1 The Committee is of the opinion that in view of the extent of geographical spread 
and the scale of corruption in the country, the present vigilance set up is inadequate to 
handle the volume of work. The Committee therefore recommends that there is an 
imperative need to strengthen the vigilance administration with adequate manpower 
and requisite infrastructure including building up a robust surveillance system with 
certain amount of independence and autonomy so as to improve the effectiveness of 
vigilance administration and ensure expeditious disposal of cases. 
6.2 The Committee is of the view that surveillance is an integral part of vigilance, 
whether collecting intelligence about the corrupt practices committed or likely to be 
committed by the employees of  any organization or identifying areas vulnerable to 
corruption. At present, most organizations depend upon employees and informal 
sources for source information and intelligence about possible malpractices and 
misconduct among the employees of the organiz ation. In the absence of surveillance 
/intelligence unit, vigilance officers are over burdened with the dual responsibility of 
surveillance and vigilance administration. Therefore, the Committee recommends that a 
dedicated surveillance unit be set up in every organization for the purpose. 
6.3 The Committee also notes that over the years focus of organizations has shifted 
from punitive vigilance to preventive vigilance and organizations are increasingly using 
information and communication technologies such a s e -procurement, e -tendering, 
online grievance redressal mechanism to prevent the occurrence of lapses. The 
Committee is of the view that, quite often, individual employees don’t raise red flags 
and choose to remain mute spectators for fear of reprisal fro m the perpetrators. 
Therefore, the Committee desires that the feasibility of involving employees 
associations and trade unions in strengthening preventive and detective vigilance be 
explored. 
6.4 The Committee was informed that the post of CVO is an ex -cadre post initially 
appointed on deputation for three years which is extendable up to two years in the same PSU 
(total five years) or up to three years on transfer to another PSU on completion of initial 
tenure (3 years) in the previous PSU (i.e. total six y ears). Whereas, other Vigilance Officers 
are appointed from within the concerned PSUs, for a period of three years, keeping in view 
the sensitivity of the Vigilance wing and to avoid any vested interests.  
6.5 However, during the deliberations on the subject, some CMDs/CVOs had informed 
the Committee that the tenure of Vigilance Officers is short and inadequate, as much of the 
time  is spent on training and learning the nitty -gritty of this specialized job. Vigi lance 
Officers are selected from within the organization and since they lack exposure to the field 
of vigilance, these officials are trained through formal and on the job training. By the time 
these officials become well versed with their job, their tenure  is completed and they are 
repatriated to their original cadre. 
6.6 The Committee therefore recommends the Ministries  concerned to take all 
possible measures to ensure that successor CVO is appointed well before the incumbent 
CVO relinquishes charge. Furth er, considering the time spent on training and learning 
the job, the Committee recommends that the tenure of CVOs may be extended upto five 
years so as to  enable the organization to reap the benefits of the officers’ expertise in 
vigilance matters.  
 

27 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
1. The Committee feels that the possibility of involving employees associations and 
trade unions in strengthening preventive vigilance should also be explored.  
(Para 2.13)  
 
2. The Committee notes that CVC in its report ‘TOP 100 BANKING FRAUDS’ 
presented a sector -wise analysis of frauds and their general modus operandi , 
loopholes in the existing system and suggested systemic improvements to plug 
them. The Committee impresses upon  the Ministries concerned to ensure that 
organizations under their jurisdiction carry out systemic improvements suggested 
by the Commission and strengthen fraud prevention mechanism to reduce the 
incidence of frauds.                            (Para 2.14)  
 
3. The Committee appreciates the constant endeavour of Central Vigilance 
Commission to bring in transparency, equity and competitiveness in procurement 
and contracting through promoting the adoption and implementation of integrity 
pact. The Committee notes that multiple benefits like improved transparency, 
image and reputation as an ethical organization;  reduced external interference, 
frivolous lawsuits and complaints from vendors;  speed up the Tenders 
Procurement Process; etc.  have been accrued to ONGC, whi ch is the first 
organization in India to implement Integrity Pact. The Committee therefore 
recommends that Integrity Pact is implemented in all government 
agencies/organization and it is strengthened as a tool of robust preventive vigilance 
mechanism.                                                     (Para2.16) 
 
4. The Committee hopes that Integrity Index is progressively extended to cover all 
Government organizations and it is implemented in a manner that it promotes a 
healthy competition among the organisations to climb up the ladder. 
(Para 2.18) 
 
5. In view of the above, the Committee feels that there is a dire need to revamp the 
current traini ng apparatus of CVOs and VOs in  PSUs/PSBs by promoting 
awareness about latest technologies. The Committee, ac cordingly, recommends  
CVC to prepare extensive training framework/modules for CVOs and VOs of 
PSUs/PSBs by giving due regard to their specific areas of operations.  The 
Committee also recommends CVC to revamp the existing training programme so 
as to enable  CVOs and vigilance officials to keep pace with changing times with 
focus on advanced technology and forensics.              (Para 2.20) 
 
6. The Committee is in complete agreement with the views of the Commission, and 
recommends that learning from the abovementioned short comings diagnosed by 
the commission, proactive steps are taken by PSUs/PSBs to avert recurrence of 
such frauds in future.  The PSUs, PSBs and Insurance Companies should put in 
place SOPs for all their activities, by clearly defining ro le, function and delegation, 
at all levels in the organization, leaving a minor or no role for use of discretion. 
                                                      (Para 2.22) 
 

28 
 
7. The Committee also observes that most scams and financial frauds unearthed in 
the country in recent times are transnational in character and involved round 
tripping of funds. Round tripping usually involves several layers of financial 
transactions and a maze of companies, banks and foreign investors, thus 
presenting a formidable challenge for the investigators to establish the money trail. 
In view of rising incidence of transnational crimes, the Committee recommends 
the investigating agencies to create a pool of dedicated investigators with 
significant expertise in forensic audit.                           (Para 2.23) 
 
8. Therefore, the Committee is of the considered view that a Centralised Database 
containing details of suspicious entities, fraudsters and their general modus 
operandi be created by collating data available with indivi dual organizations, 
regulators, investigating agencies as seamless sharing of such information among 
all the stakeholders concerned will bring down cases of all nature. 
(Para 2.24) 
 
9. The Committee is of the view that Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), through 
which companies give back to the society, has the potential to uplift the living 
standards of the local population. But, usually,  companies spend the amount 
earmarked for CSR activities towards the development of their local township and 
infrastructure and for the benefit of the employees of the organisation and a very 
insignificant part of it is spent for the development of neighbourhood. The local 
population is by and large, deprived of benefits of CSR activities. The Committee 
feels that once the  Company’s CSR funds are streamlined towards the upliftment 
of local population, the activities such as pilferage might come down.  
                                (Para 2.26) 
 
10. The Committee therefore recommends that a provision for special allowance may 
be made for the CVOs, especially for those posted outside Delhi to effectively 
attract and retain talent.                            (Para 2.28) 
 
11. Further, the representatives of various bodie s brought to the notice of the 
Committee the plight of the officers working in the vigilance department. The 
Committee notes that officers working in Vigilance face delicate situation when 
they return to parent department as they have to work with colleagu es against 
whom they handled Vigilance case(s). This may affect their functioning and 
judgement in investigation. Hence, the Committee suggests CVC to ensure that at 
least 50% of the sanctioned strength of vigilance Department is drawn on 
deputation from other organization as far as practicable. 
(Para 2.29) 
 
12. However, the Committee is of the view that there is a little awareness about the 
procedure of filing complaint under PIDPI Resolution among the public. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to raise awareness about 
PIDPI Resolution through massive public outreach campaigns and wide publicity 
in the print, electronic media and also in social media which has emerged as a 
powerful participatory medium of communication in recent times. 
(Para 2.32) 
 

29 
 
13. Consequently, it was felt that the Act required amendments aimed at safeguarding 
against disclosures affecting sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the 
State, etc., before it is brought into force, the Government  introduced the Whi stle 
Blowers Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in the Lok Sabha which was passed by 
the Lok Sabha on 13 th May, 2015. The said Bill was transmitted to the Rajya 
Sabha. However, due to dissolution of 16 th Lok Sabha, this amendment Bill needs 
to be re -introduced in the House.  The Committee hopes that the Whistle Blowers 
Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2015 may be introduced in the House without any 
further delay and passed by both the Houses.              (Para 2.34) 
 
14. In order to achieve this, the Committee recommends to employ such novel 
technologies as  Block Chain technology, Artificial Intelligence etc. to leave 
miniscule opportunity for misuse by unscrupulous elements. The Government and 
the CVC should work together with the RBI and Banks to overcome such  types of 
frauds by strengthening the existing system.                          (Para 2.35) 
 
15. To ensure accountability of TPEs, the Committee recommends that a Code of 
Conduct and a legally enforceable agreement should be executed by all these 
TPEs, so as to bring in better ethics and accountability on their part. 
(Para 2.36)  
 
16. The Committee is appreciative of the actions taken by CBDT to improve 
preventive vigilance in the Department particularly in terms of elimination of 
human interference and maximum use of technology. The Committee, however, 
observes that overdependence on these technological tools give rise to new forms of 
corruption which do not require in -person interaction such as digital bribery, 
blackmail on the basis of data, unauthorised access to digital information of 
taxpayers that corrupt tax officials may have.      (Para 3.4) 
 
17. The Committee feels that technology may also lead to complexity of official 
procedures and processes as officials and tax evaders who understand technology 
and systems may exploit it to their evil design. Lack of digital literacy or 
technological illiteracy also brings in middlemen having technological knowhow to 
use the vulnerabilities of the service seekers to extort bribes.  The Committee, 
therefore, feels that the CBDT should not fall prey to techno utopianism as  
technology is merely an advanced tool and is not a final solution to eradicate 
corruption in departments under the purview of CBDT and it is not always true 
that if human interference is reduced, corruption might go down as it is human 
beings only who operate these technological tools who on occasions may turn 
fallible.                                  (Para 3.5) 
 
18. The Committee is of the view that corruption is a big challenge in this country and 
it should be dealt with through various mechanisms. A robust vigilance 
mechanism shou ld be put in place as the level of corruption increases where 
surveillance and enforcement by public authority is weak. CBDT may consider 
appointing officers from other organisations on deputation in vigilance units of 
their organisation for a particular period as this would ensure relative impartiality 
of vigilance officers.  Besides, a service condition may be added in the Departments 
under purview of CBDT that officers who resign or retire from their services may 
not join private sector.                               (Para 3.6) 

30 
 
 
19. The Committee notes that, historically, personal interaction between tax officer 
and tax payer has been a major avenue for corruption. The Committee feels that 
faceless assessment will minimize opportunities for corruption by eliminating 
physical interface and person -to-person contact in the scrutiny assessments. The 
Committee appreciates CBDT for making all out efforts to ensure corruption free 
tax administration.                    (Para 3.7) 
 
20. The Committee recommends that a time frame should be put in place for refunds 
as it will ease things for assesses and if no refunds are made in the time frame, 
stern action should be taken against officers concerned. 
(Para 3.8) 
 
21. The Committee is aware that the officials who are charged with corruption take 
undue longer time in submitting replies against their charge sheets. The 
Committee is of the view that the time frame should be strictly followed in these 
cases and a clause sho uld be added that those who do not reply to their charge 
sheets in given time frame may be considered guilty of charges made.  
(Para 3.9) 
 
22. The Committee appreciates the punitive action taken by CBDT to compulsorily 
retire ‘dead wood’ from the Department as corrupt, errant and non - performing 
officials are burden to the organization and the exchequer. The Committee 
understands that this move was in line with Prime Minister’s Independence Day 
address at the Red Fort last year, where he announced that the ‘black sheep’ in the 
tax administration who may have misused their power by harassing honest 
taxpayers or taking excessive action for minor procedural violations will be 
removed. This action is also in line with the objectives of  incumbent Government 
to clean -up the bureaucracy. The Committee recommends that more punitive 
action is required to be done to improve the image of CBDT and a massive exercise 
should be undertaken in this regard.                                                           (Para 3.13) 
 
23. The Committee appreciates CBDT for making an all -out effort to augment tax 
collection in the country and bring tax evaders into the tax net. The Committee, 
however, feels that the Department should treat assesses as their asset s and follow 
good behavioural norms while conducting searches and raids. Tax Departments 
across the world have changed their stance towards taxpayers in terms of dealing 
with them which is to treat them as partners and clients rather than as tax 
evaders. T he Department should adopt corporate etiquettes of service industry 
and transform into a service-oriented organization.                                   (Para 3.16) 
 
24. The Committee is of the view that instead of high -handed, arrogant and rude 
conduct, the income tax sleuths should be well behaved and deal with the public 
with efficiency as well as decency as they are clients and partners of the 
department. Search operations during odd hours in night should also be avoided if 
there are no compelling reasons to do so. The department should have a policy of 
zero tolerance towards rude and arrogant conduct on the part of tax officials with 
taxpayers and for this the officials should be imparted training in soft skills so that 
they could be courteous and polite w hile dealing with taxpayers. The Committee 
recommends that errant officials should be penalized if they resort to such actions 

31 
 
even after repeated complaints and warnings. The need for remedy could not be 
more urgent.                                          (Para 3.17) 
 
25. Filing Income Tax returns is a cumbersome process, full of technicalities and 
therefore challenging. Sometimes, due to the complex nature of online forms, 
errors may creep in inadvertently. The Committee feels that law abiding taxpayers 
should be given an opportunity to rectify their returns.             (Para 3.18) 
 
26. The Committee is of the opinion that CBDT should always conduct its work in a 
neutral, non -partisan and non -discriminatory manner so that the Department 
could gain respect in the eyes of the general masses for its political neutrality and 
no one could accuse them of working under political pressures. Working of 
enforcement agencies under pressure  of those in power creates crisis for 
institutional autonomy and against the very s pirit of the concept of political 
neutrality of bureaucracy which may endanger the very fundamentals of 
democracy.                   (Para 3.21) 
 
27. The Committee takes note of the submission of CBIC in regard to the steps taken 
to strengthen preventive vigil ance in the Department as well as at ports, airports 
etc. through maximum use of advance technology and reducing human 
intervention. The Committee appreciates that the CBIC has taken various 
measures such as ICEGATE, E-SANCHIT, ICETRAK, E-Payment of Duty, APIS, 
DPE, SWIFT etc. to streamline fast movement of goods and services and to ensure 
robust preventive mechanism in the organisation.                                        (Para 4.6) 
 
28. The Committee also notes that there are scanning and examination facilities at 
ports of our country in which only 5 -10 per cent of the total containers per 
consignment are scanned and are picked up randomly by the system for scanning 
as ports have limited capacities for scanning. The Committee recommends that 
full-body or drive -through scanners should be installed in a phased manner at all 
the ports in such a way that trucks or other vehicles carrying containers can 
simply pass through these scanners and get fully scanned as has been done at some 
integrated check posts and ports in the country. This will ensure 100 per cent 
scanning. The Committee believes that after installation of the full body or drive 
through scanners at all the ports, the smuggling of c oncealed drugs, weapons and 
other contraband through the ports will be curbed. This will put an end to 
smuggling and subsequent revenue losses and criminal and terrorist activities.  
                                                                                         (Para 4.7) 
 
29. The Committee is also aware of the limitations of  scanners as they are manned by 
fallible officials who may fall prey to bribery as had happened during Mumbai 
bomb blast of 1993 in which some customs officials including an IRS officer had 
aided and abetted illegal imports of RDX and other weapons for the Mumbai 
bomb blast. In view of this, the Committee recommends that a fool proof vigilance 
set up should be put in place and stern actions should be taken action corrupt 
officials in a time bound manner as the involvement of corrupt officials in import 
or export of illegal items may not only cause revenue loss but also pose threat to 
national security. The Committee also recommends that CBIC may also  appoint 
officers on deputation from other organisations in their vigilance units as they, 

32 
 
being outsiders, may act in non -partisan manner during their limited tenure.                                                                                        
           (Para 4.8) 
 
30. The Committee is pleased to note that several steps have been taken by CBIC to 
punish errant, corrupt or non -performing officials of the organisations under its 
purview. The Committee also notes that CBIC has compulsorily retired such 
officials who gave a bad image to the organisation. This action is also in the line 
with the objectives of incumbent government to clean -up the rot in the 
bureaucracy. The Committee recommends that more punitive action is  required 
and a massive exercise should be taken up in t his regard at the earliest as it will 
give a strong message to other officials.                (Para 4.12) 
 
31. The Committee is aware of the fact that CBIC is helping the Government in terms 
of collection of taxes and being an important enforcement organizati on their 
invaluable contribution to the country, cannot be denied. However, the Committee 
is of the view that the officials should project an image of professional taxmen with 
etiquettes of service industry and instead of arrogant and rude conduct, they 
should be well behaved and deal with the public politely. The CBIC should have a 
policy of zero tolerance towards rude and arrogant conduct of tax officials and 
they should be imparted training in soft skills so that they could be courteous and 
polite while dealing with general public. The errant officials should be penalized if 
they resort to such actions even after repeated warning.             (Para 4.14) 
 
32. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the officials of CBIC should treat 
common Indian citizens returning from foreign tour as well as foreign tourists 
visiting India courteously and in a professional manner while performing their 
core job of searching for illegal contrabands. Indecent and feudal behaviour while 
conducting searches at airports dents the image of the department.  
(Para 4.15) 
 
33. At the outset,  the Committee congratulated ISRO on successful launch of India’s 
communication satellite GSAT -30 on 17 th January, 2020. The Committee was 
happy that ISRO, which is established in 1969, has been a source of pride for 
India. It has not only bagged achievement which others countries are yet to, it has 
also put India on the world map of space missions.     (Para 5.4)  
 
34. On vigilance setup, the Committee  is of the view that corruption is a complex 
phenomenon involving officials, organizations both public and private and public 
at large. Its roots may lie in an organization but the ramifications may extend 
beyond the boundaries of that organization. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends the Government to create an interface between the vigilance units of 
Central Government and its authorities, CPSUs, CPSBs and other bodies owned 
and controlled by the Central Gov ernment. The Committee is hopeful that such a 
platform will facilitate exchange of best practices, information and experiences.
            (Para 5.5) 
 
35. The Committee is of the opinion that in view of the extent of geographical spread 
and the scale of corruption in the country, the present vigilance set up is 
inadequate to handle the volume of work. The Committee therefore recommends 
that there is an imperative need to strengthen the vigilanc e administration with 

33 
 
adequate manpower and requisite infrastructure including building up a robust 
surveillance system with certain amount of independence and autonomy so as to 
improve the effectiveness of vigilance administration and ensure expeditious 
disposal of cases.         (Para 6.1) 
 
36. The Committee is of the view that surveillance is an integral part of vigilance, 
whether collecting intelligence about the corrupt practices committed or likely to 
be committed by the employees of any organization or identifying areas vulnerable 
to corruption. At present, most organizations depend upon employees and 
informal sources for source information and intelligence about possible 
malpractices and misconduct among the employees of the organization. In the 
absence of surveillance /intelligence unit, vigilance officers are over burdened with 
the dual responsibility of surveillance and vigilance administration. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that a dedicated surveillance unit be set up in every 
organization for the purpose.        (Para 6.2) 
 
37. The Committee also notes that over the years focus of organizations has shifted 
from punitive vigilance to preventive vigilance and organizations are increasingly 
using information and communication technologies such as e -procurement, e -
tendering, online grievance redressal mechanism to prevent the occurrence of 
lapses. The Committee is of the view that, quite often, individual employees don’t 
raise red flags and choose to remain mute spectators for fear of reprisal from the 
perpetrators. Therefore, the Committee desires that the feasibility of involving 
employees associations and trade unions in strengthening preventive and detective 
vigilance be explored.         (Para 6.3) 
 
38. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministries c oncerned to take all 
possible measures to ensure that successor CVO is appointed well before the 
incumbent CVO relinquishes charge. Further, considering the time spent on 
training and learning the job, the Committee recommends that the tenure of CVOs 
may b e extended upto five years so as to  enable the organization to reap the 
benefits of the officers’ expertise in vigilance matters.     (Para 6.6)  
 
 
******  
  

34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

35 
 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
 The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 P.M. on Monday, the 1 st October, 2018 in 
Committee Room No. -4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi – 110001. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav                   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
3. Shri Majeed Memon 
4. Shri D. Raja 
5. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
8. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Tariq Anwar 
10. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
11. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury  
12. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
13. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi 
14. Shri Bhagwant Mann 
15. Shri B.V. Naik 
16. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
17. Shri M. Udhayakumar 
18. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director 
3. Shri Goutam Kumar, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
I. Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) 
1. Dr. C. Chandramouli, Secretary; and 
2. Shri Lok Ranjan, Additional Secretary. 
II. Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) 
Dr. Madhukar Gupta, Additional Secretary. 
III. Department of Financial Services (DFS) 
Shri Lalit Kumar Chandel, Economic Advisor. 
IV. Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) 
1. Ms. Archana Varma, Additional Secretary; and 
2. Shri J. Vinod Kumar, Director. 

36 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welco me to all Members of the re -
constituted Committee and sought their active participation and cooperation in the 
deliberations of the Committee. He introduced, Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, MP, Rajya Sabha 
and Shri Kaushal Kishore, MP, Lok Sabha who are newly nom inated to the Committee and 
also welcomed them.  Thereafter, Members of the Committee welcomed and congratulated 
the Chairman on being re-nominated as Chairman of the Committee. 
(After arrival of the witnesses) 
3. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, DoPT and other officers of the Department of 
Public Enterprises, Department of Financial Services and Central Vigilance Commission and 
informed them that the meeting has been convened to deliberate and discuss further on the 
subject – Effectiveness of Vigilance  Administration in Central Government Ministries, 
Corporation, Societies, PSEs, etc, which is at present under examination of the Committee. 
He also shared certain findings of the Committee from its interactions with the PSUs/PSBs on 
the subject during the  recently concluded study -visit to Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata. He 
then invited Secretary, DoPT and other officers to make their brief presentation on the 
subject.  
4. Secretary, DoPT, averred that prevention of corruption has always been the priority of 
the Government and to achieve this objective several laws have also been enacted to combat 
and curb the menace. However, in order to ensure effective implementation of such laws he 
stressed upon the importance of organizational level vigilance.  He further informed that in 
recent past several initiatives have been taken by the Department through the Central 
Vigilance Commission to ensure effectiveness of vigilance administration at all levels.  
5. Thereafter, Addl. Secretary, CVC along with Additional Secretary, DoPT made a 
combined power-point presentation on the subject inter -alia highlighting the mechanism of 
vigilance administration in Central Government along with role and appointment of CVOs, 
Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informers Resolution , 2004, status of Whistle 
Blowers’ Protection Act. She also mentioned about multipronged strategy of the DoPT and 
CVC on various areas in preventive vigilance administration through active pa rticipation of 
the management of the respective organisations. 
6. Additional Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises informed the Committee 
about the vigilance governance of the CPSUs. He informed that the Department issues 
guidelines for making the CP SUs to follow transparent procedures while implementing CSR 
initiatives. The representative of the Department of Financial Services informed the 
Committee that on the basis of an analysis done by the CVC in the recent past regarding 
some sectors prone to f rauds in the banking sector; a committee of Bankers to report on the 
issues of preventive mechanism in the financial institution has been set up. Based on the 
findings of that committee, common guidelines for all banks and financial institutions for 
preventive vigilance mechanism would be issued.  
7. Thereafter, Members of the Committee raised some issues/queries pertaining to the 
subject viz. punitive actions taken against CVOs who have failed to detect and stop recent 
banking frauds; inquiry regarding ban king fraud; inordinate delay in carrying out 
investigations; impact of Integrity Index on appointment of Lokpal; mandate of Independent 
External Monitors for PSUs; absence of full time CVOs in some PSUs/PSBs; lessons learnt 
from recent banking fraud; political interference as cause of corruption in PSUs; etc.  

37 
 
8. In the end, the Chairman enquired about the additional preventive measures being 
taken to curb corruption in delivery of goods and services, roadmap for extending the 
Integrity Index to all the PSU s and impediments in implementation of Whistleblower 
Protection Act. He also asked the Government to apprise the Committee about some 
International best practices for effective vigilance administration. The DoPT was asked to 
furnish its response on the poi nts raised by the Committee during the course of the meeting 
within ten days.  
9. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
10. The meeting adjourned at 04.04 PM to meet again on 8th October, 2018.  
 
 
  

38 
 
  
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
          The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 19 th November, 2018 in 
Committee Room No. -4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Exten sion 
Building, New Delhi – 110001. 
PRESENT 
1.       Shri Bhupender Yadav              -     Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
2. Shri Majeed Memon 
3. Shri D. Raja 
4. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
          LOK SABHA 
5.       Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
6.       Shrimati Meenakshi Lekhi 
7.       Shri Bhagwant Mann 
8.       Shri B.V. Naik 
9.       Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10.     Dr. Anirudhan Sampath 
11.     Shri M. Udhayakumar 
12.     Shri Kaushal Kishore 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.       Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.       Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director 
3.       Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
I.   Shri Harish Narsappa, Co-founder, DAKSH, Bangaluru 
II.   Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, New Delhi 
(i)       Shri Ameen Jauhar, Senior Fellow 
(ii)      Shri Prashant Reddy, Senior Fellow 
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed Members of the Committee and apprised them 
the agenda for the day i.e. (i) adoption of report on “ Effectiveness of Vigilance 
Administration in Central Government Ministries, Corporation, Societies, Public Sector 
Enterprises, etc” and recording of viewpoints of (ii) Shri Harish Narsappa, DAKSH and Shri 
Ameen Jauhar and Prashant Reddy, Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy on the subject 

39 
 
'Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process'. He then invited the Members to offer their views 
on the report so that it may be adopted. 
3.     Members deliberated on various issues pertaining to the report and raised issues relating 
to appointment procedures and posti ng of CBI and vigilance officers, prosecution of 
officials/CVOs of banks and institutions were fraud occurred, issue of Whistle Blowers 
Protection Bill etc. Thereafter, the Chairman assured the Members that Secretary, 
Department of Personnel and Training, Secretary, Department of Financial Services and 
other stakeholders will to be heard before the report is presented to the Parliament.  
(After arrival of the witnesses) 
4.       The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and requested Shri Harish Narsappa , DAKSH 
to take the floor followed by representatives of Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy.  
5.        Shri Harish Narsappa opined that the administrative work of judiciary is a part -time 
work carried out by respective Chief justice of High Courts and submitte d that judges should 
be relieved from administrative work by creating a separate specialized administrative cadre 
to manage administrative works of courts so that they can focus on judicial aspects. He added 
that the Parliament should enact a legislation t o create specialized administrative body as 
happened in some western countries. He also apprised the Committee of the non -
implementation of decisions of judiciary and added that also added that judiciary should be 
helped in implementing its decisions. He further added that uncertainty of case hearing due to 
frequent adjournments and non-scientific case listing in subordinate courts are major cause of 
pendency of cases. On the issue of optimal number of strength, he refuted the idea of judges -
population ratio and added that it should be based on cases filed, time spent by each judge 
and capacity of judges from subordinate courts onwards. 
6.      In addition to concurrence with the views of DAKSH, Ameen Jauhar, Senior Fellow, 
Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy apprised the Committee of their studies in mediation centres in 
Bangalore, Delhi and Allahabad and submitted that to strengthen justice delivery system 
standalone legislation on mediation is need of the hour to set out mediation pr ocess in India 
which should also look at aspects like regulation of mediation process, issues of accreditation 
and a centralized body to oversee its functioning. On the issue of All India Judicial Service, 
he added that if it is to be proposed the unique n ature of judiciary and subjective experience 
of each State may be taken into account during the selection of candidates. 
7.       Thereafter, Members  raised specific queries relating to increasing working hours of 
courts, judicial delay due to unpreparedne ss of lawyers, reducing frequent adjournments, 
interest of lawyers to be taken into account in the justice delivery system, wasting of time 
due to existing mediation process, rising cost of justice delivery, increasing judges strength 
and court infrastructure, registrars in courts to act as administrative officers to manage court 
affairs, All India Judicial service may violate principle of Article 233 of the Constitution of 
India, attachment of Family Courts with regular courts is against the Family Courts Act, low 
representation of minorities and backward sections in judiciary. 
8.       The Chairman, while summing-up, observed that judicial data is a prerequisite for any 
judicial reforms and proposed the creation of service like Information Utility Service as 
present in Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  to offer genuine information relating to 
judiciary. He was also in agreement with the witne sses that Chief Justices are burdened by 
administrative works of courts from transfers to appointments. He was furthered concerned 
with the lack of IT infrastructure, DNA labs, forensic labs etc in dedicated courts. He was 

40 
 
also of the view that judicial de lay is also due to heard by Supreme Court becoming final 
authority, instead of cases disposing at High Court level. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
9.       Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept. 
10.       The meeting adjourned at 4.07 PM to meet again on 26th November, 2018. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

41 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Friday, the 10 th January, 2020 in 
Committee Room No. -3, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament  House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi – 110001. 
The following Members and Witnesses attended the meeting:- 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav                  Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral 
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
4. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
5. Shri Vivek k.Tankha 
6. Shri P.Wilson 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
8. Shri MohanbhaiSanjibhaiDelkar 
9. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill  
10. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
11. Shri B.Manickam Tagore  
12. Shri Malook Nagar 
13. Shri Suresh Pujari 
14. Shri Omprakash BhupalsinhRajenimbalkar alias Pawan 
15. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
16. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
17. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri A.A.Rao, Additional Secretary  
2.        Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
3.        Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
4.        Shri Ashok k. Sahoo, Additional Director 
5.        Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
6.        Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
I. Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)  
1. Shri P.C. Mody, Chairman 
2. Shri Prabhash Shankar, Member (Admn.) & Spl. Secretary 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Jha, Addl. Secretary (Revenue) 
4. Ms. Anuja Sarangi, Pr. DGIT (Vig.)  
5. Shri Ritvik Pandey, Joint Secretary (Rev) 
6. Shri Rakesh Gupta, Addl. DGIT 
 

42 
 
II. Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) 
1. Dr. John Joseph, Chairman 
2. Shri Ashok Kumar Pandey, Member (Admn) & Spl. Secretary 
3. Shri Ranjan Kumar Sahoo, Pr. Director General & CVO 
4. Smt. Aruna N. Gupta, Pr. ADG (Vig.)  
5. Shri C.P.S. Bakshi, ADG-II (Vig.) 
6. Capt. Kapil Choudhary, ADG (Vig) 
III. Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) 
1. Smt. R. Jaya, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anurag Sharma, Deputy Secretary 
 
IV. Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) 
1. Smt. Archana Varma, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.Vinod Kumar, Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised 
them about the agenda for the day i.e. recording of oral evidence of the Chairpersons of 
CBDT and CBIC on the subject ‘Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration’. He apprised th e 
Committee that as per past practice, Public Sector Undertakings, Public Sector Banks and 
other Government bodies were invited from time to time before it to make appraisal of the 
vigilance mechanism of those organizations.  
3. The Chairman then welcomed the Chairpersons of CBDT and CBIC to the meeting 
and urged them to enlighten the Committee about the measures and initiatives taken to 
strengthen punitive, preventive and participative vigilance and to promote the culture of 
integrity, transparency and accountability and the strategy adopted to check frauds and reduce 
corruption in their respective organizations. 
4.      The Chairperson of CBDT started the presentation and briefed the Committee about 
the vigilance set up in the organization which inter-alia includes use of emerging 
technologies such as online filing, online payments, video conferencing, Computer Aided 
Selection system (CAS), Faceless Assessment and automation & randomization to strengthen 
preventive vigilance and to reduce human interface to  the maximum possible extent. He also 
briefed about strengthening of time bound grievance redressal system and review and 
inspections in the organization.  
5. The Chairperson, CBDT  further apprised that the officers of CBDT are  trained 
regularly for capa city building and policy of rotational transfers is  strictly implemented to 
strengthen the vigilance set up in CBDT. He then informed the Committee that CBDT carried 
out a massive exercise of examining the antecedents of the officials who were not discharging 
their duties properly and efficiently and prematurely retired about 57 officers under Rule 
56(j) of Fundamental Rules. 
6. Thereafter, Chairperson, CBIC while elaborating vigilance mechanism in his 
organisation,  apprised the Committee that latest tech nologies such as risk management 
system, scanners, direct port delivery are used at ports to reduce scope for discretion and to 
enhance supply chain security. He then briefly touched upon the other initiatives taken in the 
CBIC to enhance the vigilance mechanism in CBIC. 

43 
 
7.     The Chairman of the Committee noted the points made by both the Chairpersons and 
stated that vigilance is not just about leveraging latest technologies and eliminating human 
interface, but it also includes instilling ethical values a nd discipline in officials. He then 
enquired about the initiatives taken by CBIC in this regard. In response, the Chairperson of 
CBIC stated that a large number of officials including Principal Commissioners, 
Commissioners have been compulsorily retired in  public interest to send across a strong 
message that if an officer doesn’t maintain honesty and integrity, he is liable to be removed 
from the service. 
8. Before seeking clarifications from the witnesses, the Chairman and Members made 
certain suggestions which inter-alia include framing of guidelines or a code of conduct for 
officials who are dealing with the tax payers especially during raids; scope for correction for 
faulty tax payers; enrolment of more banks to empower tax deposits; time bound refund of  
excess collection of tax; discourage post retirement employment for Chairperson and 
Members of the Board etc,. 
9. After the presentation was over, the following queries were raised by the Chairman 
and Members during the meeting: 
Queries pertaining to CBDT: 
(i) How many officers of CBDT have resigned and joined the private sector in 
recent years? Whether such officers bestowed any favours on Private sector 
individuals during their term of office? Whether such officers are under 
constant vigil of the vigilance cell of your organization? 
 
(ii) Whether CBDT has framed any guidelines/code of conduct as to how its 
officers should treat assesses while undertaking search operations? 
 
(iii) Annexure 5 appended to the written replies of CBDT states that there are  lot  
of irregularities in appellate orders. The orders have to passed within 15 days 
of the last hearing and in this regard, instructions were issued by CBDT in 
2013, then in 2015 and again in 2018.What was the necessity of issuing 
instructions time and again?  Provide a brief note on the irregularities and 
lapses that have been earmarked in the instructions and has there been any 
improvement ever since the last circular has been issued? 
 
(iv) Whether CBDT contemplates introducing a one -time settlement system on the 
lines of Plea Bargaining as in United States of America? 
 
(v) Most often IT officials flout the prescribed norms and procedures and conduct 
IT raids at night and indiscriminately attach bank accounts to harass tax 
payers. Whether CBDT has taken any action against such officials? 
 
(vi) Furnish a detailed list of IT raids conducted during the election period between 
2016-2019. State in brief the follow up action taken in respect of each of those 
raids? 
 
(vii) How many appeals have been filed by the Commissioner of Income Ta x 
against the orders of Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) that were 
decided in favour of tax payers? What is the success rate of the departmental 
appeals at ITAT, High Court and Supreme Court? What is the average 
expenditure incurred by CBDT on litigation in a year? 

44 
 
 
(viii) Provide a brief overview of the internal vigilance mechanism of your 
organization. Are these vigilance Officers belongs to the organization or are 
they deployed from outside the organization? 
 
(ix) Whether the Department contemplates bringing inf ormal sector (eg: vendors, 
owners of small businesses) within the tax fold so as to widen the tax base? 
 
 
Queries pertaining to CBIC: 
(i) How many officers of CBIC have resigned and joined the private sector in 
recent years? Whether such officers bestowed any favours on private sector 
individuals during their term of office? Whether such officers are under 
constant vigil of the vigilance cell of your organization? 
 
(ii) How many sea ports are equipped with scanners? Furnish details port-wise. 
 
(iii) How is supply chain security being subverted at ports? What is the  
modus operandi  adopted by the smugglers to smuggle contraband and 
valuables through the sea route? How have scanners installed at ports enabled 
Customs authorities to thwart such attempts? 
 
(iv) Why has India become a ‘World’s dumping yard’ for E -waste? How is such 
waste being handled?  List out the steps taken by CBIC to prevent illegal 
dumping of discarded electronic goods in India? 
 
 
Queries pertaining to CVC: 
(i) Role of CVC vis-a-vis Lokpal? 
 
10. The Chairman then directed the officials to furnish replies to the queries raised during 
the meeting within 15 days time. 
11. Verbatim record of the meeting of the Committee was kept. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
12. The Chairman then requested the Members to give their journey proforma regarding 
study visit of the Committee to Hyderabad, Bengaluru and Mumbai from 14th to 18th January, 
2020. 
13.    The Meeting was adjourned at 12.07 PM with a vote of Thanks to the Chair. 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8 th September, 2020 in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi – 110001.  Following Members attended the sitting:- 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral  
3. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
5. Shri P. Wilson 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Mohanbhai S.  Delkar 
8. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
9. Shri Malook Nagar 
10.  Shri Suresh Punjari 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
12.  Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
       Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
       Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
       Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
       Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed Members of the Committee and apprised them 
the agenda for the day i.e., adoption of following four reports:- 
(i) Draft One Hundred -second Report on the subject ‘Effectiveness of Vigilance 
Administration in certain Revenue & Banking Institutions and Selected CPSEs’; 
 
(ii)           *    *    * 
 
(iii)           *    *    *     
(iv)           *    *    * 
3. Thereafter, Members deliberated on the Reports and the Reports were adopted 
without any alterations/modifications. Since both Houses of Parliament were not in Session 
and the present Committee’s term was going to expire on 13 th September, 2020, the 
Committee decided to present the above mentioned Reports to the Hon’ble Chairman, Raj ya 

46 
 
Sabha, before they are presented/ laid before both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing 
session. 
4. *                                                          *                                                                 * 
. 
5. The meeting was then adjourned at 11.30. AM.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________  
***relate to other matters. 
  

47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
  

48 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
STUDY VISIT NOTE 
CHAIRMAN 
Name of Committee Chairman  :  Shri Bhupender Yadav 
MEMBERS 
Total No. of Members : 30 
No. of Members who attended the visit  : 12 
No. of accompanying persons  : 2  
SECRETARIAT 
No. of Secretariat Staff  : 5 (including staff of Chairman of the   
  Committee) 
PLACES AND DURATION 
States visited  : Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and West 
  Bengal 
Places visited  : Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata 
Duration  : 26th to 31st August, 2018 
No. of Days  : 6 
Night Halts  : 5 
HOST ORGANISATAION 
Government of India : Nil 
Organization Name : Nyeveli Lignite Corporation Ltd.,  
  Life Corporation of India Ltd and UCO Bank 
State Government : Nil 
  

49 
 
 The purpose of the study -visit to Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata from  26th to 31 st 
August, 2018 (Tour Programme at Appendix-I) was to make appraisal of vigilance 
mechanism of select PSUs/PSBs and hold wider consultation with the top managements and 
CVOs of those bodies on the subject " Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration in Central 
Government Ministries, Corporation, Societies, Public Sector Enterprises, etc." *     *. 
*   *   *   *      * 
Members Attend ance and list of participants, who interacted with the Committee, are 
annexed as Appendix-II and Appendix-III, respectively. 
CHAPTER - I 
Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration in Central Government Ministries, 
Corporation, Societies, Public Sector Enterprises, etc. 
 The Committee had interaction with the representatives Neyveli Lignite Corporation 
Ltd. (NLC), Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (CPCL) and United India Insurance 
Company Ltd (UIICL) at Chennai;  Life Insurance Corporation (LIC), Shippin g Corporation 
of India Ltd and Dena Bank at Mumbai; UCO Bank, Coal India Ltd. and Metal Scrap Trading 
Corporation Ltd. (MSTC) at Kolkata on the subject. Officers from the concerned 
Ministries/Departments and DoPT were also present in those meetings. 
2. The above mentioned PSUs/PSBs made a detailed presentations to the Committee 
inter-alia highlighting their internal vigilance mechanism, steps taken by them in 
strengthening vigilance administration, spreading awareness about vigilance amongst their 
stakeholders, etc. Following points were highlighted by the PSUs/PSBs in their presentation: 
 The Committee was apprised by the top management of the PSUs/PSBs that their 
focus has shifted from punitive to preventive vigilance. They have leveraged 
Information and Co mmunication Technology (ICT) for this purpose which inter -
alia includes online tendering, bill tracking, e -procurement, e -auction, online 
filing and tracking of complains, etc. The Committee was also apprised that 
because of these steps, taken over the yea rs, number of vigilance cases has gone 
down significantly. 
 Further, as a part of preventive vigilance, ‘vigilance awareness weeks’ are 
organized regularly and the employees, clients, vendors, public etc. are made 
aware by holding seminars/lectures and publ icizing it through workshops, radio, 
Whatsapp and SMS, etc. 
 Notice Boards have been displayed in all the Units, to sensitize the Public not to 
give bribe and to intimate demand of bribe to the Competent Authority. 
 Vigilance activities and Vigilance related  issues are being published through in -
house magazine. 
 Surprise inspections and audit of satellite offices are done on regular intervals to 
check any fraud at the cutting edge level.  
 Various Complaints were referred to CVC and CBI, for advice/ investigati on 
Provision for internal and external audit including internal inspection of all 
Offices of PSUs and PSBs. 
 Provision for property returns obtained from employees annually. 
 Establishment of robust online grievance reporting and redressal mechanism 
adopted by all PSUs/PSBs including development of in -house data vigilance 
module. 
____________________ 
***relate to other matters 

50 
 
 All procurements as per CVC guidelines. E -Tendering process as well as Reverse 
Auction system in place. 
 
3. Several queries viz. implementation of policy of zero tolerance towards corruption, 
check on pilferage of goods at source and during transportation, requirement of dedicated 
cadre within the PSUs/PSBs for vigilance purpose, reasons for not having a full time CVOs 
for certain PSUs, impediments for whistle blower protection policy, etc. were raised by the 
Chairman and Members of the Committee, which were responded by the representatives of 
the PSUs/PSBs. On the presentation made by the PSUs/PSBs, the Members of the 
observations of the Committee on the issues raised in the meetings are enumerated as under:- 
 There is a need for adequate staffing of the Vigilance Wing/Department of PSUs 
so that they can fulfil their mandate properly. 
 As regard, the selection criteria for selection of Vigilance officers/personnel in the 
organization it was stressed upon that such criteria should be stringent and persons 
of impeccable integrity and sound knowledge should be appointed on such posts. 
 The PSUs may explore the possibility of having a full -fledged dedicated cadre of 
vigilance personnel to deal with vigilance cases. This will further help in 
improving vigilance administration in the organisation. It was felt the need for 
enhancing the tenure of Vigilance Officers which is at present 3 years t o at least 5 
years, as much of their time is spent on learning and training on vigilance 
machinery and issues.  
 Preventive vigilance, which signifies continuous watchfulness on the part of the 
top management, is the need of the hour. It was stressed on the  need to associate 
trade unions in vigilance administration especially preventive vigilance.  
 Promotion of whistle blower protection policy is not only extremely beneficial to 
the organisation and its employees, but also for its shareholders, society and t he 
nation at large.  
 As per the presentation made by PSUs/PSBs to the Committee, it was noted that 
the number of vigilance complaints made/registered is coming down significantly 
over the years. There may be two scenarios, either this might be due to the 
robustness of the vigilance administration in the organization or might also due to 
lack of people’s confidence in the vigilance setup of the organization to mitigate 
the problem. 
 As part of preventive vigilance many programmes like organizing vigilance 
awareness weeks, etc. are being carried out by PSUs/PSBs. But it was felt by the 
Committee that such awareness do not yield desired results. There is a need to 
rethink strategies for enhancing vigilance awareness among employees of the 
organization. 
 Pilferage of Coal at the mining site as well as during its transportation has been a 
big concern. The Committee was made to understand that one of the major causes 
of pilferage of Coal from the mining site by the local population is their abject 
poverty. The Member felt that Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), which was 
introduced as company’s efforts to improve society in some way, has the potential 
to uplift the living standards of the local population. 
 NLC’s Vigilance Systems/Procedures has been certified by I SO 9001 -2015 
Quality Management Systems. All other PSUs should follow this example.  
 During the interaction with the PSUs/PSBs, it was observed that fraud and other 
malpractices still persists in certain areas of those undertakings, which is an 
indication of failure of internal vigilance mechanism. Thus all PSBs should take 
proactive steps to eradicate such malpractices completely. 

51 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 *    *    *   
 * 
*    *    *    
2. *    *    *    
 
* * *  
 
(i) *    *    *    
 (ii) *    *    *  
(iii) *    *    *  
(iv) *    *    *  
(v) *    *    *  
(vi) *    *    * 
(vii) *    *    *  
(viii) *    *    *  
(ix) *    *    *  
(x) *    *    *  
(xi) *    *    *  
(xii) *    *    * 
3. *    *    *   
     
4. *    *    *    
5. *    *    *    
 
6. *    *    *    
7. *    *    *    
8. *    *    *    
_________________ 
*** relates to other matter 

52 
 
 
9. *    *    *    
10. *    *    *    
11. *    *    *    
 
*    *    *    
 *    *    *   
12. *    *    *    
13. *    *    *    
14. *    *    *    
15. *    *    *     
16. *    *    *    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
*** relates to other matter 
 

53 
 
Appendix - I 
TOUR PROGRAMME 
CHENNAI – MUMBAI - KOLKATA  26TH TO 31ST AUGUST, 2018 
 
DAY AND 
DATE 
 
TIME BUSINESS 
27.08.2018 
MONDAY 
1000 Hrs. Meeting with the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. (NLC)  
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. and United India Insurance  
Company Ltd. on the “Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration in 
Central Government Ministries, Corporation, Societies, Public 
Sector Enterprises, etc.” 
1130 Hrs. Interaction with the Registrar General of the Madras High Court, 
representatives of the State Government, Subordinate Courts, Bar 
Association, Bar Council of Tamil Nadu & Puducherry, State 
Judicial Academy, SLSA and retired Judges of the High Court on  
‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’. 
 1630 Hrs. Visit to the Madras High Court complex and interaction with the 
Hon’ble Judges on ‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’. 
 
NIGHT STAY AT CHENNAI 
 
28.08.2018 
TUESDAY 
1100 Hrs. Visit to the Puzhal Central Prison in Chennai to review the 
functioning of Legal Aid Clinic in the Jail and implementation of 
Supreme Court’s direction on Section 436A of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. 
2110 Hrs. 
 
Departure for Mumbai by AI 93 
2315 Hrs. Arrival at Mumbai 
NIGHT STAY AT MUMBAI 
 
29.08.2018 
WEDNESDAY 
1000 Hrs. Meeting with Life Insurance Corporation (LIC ), Dena Bank and   
Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. on the “Effectiveness of 
Vigilance Administration in Central Government Ministries, 
Corporation, Societies, Public Sector Enterprises, etc.” 
1130 Hrs. Interaction with Registrar General of the Bombay High Court, 
representatives of the State Government, Subordinate Courts, Bar 
Association, Bar Council of Maharashtra & Goa, State Judicial 
Academy, SLSA and retired Judges of the High Court on 
‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’. 
1630 Hrs. Visit to the Bombay High Court complex and interaction with the 
Hon’ble Judges on ‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’. 
NIGHT STAY AT MUMBAI 
 
30.08.2018 
THURSDAY 
1100 Hrs. Visit to the Mumbai Central Prison (Arthur Road Jail) to review the 
functioning of Legal Aid Clinic in the Jail and implementation of 
Supreme Court’s direction on Section 436A of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. 

54 
 
2030 Hrs. Departure for Kolkata by AI 774 
2315 Hrs. Arrival at Kolkata 
NIGHT STAY AT KOLKATA 
 
31.08.2018 
FRIDAY 
1000 Hrs. Meeting with the UCO Bank,  Coal India Ltd. and Metal Scrap 
Trading Corporation Ltd. (MSTC) on the “Effectiveness of 
Vigilance Administration in Central Government Ministries, 
Corporation, Societies, Public Sector Enterprises, etc.” 
1130 Hrs. Interaction with Registrar General of the Calcutta High Court,  
representatives of the State Government, Subordinate Courts, Bar 
Association, Bar Council of West Bengal, State Judicial Academy , 
SLSA and retired Judges of the High Court on ‘ Strengthening the 
Justice Delivery Process’. 
1630 Hrs. Visit to Calcutta High Court complex and interaction with the 
Hon’ble Judges on ‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’. 
DISPERSAL 
 
 
**** 
  

55 
 
Appendix- II 
 Member's Attendance 
S.No  Chennai Mumbai Kolkata 
1.  Shri Bhupender Yadav X ✔ ✔ 
2.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta ✔ ✔ ✔ 
3.  Shri Majeed Memon ✔ ✔ X 
4.  Shri D. Raja ✔ ✔ X 
5.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao ✔ ✔ X 
6.  Shri Vivek K. Tankha ✔ ✔ X 
7.  Dr. Subramanian Swamy ✔ ✔ X 
8.  Dr. Sanjeev Balyan X ✔ ✔ 
9.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee ✔ ✔ ✔ 
10.  Shri Bhagwant Mann ✔ ✔ X 
11.  Shri B.V. Naik ✔ ✔ ✔ 
12.  Adv. Anshul Verma ✔ ✔ ✔ 
 
**** 
 
  

56 
 
Appendix - III 
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS WHO INTERACTED WITH THE COMMITTEE DURING 
THE STUDY-VISIT. 
 
CHENNAI 
 
Date: 27-08-2018      Meeting  Venue  :  Hotel Le Meridien, Chennai                                   
Subject: Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration in Central Government Ministries, 
Corporation, Societies, Public Sector Enterprises, etc. 
ATTENDANCE OF PARTICIPANTS 
I. Neyveli Lignite Corporation India Limited (NLCIL)  
 1.  Shri Rakesh Kumar, Director, Finance (Additional charge of CMD) 
 2. Shri R. Vikraman, Director (HR) 
 3. Shri Venkata Subramanian, CVO  
 4. Shri N. Sankar, CGM (HR) 
II. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. 
 1. Shri K.B. Vijay Srinivas, Director & General Manager 
 2. Shri S. Gopakumar, Director & General Manager 
 3. Shri V. Sundaresan, Chief Vigilance Officer 
 4. Shri B.B. Dash, General Manager 
 5. Shri D.T.V. Sastri, General Manager 
III. Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited (CPCL) 
 1. Shri S. N. Pandey, MD 
 2. Shri G. Aravindan, Director (D) 
 3. Shri Rajeev Ailawadi, Director (F) 
 4. Shri R. Srikanthan, Director (T) 
 5. Shri A. S. Rajkumar, CVO  
 6. Shri M. Sankarnarayanan, Chief General Manager 
 
 Shri Mukesh Chaudhary, Director, Ministry of Coal 
 Shri Vijay Sharma, Director, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
 Shri A.K. Dogra, Deputy Secretary, Department of Financial Services, Ministry of  
 Finance  
 Shri Juglal Singh, Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry 
 of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 
 
 

57 
 
MUMBAI 
Date:  29-08-2018                              Meeting Venue : Hotel Trident, Mumbai                                                
Subject:   Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration  
ATTENDANCE OF PARTICIPANTS 
I. Life Insurance Corporation of India 
  1. Smt. Usha Sangwan, MD 
 2. Shri B. Venugopal, MD 
 3. Smt. Sunita Sharma, MD 
 4. Shri. S. Venkateswaralu, CVO 
 5. Shri. Sharad Shrivastava, ED 
 6. Shri Mukesh Gupta, ED 
 7. Shri D. N. Joshi, ED 
 8. Shri. R. K. Sood, ED 
 9. Shri. D. K. Banerjee, ED 
II. Shipping Corporation of India 
 1. Shri Anoop Sharma, CMD 
 2. Shri Deepak Chaturvedi, CVO 
 3. Shri S.P.S Jaggi, Director (P) 
III. Dena Bank 
 1. Ms. Anjali Bansal, Non-Executive Chairman 
 2. Shri Parshuram Panda, CVO 
 3. Shri Ramesh S. Singh, ED 
 4. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Yaduvanshi, ED 
  
Shri. Manish Gupta, Director (Vigilance), Department of Finance Service, Ministry of 
Finance 
Shri. Jayaseelan, Director (Vigilance), Ministry of Shipping 
Shri Juglal Singh, Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training 
  

58 
 
KOLKATA 
Date: 31-08-2018                        Meeting  Venue: The Oberoi Grand Hotel, Kolkata 
Subject: Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration  
ATTENDANCE OF PARTICIPANTS 
I. II. UCO Bank 
 1. Shri R. K. Takkar, MD & CEO  
 2. Shri Charan Singh, ED 
 3. Shri Pradeep Kumar, CVO 
 4. Shri Raspal Singh, GM 
 5. Shri A. K. Murmu, AGM 
II. Coal India Ltd. 
 1. Shri Binay Dayal, Director (T) 
 2. Shri Venkata Subramanian, CVO, 
 3. Shri Ashok Labhane, CVO (WCL, Nagpur) 
 4. Shri Munawar Khursheed, CVO (MCL, Sambalpur)  
 5. Shri Sandeep Raj, CVO (Central Mines Planning & Design Institute Ltd) 
 6. Shri A. Sah, Chief Manager 
III. MSTC Ltd. 
 1. Shri A. K. Basu, Director (Finance) 
 2. Shri Bhanu Kumar, Director (Commercial) 
 3. Shri M. P. Shrivastava, DGM 
 4. Shri B. S. Pradhan, Sr. Manager (Vigilance) 
  
Shri Gurdeep Singh, Director, Department of Finance Service, Ministry of Finance 
Shri Mukesh Chaudhary, Director, Ministry of Coal 
Shri Neeraj Agrawal, Director, Ministry of Steel 
Shri Jai Narain, Under Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
  
Annexure-II 
STUDY VISIT NOTE 
 
CHAIRMAN 
Name of Committee Chairman  :  Shri Bhupender Yadav 
MEMBERS 
Total No. of Members : 27 
No. of Members who attended the visit  : 15 
No. of accompanying persons  : 06 
SECRETARIAT 
No. of Secretariat Staff  : 5 (including P.S. to Chairman ) 
PLACES AND DURATION 
States visited                                                       : Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and         
Maharashtra  
Places visited  : Hyderabad, Benaluru and Mumbai  
Duration  : 15th to 18th January, 2020 
No. of Days  : 4 
Night Halts  : 4 
HOST ORGANISATAION 
Government of India : Nil 
Organization Name : Andhra Bank, Canara Bank and Union Bank 
    
State Government : Nil 
  

60 
 
STUDY NOTE 
 
The purpose of the study -visit of the Committee to Hyderabad, Bengaluru and 
Mumbai from  15th to 18 th January, 2020  (Tour Programme at Annexure-I) was to make 
appraisal of vigilance mechanism of select PSUs/PSBs and hold wider consultation with the 
top managements and CVOs of those bodies on the subject "Effectiveness of Vigilance 
Administration in Central Government Ministries, Corporation, Societ ies, Public Sector 
Enterprises, etc." The Committee also held interactions with the Hon'ble Judges and 
Registrar-General of High Courts, Representatives of State Governments, Judicial , Officers 
of Subordinate Courts, Bar Associations, Bar Councils, State Judicial Academies, State Legal 
Service Authorities, retired Judges on the subject "Strengthening the Justice Delivery 
Process". Members Attendance and list of participants, who interacted with the Committee, 
are annexed as Annexure-II and Annexure-III, res pectively. Brief notes of the business 
transacted by the Committee at each places are summarized date-wise as under:- 
 
15th January, 2020 
 
 *     *      * 
 
2. *     *      * 
2.1. *     *      * 
 *     *      * 
 
2.2 *     *      * 
2.3 *     *      * 
 
2.4 *     *      * 
2.5 *     *      * 
2.6 *     *      * 
2.7 *     *      * 
2.8 *     *      * 
2.9 *     *      * 
2.10 *     *      *.  
 *     *      * 
2.11 *     *      
2.12 *     *      * 
2.13 *     *      * 
2.14 *     *      * 
 
Review of Vigilance Administration of Andhra Bank, Electronics Corporation of India, 
National Mineral Development Corporation and Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd. at  
Hyderabad 
2.15 The Committee had interaction with the representatives of Andhra Bank, Electronics 
Corporation of India, National Mineral Development Corporation and Mishra Dhatu Nigam 
Ltd. at Hyderabad on the subject. Officers from the concerned Ministries/Departments and 
DoPT were also present in these meetings. 
Andhra Bank: 
2.16 A full time Chief Vig ilance Officer (CVO) has been appointed by the Department of 
Financial Services, Ministry of Finance in consultation with Central Vigilance Commission 
(CVC). CVO functions as an extended arm of CVC and provides a link between the Bank, 
CVC, CBI and other E xternal agencies including Enforcement Directorate. CVO performs 
role of   an advisor to the MD & CEO on all vigilance related matters and reports to him. 
________________ 
*** relates to other matter 

61 
 
2.17 The Committee noted the Preventive Vigilance Initiatives taken by the Andhra Bank, 
which are as under:- 
 
(i) Preventive vigilance meetings with Branch Managers and Zonal Officials. 
(ii) Conduction of Preventive Vigilance inspection in all branches. 
(iii)  Investigation of Complaints & Initiation of appropriate remedial Action. 
(iv) Enhancing vigilance awareness and Compliance level among the employees 
through CVO’s Monthly magazines and sharing of information through 
whatsapp Group to reach out all Managers and other officials of the Bank. 
2.18 The Committee also noted t he use of Leverage of Technology for transparency & 
reduction of corruption in the Andhra Bank viz. whistle blower portal (Intranet); off Site 
Monitoring System; implementation of controls in Core Banking Solution (CBS) for various 
Delegation of powers of the Branch officials, modification in repayment schedule; issuance 
of Solvency Certificate through Finacle System etc.; concessions module for Trade Finance 
through Finacle System.  
2.19 The Committee was further informed that the Bank has implemented Integrity Pact on 
01.10.2018 and two Independent External Monitors (IEMs) were nominated. Quarterly 
Structured Meetings of IEMs with CVO & concerned Executives are conducted and Action 
Taken Report on the Minutes of the meetings is reviewed. Bank is also affec ting rotational 
transfers as per direction of CVC in respect of Officers who are continuing beyond 3 years 
from the sensitive seat / post and not necessarily from the station. It was further informed that 
the Annual Confidential Reports of CVO is written b y the MD & CEO and sent to the DFS, 
Ministry of Finance for review and for onward submission of the same to CVC as accepting 
authority. CVO and Vigilance Department officials also undergo periodical training 
programme for skill development. 
 
2.20 Andhra Bank further submitted that obviate undue delay in conduction and conclusion 
of CBI cases in view of the large number of such cases, the threshold limit for investigation 
of fraud cases by CBl may be increased from the present level of outstanding of Rs.3.00 Cr to 
a higher level which may be about Rs. 10 Cr or above. Further, it was also suggested that the 
realizable value of primary & collateral securities and probable cash recovery from other 
sources, if any, may be allowed to be deducted from the outstandi ng balance and on the 
remaining amount, up to about 50% provision may be made. This would enable Bankers to 
declare such accounts as Fraud without delay.   
2.21 The Committee notes that there are instances where unscrupulous borrowers/ 
middlemen raise high  value credit by   fudging financial statements, excess valuation of 
Primary & Collateral securities, obtaining clear legal opinion on defective documents in 
collusion with financial consultants/CA/Valuers/Advocates as the case may be. As Bankers 
generally depend on such professionals’ advice for decision making.  It is suggested that in 
all such cases, if the loans and advances turn NPA solely due to above reasons/ irregularities, 
Bank officials may not be held accountable for the accounts turning into NPA . Further, legal 
framework is to be strengthened to take punitive action on such professionals by implicating 
them in the CBI cases. Such measures may deter them from doing unscrupulous activities.  
2.22 In recent past many frauds have come to the notice o f Banks due to improper 
certification done by the TPEs and the Banks have failed to hold them accountable. To 
ensure accountability of TPEs, the Committee suggested that a Code of Conduct and a 

62 
 
legally enforceable agreement should be executed by all these TPEs, so as to bring in better 
ethics and accountability on their part. 
Electronics Corporation of India: 
2.23 Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL)  is a  Government of 
India Enterprise under the  Department of Atomic Energy  with its headquarters 
in Hyderabad. ECIL is a multi -product, multidisciplinary organisation with focus on 
indigenous Nuclear energy , space and Defence sectors. ECIL has a separate vigilance 
wing which is headed by a Full time CVO. CVOs are appointed in ECIL by s election 
from the All India Services/Central Services/ other CPSEs on deputation. 
2.24 The Committee observed that following measures were taken by ECIL to 
strengthen preventive vigilance: 
 
(i) ECIL has a monthly review of all the projects that takes note of delays in 
procurements and payments for corrective action.  
(ii) ECIL is in the process of implementing an Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) based package so as to streamline internal work flows and 
strengthen internal controls.  
(iii) The sensitive posts in ECIL have been identified and action is being taken 
to ensure periodic rotation of the staff. 
 
(iv) ECIL has a Whistle Blower Policy promulgated on the ECIL Website to 
help provide a facility to employees to highlight instances of corruption 
while protecting the whistle blower. 
 
(v) Internal Auditors’ Reports, Statutory Auditors’ Reports and CAG Audit 
Reports are reviewed through an Audit Sub -Committee and by the CVO 
to periodically identify Vigilance related issues.  
(vi) Vigilance Wing conducts Chief Technical Examiner (CTE) type 
inspections to examine specific procurement cases for deviations from 
procedures. In the current year 3 such examinations have been done. 
2.25 The Committee further observed that  no case of corruption or financial fraud has 
been detected in the last 5 years. However, based on complaints in 2010 and 2011 on 
procurement of cell phone interception and monitoring system, the vigilance wing had 
carried out an investigation in 2012 and based on recommendation of the CVC, the case 
was handed over to CBI in 2013 and CBI has registered a regular case in December 2017 
against some ECIL Officials and other entities and the investigation is in progress 
2.26 The Committee noted that ECIL has le veraged advanced technology to bring in 
transparency and reduce human intervention. Details of some of the initiatives are given 
below: 
(i) ECIL has progressively adopted e -Tendering and publication of the 
Tenders on the ECIL Website and Central Public Procure ment Portal for 
wide publicity. 
 
(ii)  Online Vendor Registration facility. 
(iii) Use of Government e -Marketplace (GeM) portal for procurement of 
common use items. 
 
(iv) Publication of Tender Conclusion Reports (TCRs) on the ECIL Website. 
 

63 
 
(v) Secure Manufacturing System for monitoring and control of 
manufacturing process for Electronic Voting Machines to account for 
inputs and outputs at various stages. 
 
(vi) All payments to the Vendors and the Employees of ECIL are done 
through Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT/RTGS). 
 
2.27  Members inter-alia raised issue regarding chance of possible tempering of 
EVMs, which was negated by the CMD, ECIL. 
National Mineral Development Corporation:  
2.28 NMDC Limited is a state-controlled mineral producer headquartered in 
Hyderabad. It is under the administrative control of the  Ministry of Steel . NMDC has a 
full time CVO who is not a regular employee of NMDC and he is appointed on 
deputation from All India Service/ Central Service/ other CPSE’s by DoPT with 
approval of ACC. 
2.29 The Committee noted that following measures were taken by NMDC to 
strengthen preventive vigilance: 
 
(i) Chief Technical Examiner type inspections, Surprise checks & Regular 
checks are conducted. 
 
(ii) Updation of Manuals for procurements from time to time to ensure 
compliance to guidelines issued by the CVC and by Ministries concerned. 
 
 
(iii) To identify areas in the Organization prone to corruption and ensure 
periodic rotation of staff from sensitive posts. 
 
(iv) Scrutinize Internal Auditors Reports, Statutory Auditors Reports, 
Inspection Reports and CAG Audit Report for identifying any vigilance 
related issues to be followed up. 
 
(v) In order to keep a watch on the activities of public servants, who are of 
doubtful integrity, an “Agreed List” of Officers is drawn in consultation 
with CBI. 
 
 
(vi) NMDC has adopted Integrity Pact. Two Independent External Monitor s 
are appointed as per stipulation of Central Vigilance Commission duly 
following the process. 
 
(vii) Fraud Prevention Policy for the Organization is under implementation. 
 
2.30 The Committee noted that in the last five years, major penalty was imposed on 1 
Workmen & 4 Executives and Minor Penalty was imposed on 2 Workmen & 12 
Executives in various disciplinary corruption cases. 
2.31 The Committee also noted that NMDC has leveraged advanced technology to 
bring in transparency and reduce human intervention. De tails of some of the initiatives 
are given below: 
(i) Details of all the transactions, details of contracts concluded above Rs. 10 
lakhs, all works awarded on nomination basis, single tender basis above 
Rs. 1 lakh, information regarding bill payments to the co ntractors etc., are 
provided on the company’s website. 
 

64 
 
(ii) Surveillance of weighment, sampling and transport in mining areas. 
 
(iii) System for online submission of Certificates. 
 
 
(iv) NMDC has a time bound action plan for implementation of ERP package 
in the organization so as to streamline internal work flow and strengthen 
internal controls. 
 
(v) All payments to the Vendors and the Employees of NMDC are done 
through Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT/RTGS). 
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd.  
2.32 Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited is  a specialized  metals and metal 
alloys manufacturing facility in  India, located in  Hyderabad. It is a  Public Sector 
Undertaking (PSU), under the administrative control of Department of Defence 
Production, Ministry of Defence . MIDHANI is the on ly producer of  Titanium in India. 
MIDHANI has a separate vigilance department which is headed by a CVO, who is 
brought on deputation and is supported by staff drawn from within the organiza tion. As 
per DDP instructions, the additional charge of CVO, MIDHANI is given to CVO, BDL 
permanently. 
2.33 The Committee observed that following measures were taken by MIDHANI to 
strengthen preventive vigilance: 
(i) Surveillance and Detection of corruption, m alpractices and other 
misconduct through conduct of surprise and routine checks in all areas 
that is prone to corruption. 
 
(ii) Preparation of Agreed List and Officers of Doubtful Integrity. 
 
(iii) Implementation of Whistle Blower policy to report the instances and 
incidents of unethical behavior to the Management. 
 
(iv) Integrity pact signed for all contracts valued more than Rs 40 lacs. 
 
(v) MIDHANI Public Procurement system is streamlined and made 
transparent. All high value procurement files and low response tenders 
are scrutinized by Vigilance Dept. regularly 
 
2.34 The Committee observed that following punitive action was taken by MIDHANI 
during 2018-19 in vigilance cases: 
 
Year Case description Modus operandi Punitive action 
taken 
Average 
time 
taken to 
take the 
action 
2018 Submission of 
forged / fake 
documents 
towards previous 
Experience  
Sent the verification letter to the 
previous organization to confirm 
the genuinity  of the experience 
certificate. In response, we 
received the adverse response.  
Terminated from the 
services with 
immediate effect. 
11 days. 
2018 False certification 
of vehicle entries 
and vehicle usage 
in case of “Hiring 
of JCB and 
Dumpers” 
contract.  
Based on the information received 
from IAD (Internal Audit 
Department) total transactions and 
records are verified and found that 
the contractor had submitted the 
forged documents in collusion with 
the Security and User departments 
and claimed excess payment. 
The firm was banned 
for 5 years and FIR 
was lodged against 
the contractor. 
- Departmental 
enquiries initiated 
against three 
employees. 
Total 03 charge 
sheets were 
issued. 
Average time 
taken is, 12 
months 13 days. 
 

65 
 
2019 Submission of 
forged / fake 
documents 
towards 
Educational 
qualification  
Vigilance team made a surprise 
check to the concerned university 
to confirm the genuinity of the 
Education certificates submitted 
which is an essential requirement 
for the job. It was  proved that the 
certificates are not genuine. 
Terminated from the 
services with 
immediate effect as 
per company 
Standing Orders. 
3 months 2 
weeks. 
2019 Mixing up of 
good material 
with the scrap. 
Inspection carried out by the 
Vigilance department during the 
lifting of auctioned scrap by a 
private firm. 
Warning letter was 
issued. 
1 month 3 
weeks. 
 
2.35 The Committee noted that MIDHANI has leveraged advanced technology 
ORACLE ERP has been implemented in the organisation, On -line Vendor Registration; 
E-Procurement; Use of NIC services in recruitment process; E -Payment; Uploading of 
tenders & Contracts on website; E -Auction through MSTC/ m -Junction for Scrap 
disposal; Online receipt and refund of EMD; Online submission of Annual Property 
Returns (APRs) by the employees; Online Vigilance clearance; Online Bill Tracking’s 
etc. were also done . 
2.36 During deliberations, the representatives of various bodies brought to the notice 
of the Committee the plight of the officers working in the vigilance departmen t. The 
Committee observed that officers working in Vigilance face delicate situation when they 
return to parent department as they have to work with colleagues against whom they 
handled Vigilance case(s). This may affect their functioning and judgment in 
investigation. Hence, the Committee suggested ensuring that at least 50% of the 
sanctioned strength of vigilance Department is drawn on deputation from other 
organization as far as practicable. 
2.37 Electronics Corporation of India Limited apprised the Comm ittee that there was 
no CVO from 4 th Feb 2016 to 19 th May 2019. The Committee directed the concerned 
Ministries to take all possible measures to ensure that successor CVO is appointed well 
before the incumbent CVO relinquishes charge. 
2.38 Several other qu eries viz. implementation of policy of zero tolerance towards 
corruption, check on pilferage of goods at source and during transportation, requirement 
of dedicated cadre within the PSUs/PSBs for vigilance purpose, reasons for not having a 
full time CVOs fo r PSUs, impediments for whistle blower protection policy, etc. were 
raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee, which were responded by the 
representatives of the PSUs/PSBs. 
16th January, 2020 
 
 *     *      * 
3. *     *      * 
3.1 *     *      * 
3.2 *     *      * 
3.3 *     *      * 
3.4 *     *      * 
3.5 *     *      * 
3.6 *     *      * 
________________ 
*** relates to other matter 

66 
 
3.7 *     *      * 
3.8 *     *      * 
3.9 *     *      * 
3.10 *     *      * 
3.11 *     *      * 
3.12 *     *      * 
 *     *      * 
3.13 *     *      * 
3.14 *     *      * 
3.15 *     *      * 
3.16 *     *      * 
17th January, 2020 
 *     *      * 
4. *     *      * 
4.1 *     *      * 
4.2 *     *      * 
4.3 *     *      * 
4.4 *     *      * 
4.5 *     *      * 
4.6 *     *      * 
Review of Vigilance Administration’ of Canara Bank, Bharat Electronic Ltd., 
Hindustan Aeronautic Ltd. (HAL) and Indian Space Research Organisation ( ISRO) at 
Bengaluru. 
Canara Bank: 
4.7 Canara Bank  is one of the largest public sector banks, establis hed 
at Mangalore in 1906, also known as one of the oldest public sector banks in the country. 
Canara Bank has a separate Vigilance Wing at Head Office. The Vigilance Wing is 
headed by Full time Chief Vigilance Officer, stationed at Head Office, Bangalore. 
4.8 The Committee noted that following measures were taken by Canara  Bank to 
strengthen preventive vigilance: 
(i) All the 21 Circle Offices of the Bank have separate Vigilance Officers. 
 
(ii) Vigilance Officers conduct monthly 15 surprise branch visits on 
preventive vigilance, 10 Godown/ unit visits. 
 
(iii) For procurements valued Rs.1 C rore and above, Bank is obtaining pre -
contract integrity pact from the Bidders/Sellers and the tender documents 
are being shared with Independent External Monitors (IEMs) appointed 
by the Bank. 
 
(iv) Also all the payments to the vendors are being released throu gh NEFT 
and RTGS only.  
(v) The Bank follows open tender procurement process and all decisions 
subsequent to issue of tender will be strictly based on the terms and 
conditions specified in that particular tender. 
4.9 The Committee noted that the following puni tive action was taken by Canara 
Bank in vigilance matters: 
________________  
*** relates to other matter 
 

67 
 
 
(i) Corruption / Financial Frauds during the last 5 years: 
 
Financial Year 
No. of Cases 
Detected 
Staff Induced/ 
Directly 
involved 
2014-15 125 15 
2015-16 99 14 
2016-17 121 26 
2017-18 111 18 
2018-19 191 21 
2019-20 till Dec 
2019 156 18 
Total 803 112 
(ii) Summary of brief account of punitive action taken : 
 
Punitive Action Taken No. of Staff 
Punished 
Dismissal, Removal, Compulsory Retirement 108 
Reduction in Grade 1 
Full Withdrawal of Pension 3 
Total 112 
 
4.10 The Committee noted that Canara Bank has leveraged advanced technology to 
bring in transparency and reduce human intervention. Most of the Tenders are floated 
through RFP. In respect of all open RFP/ Tenders, Bank is issuing precise advertisement 
in a National News paper and the tender documents are hosted in Bank’s website as well 
as in the portal of CPPP (Central Public Procurement Portal) of Govt. of India.  Bank has 
already started procurement of its IT requirements through GeM portal of Govt. of India.  
In NPA accounts, wherein action is initiated under SARFAESI Act and recovery 
proceedings are initiated through DRT, the sale of the property is done through E -
auction.  
Bharat Electronic Ltd: 
4.11 Bharat Electronics Limited is an  aerospace and defence company headquartered 
in Bengaluru. It primarily manufactures advanced electronic products for the  Indian 
Armed Forces. It is under the administrative control of Ministry of Defence. BEL has a 
separate Vigilance Unit  which is headed by a Full time CVO appointed by DoPT on 
central deputation. BEL Vigilance has separate wings for Preventive Vigilance, 
Investigation & Technical wing in Corporate Office and full time Vigilance Officers at 
the field level offices in the Strategic Business Units (SBUs) /Units 
4.12 The Committee noted that following measures were taken by BEL to strengthen 
preventive vigilance: 
(i) Chief Technical Examiner (CTE) Type Intensive Examination of High 
value Contracts. 
 
(ii) Introduction of Integrity Pact in all Contracts more than Rs. 3 Crores.  
 

68 
 
(iii) E-Procurement through Supplier Relationship Management (SRM) and 
NIC portal. 
 
(iv) Preparation of Agreed List and Doubtful Integrity List in co -ordination 
with CBI. 
 
(v) Providing online vigilance clearances. 
 
(vi) Implementation of Corruption Risk Management Policy.  
 
4.13 The Committee noted that during the years 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018 & 2019 , all 
complaints including corruption & financial frauds received are 24, 15, 70, 40 &  39, 
respectively. Complaints predominantly relate to procedural violations. There were 7 
cases relate to corruption / fraud during 2016 to 2019. 
4.14 The Committee noted that BEL has leveraged advanced technology to bring in 
transparency and reduce human intervention. Details of some of the initiatives are given 
below:- 
(i) The bulky paper files have been replaced by paperless files through a File 
Lifecycle Management (FLM) system. End to end file processing is 
implemented across the organisation involving Off icers to Functional 
Directors and CMD. File creation, movement, approval and record 
keeping is digitized. 
 
(ii) E-procurement using SRM and NIC portal.  More than 90% of 
Procurements is done on SRM portal. Open tenders are floated on NIC 
portal.  
 
(iii) All payments to employees and contract workmen is done through e -
payment.  
 
(iv) Online Vendor Registration process is enabled through BEL website. 
Industrial Promotion Officers have been identified across all the units to 
facilitate vendor development. Contact  details are made available on the 
website. 
 
(v) Installation of Closed Circuit TVs in Sensitive areas to monitor the 
movement of undesirable persons inside the Factory premises. 
Hindustan Aeronautic Ltd. (HAL): 
4.15 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) is an  aerospace and defence company 
headquartered in   Bengaluru. The government-owned corporation  is primarily involved 
in the operations of the aerospace and is currently involved in the  design, fabrication and 
assembly of  aircraft, jet engines , helicopters and their spare parts. It is under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Defence. HAL has a separate Vigilance Department 
which is headed by a Full time Chief Vigilance Officer on deputation from Central 
Government. 
4.16 The Co mmittee noted that HAL has taken certain initiatives to strengthen 
preventive vigilance such as system studies, scrutiny of purchase orders, work orders, 
surprise checks and CTE type inspections with specific attention on corruption prone 
areas. The Committee noted that HAL has adopted Integrity Pact. The IP binds both the 
parties’ i.e HAL and suppliers not to indulge in any unscrupulous practice. The contract 
is monitored by two Independent External Monitors appointed by Central Vigilance 
Commission.  

69 
 
4.17 The Committee noted that a total number of 14 cases of corruption and financial 
frauds have been detected in the last five years and disciplinary action has been taken in 
12 cases so far. 
4.18 The Committee noted that HAL has leveraged advanced technology  to bring in 
transparency and reduce human intervention. HAL has implemented companywide e -
procurement system through its own e -procurement portal for all tenders valuing more 
than 2 lacs.  Online bill tracking system also made available for the vendors to  check the 
status of their payments.  E -Reverse Auction has now replaced conventional price 
negotiation and resulted in competitive prices. 
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO): 
4.19 The Indian Space Research Organisation is the space agency of the Government 
of India and has its headquarters in Bengaluru . It is managed by the Department of 
Space, which reports to the Prime Minister of India. ISRO has a part time CVO. The 
Chief Vigilance Officer, Department of Space heads its Vigilance Division, however, the 
Joint Secretary (Administration) of the Department is designated as part time Chief 
Vigilance Officer of ISRO and is responsible for the overall vigilance administration of 
the Depa rtment. Every ISRO Centre/Unit has a Vigilance Wing headed by Vigilance 
Officer who reports to CVO. 
4.20 With regard to preventive vigilance, ISRO informed the Committee that all 
procurement in ISRO is done through respective Committees and there are diffe rent 
Committees to deal with tenders of different values. Surprise inspections are conducted 
at ISRO Centres/Units by the vigilance officials. Intelligence inputs on security and 
vigilance matters are collected from CISF and utilized as inputs to strengthe n vigilance. 
The Department implements rotation transfer policy in certain administrative areas 
which are vulnerable to corruption. Rotation of S&T personnel posted in different 
technical domains at ISRO Centres/Units is not always feasible. The Committee has 
been apprised that ISRO is exploring the feasibility of implementing integrity pact in 
various types of procurement contracts as the Department’s procurement mostly consists 
of sophisticated technical items. 
4.21 ISRO further informed that a Group A of ficer of Semiconductor Laboratory, 
Chandigarh was imposed minor penalty of censure for procedural irregularity in 2016 in 
processing of contract after due consultation with CVC and three sanctions for 
prosecution were issued in 2017 by the Department and t he matter is presently sub-
judice in court. ISRO also informed that it has introduced e-payment and e-procurement 
to bring in transparency and rule out scope for corruption. 
4.22 On hearing all the four presentations, the Committee was of the opinion that in 
view of the extent of geographical spread and the scale of corruption in the country, the 
present vigilance set up seems to be inadequate to handle the volume of work. It feels 
that there is an imperative need to strengthen the vigilance administration with adequate 
manpower and requisite infrastructure including building up a robust surveillance system 
so as to improve the effectiveness of vigilance administration and ensure expeditious 
disposal of cases. 
4.23 The Committee was also of the view that cor ruption is a complex phenomenon 
involving officials, organizations both public and private and public at large. Its roots 

70 
 
may lie in an organization but the ramifications may extend beyond the boundaries of 
that organization. Therefore, the Committee recom mends the Government to create an 
interface between the vigilance units of Central Government and its authorities, CPSUs, 
CPSBs and other bodies owned and controlled by the Central Government. The 
Committee is hopeful that such a platform will facilitate e xchange of best practices, 
information and experiences. 
18th January, 2020 
Review of Vigilance Administration’ of Union Bank, Bank of Baroda, Bank of India, Oil 
and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. ( ONGC), IRCON and Rashtriya  Chemical 
Fertilizers (RCF) at Mumbai.   
 
5. On this last leg of the study tour, the Committee requested all the representatives of 
PSBs/PSUs, to combine their presentation and highlight the main points pertaining to the 
vigilance administration before the  Committee due to paucity of time as large number of 
stakeholders is were scheduled to be heard by the Committee. Following points were 
highlighted by the PSUs/PSBs in their presentation: 
 
 The Committee was apprised by the top management of the PSUs/PSBs t hat their 
focus has shifted from punitive to preventive vigilance. They have leveraged 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for this purpose which inter-alia 
includes online tendering, bill tracking, e -procurement, e -auction, online filing and 
tracking of complains, etc. The Committee was also apprised that because of these 
steps, taken over the years, number of vigilance cases has gone down significantly. 
 
 Further, as a part of preventive vigilance, ‘vigilance awareness weeks’ are organized 
regularly and the employees, clients, vendors, public etc. are made aware by holding 
seminars/lectures and publicizing it through workshops, radio, whatsapp and SMS, 
etc. 
 
 Notice Board has been displayed in all the Units, to sensitize the Public not to give 
bribe and to intimate demand of bribe to the Competent Authority. 
 
 Vigilance activities and Vigilance related issues are being published through in -house 
magazine. 
 
 Surprise inspections and audit of satellite offices are done on regular intervals to 
check any fraud at the cutting edge level.  
 
 Various Complaints were referred to CVC, CBI, PMO, etc. Provision for internal and 
external audit including internal inspection of all Offices of  the respective PSUs and 
PSBs. 
 
 Provision for property returns obtained from employees annually. 
 
 Establishment of robust online grievance reporting and redressal mechanism adopted 
by all PSUs/PSBs including development of in-house data vigilance module. 
 
 All procurements as per CVC guidelines. E -Tendering process as well as Reverse 
Auction system in place. 
 
5.1 The Committee noted that corruption is a complex and intricate web of acts of 
interaction and reciprocity and is the outcome of nexus between Government officials, 
private sector and public at large. Vigilance, thus, cannot be confined to a set up. Therefo re, 
the Committee suggested that the radar of vigilance be expanded to cover Intra 
Organizational Vigilance -Vigilance on the employees of the organization; Inter 
Organizational Vigilance -Vigilance on transactions/areas of interaction between 

71 
 
organizations; and Extra Organizational Vigilance -Vigilance on transactions/areas of 
interaction between organizations and general public, private individuals and any other 
stakeholders. 
 
 *     *      * 
5.2 *     *      * 
5.3 *     *      * 
5.4 *     *      * 
5.5 *     *      * 
5.6 *     *      * 
5.7 *     *      * 
5.8 *     *      * 
5.9 *     *      * 
5.10. *     *      * 
5.11 *     *      * 
 *     *      * 
5.12 *     *      * 
5.13 *     *      * 
5.14 *     *      * 
5.15 *     *      * 
5.16 *     *      * 
 *     *      * 
5.17 *     *      * 
5.18 *     *      * 
5.19 *     *      * 
5.20 *     *      * 
5.21 *     *      * 
5.22 *     *      * 
5.23 *     *      * 
5.24 *     *      * 
5.25 *     *      * 
5.26 *     *      * 
5.27 *     *      * 
5.28 *     *      * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________  
*** relates to other matter 

72 
 
Appendix-I 
 
TOUR PROGRAMME FOR STUDY VISIT TO HYDERABAD,  
 BENGALURU AND MUMBAI FROM 14th TO 18TH JANUARY, 2020 
 
DAY AND 
DATE 
TIME BUSINESS 
14.01.2020 
Tuesday 
ASSEMBLY AT HYDERABAD 
15.01.2020 
Wednesday 
 
0930Hrs. Visit to the Cherlapalli Central Prison to review Legal Aid to 
Prisoners followed by interaction with authorities concerned. 
1230 Hrs. 
 
‘Review of Vigilance Administration’ of Andhra Bank, Electronics 
Corporation of India Limited (ECIL), National Mineral Development 
Corporation Ltd. (NMDC) and Mishra Dhatu Nigam LTd. 
(MIDHANI). 
1430 Hrs Interaction with Shri Faizan Mustafa, Vice -Chancellor, NALSAR on 
‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’. 
1500 Hrs. Interaction with State Government of Telangana, Registrar General 
of Telangana High Court and Bar Council of Telangana on 
‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’. 
1630 Hrs. Visit to Mediation Centre of High Court of Telangana and interaction 
with Senior Members of the High Court Bar.  
1715 Hrs. Interaction with Hon’ble Judges of High Court of Telangana. 
NIGHT STAY AT HYDERABAD 
16.01.2020 
Thursday 
 
0825 Hrs.  Departure for Bengaluru by 6E 151  
0950 Hrs. Arrival at Bengaluru 
1400 Hrs Interaction with SALSA & DG (Prisons) of Karnataka on Legal Aid 
to Prisoners. 
1500 Hrs. 
 
Visit to Bengaluru Mediation Centre  and Interaction with Legal 
experts and arbitral Institutions ( Bengaluru Mediation Centre , 
Bangalore International Mediation, Arbitration and Conciliation 
Centre (BIMACC),CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Pvt. 
Ltd., Arbitration and Conciliation Centre and Indo French Chamber 
of Commerce & Industry),  on ‘Functioning of Alternative Dispute 
Resolution (ADR) Mechanisms’   
1600 Hrs. Interaction with State Government of Karnataka, Registrar General 
of Karnataka High Court, Bar Council of Karnataka and Bar 
Association on ‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’ 
1715 Hrs. Visit to Karnataka High Court Complex and interaction with Hon’ble 
Judges. 
NIGHT STAY AT BENGALURU 
  
 
 

73 
 
17.01.2020 
Friday 
 
1030 Hrs. Interaction with stakeholders and experts (State Judicial Academy, 
Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy and Daksh) on the subject ‘Legislation 
and Legislative Impact Assessment (LIA) - Status in India and 
way forward’. 
1200 Noon ‘Review of Vigilance Administration’ of Canara Bank,  Bharat 
Electronic Ltd., Hindustan Aeronautic Ltd. (HAL) and Indian Space 
Research Organisation (ISRO). 
1910 Hrs.  Departure for Mumbai by AI - 610  
2105Hrs. Arrival at Mumbai 
NIGHT STAY AT MUMBAI 
18.01.2020 
Saturday 
 
 1000 Hrs. Interaction with the experts & stakeholders from the Mumbai Centre 
for International Arbitration (MCIA), International and Domestice 
Arbitration Centre, Centre for Mediation and Conciliation, Bombay 
Chamber of Commerce & Industry,  Indian Council of Arbitration – 
FICCI (ICA);   IMC International ADR Centre, Indian Institute of 
Arbitration and Mediation (IIAM) on  ‘Functioning o f Alternative 
Dispute Resolution (ADR) Mechanisms’. 
1100 Hrs. Interaction with the experts and stakeholders (State Adoption 
Resource Agency, Maharashtra, Select Adoption Centers  and State 
Judicial Academy) on the subject ‘Review of Guardianship and 
Adoption Laws’. 
1200 Noon Interaction with the experts and stakeholders including National Law 
University, Government Law College and Tata Trust on 
Strengthening the Justice Delivery Process’ & ‘Legislation and 
Legislative Impact Assessment (LIA) -Status in India and way 
forward’. 
1430 Hrs. ‘Review of Vigilance Administration’ of  Union Bank,  Bank of 
Baroda, Bank of India, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
Ltd.(ONGC), IRCON and Rashtriya Chemical Fertilizers (RCF).   
DISPERSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
Appendix-II 
 Member's Attendance 
S.No  Hyderabad Bengaluru Mumbai 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav, Chairman ✔ ✔ ✔ 
2. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla, MP(RS)+ 
Spouse 
✔ ✔ ✔ 
3. Shri P. Wilson,  MP(RS)  ✔ ✔ ✔ 
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha, MP(RS) ✔ ✔ X 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy, MP(RS)  + 
Spouse 
X X ✔ 
6. Shri Majeed Memon, MP(RS) + spouse  X X ✔ 
7. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary, 
MP(LS) +Companion 
✔ ✔ ✔ 
8. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma, MP(LS)  ✔ ✔ ✔ 
9. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill, MP(LS)   ✔ ✔ ✔ 
10. Smt. Sandhya Ray, MP(LS)  + Spouse ✔ ✔ ✔ 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh 
Rajenimbalkar alias Pawan, MP(LS) 
✔ ✔ ✔ 
12. Shri Suresh Pujari, MP(LS) ✔ ✔ ✔ 
13. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat, MP(LS)  + 
Spouse 
✔ ✔ ✔ 
14. Shri Malook Nagar, MP(LS) X ✔ ✔ 
15. Shri P.P. Mohammed Faizal, MP(LS) X ✔ ✔ 
 
**** 
 
 
 

75 
 
Appendix-III 
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS WHO INTERACTED WITH THE COMMITTEE DURING 
ITS STUDY-VISIT. 
HYDERABAD 
 
Date: 15.01.2020   Meeting Venue  :  Hotel Taj Krishna, Hyderabad  
 
Subject: Review of Vigilance Administration 
ATTENDANCE OF PARTICIPANTS 
I.  Andhra Bank  
 1.  Shri J. Packirisamy, Managing Director & CEO 
 2. Shri Kul Bhushan Jain, Executive Director 
 3. Shri A. Aravind, CVO  
 4. Shri M. Nagaraju, General Manager 
II. Electronics Corporation of India Ltd(ECIL). 
 1. Shri Rear Admiral Sanjay Chaubey(Retd.), Chairman & Managing Director 
 2. Shri M. Srinivas, Chief Vigilance Officer 
 3. Shri Samir Mukherjee, Director(Personnel)   
III. National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd.(NMDC) 
 1. Shri Sumit Deb, Director(Personnel) 
 2. Shri V.V. Sreenivas, IRSME, CVO 
IV. Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd. (MIDHANI) 
1. Dr. Dinesh Kumar Likhi Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Dr. Upender Vennam, CVO 
3. Shri A. Ramakrishna Rao, Group General Manager(HR) 
4. Shri Supartha Sen, General Manager(Vigilance) 
  
 Shri Sudhir Shyam, Director, Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance 
 Shri S B Bose, Director (I & M),  Department of Atomic Energy  
Shri Aman Sharma, Director, Ministry of Steel  
 Shri R. K. Gupta, Deputy Secretary, Department of Defense Production, Ministry of  
 Defense 
 Shri Juglal Singh, Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry 
 of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
Shri U.K. Bhatia, Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry 
 of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
  

76 
 
BENGALURU 
 
Date: 17.01.2020                                           Meeting Venue: Hotel Lalit Ashok, Bengaluru 
Subject:   Review of Vigilance Administration  
ATTENDANCE OF PARTICIPANTS 
I. Canara Bank 
  1.  Shri M.V. Rao, Executive Director 
 2.  Shri L.V.R. Prasad, Chief General Manager 
 3. Shri M. Krishna Prasad, General Manager 
II. Bharat Electronics Ltd.(BEL) 
 1. Shri M.V. Gowotama, CMD 
 2. Shri Shiva Kumaran K.M., Director(HR) 
 3. Shri Shrikantwalgad, CVO 
III. Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd (HAL) 
 1. Shri R. Madhavan, CMD 
 2. Shri Alok Verma, Director(HR) 
 3. Shri B. Selvakumar, CVO 
IV. Indian Space Research organisation(ISRO)  
1. Shri Sandhya Venugopal Sharma, Joint Secretary, Personnel 
2. Shri Praveen S, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Vivek Singh, Associate Scientific Secretary 
 
Shri. Manish Gupta, Director (Vigilance), Department of Finance Service, Ministry of 
Finance 
Smt. Sadhna Khanna, Deputy Secretary, De partment of Defence Production, M/o Defence 
Shri Juglal Singh, Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training 
Shri U.K. Bhatia, Deputy Secretary 
  

77 
 
MUMBAI 
Date: 18.01.2020                  Meeting  Venue  Hotel Taj Tower, Mumbai 
Subject:   Review of Vigilance Administration  
ATTENDANCE OF PARTICIPANTS 
I. Union Bank of India 
  1.  Shri Rajkiran Rai G., Executive Director 
 2.   Shri M.V.S.N. Murthy, CVO 
 3.  Shri Brajeshear Sharma, General Manager 
II. Bank of Baroda 
 1. Shri Shanti Lal Jain, ED 
 2. Shri S. Sridhar Srimathy, CVO 
 3. Shri Umesh Mohapatra, General Manager 
III. Bank of India 
1. Shri C.G. Chaitanya, Executive Director 
 2. Shri Ishwar Chandra Misra, General Manager 
 3. Shri Devendra Sharma,  CVO 
IV. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd.(ONGC) 
1. Shri Shri S.K. Moitra, Director 
2. Shri Rajeev Chandra Joshi, CVO 
3. Dr. Ashutosh Kumar, CGM-Head Vigilance 
4. Shri Saket Gupta, Head Corp Affairs 
V. IRCON 
 1.  Shri S.K. Chaudhary, CMD 
 2.  Ms. Mamta Sanjeev Dubey, CVO 
3.  Shri S.V.S. Rao, GM/Vigilance 
VI. Rashtriya Chemical Fertilizewrs(RCF) 
1. Shri S.C. Mudgerikar, CMD 
2. Shri Sameer Rastogi, CVO 
 
Shri. A.K. Dogra, Depty Secretary, Department of Finance Service, Ministry of Finance 
Shri R.K. Kureel, Director, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Shri Srinivas Malladi, Director, Ministry of Railways 
Shri Vinay Kumar Pandey, Director, Department Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemical and 
Fertilizers. 
Shri Juglal Singh, Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training 
Shri U.K. Bhatia, Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training 
  
 