PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 33
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 FEBRUARY, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

53
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
THIRTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-65

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—15
4. S UMMARY OF THE R ECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE C OMMITTEE ...................................... 16—17
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 19—30
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 31—52
A. The Representation of the people (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 ................. 33—40
B. Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
on the views/suggestions contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/
organisations/experts on the provisions of the Bill. ............................................ 41—52

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2008)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Shri Ram Jethmalani
10. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
14. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
15. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Adv. P. Sathedevi
25. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
26. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
27. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
28. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, The Chairman of the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and
Justice, having been authorised by the Committee to submit this Report on its behalf, do hereby
present its Thirty-third Report on the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008.
The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 (Annexure-A) seeks to amend the
Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha
on the 24th October, 2008 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 31st October, 2008 for
examination and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press
communique to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions
of the Bill. Accordingly, a press communique was issued in major newspapers and dailies on
22nd November, 2008 in response to which memoranda containing suggestions were received by
the Committee.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in five sittings and heard the presentation of the
Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill in its meeting held on
19th November, 2008. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the representatives of Outlook,
Star News, Aajtak and NDTV India on 16th December, 2008; NDTV on 29th December, 2009; and
the Indian Express and the Week Magazine on 7th January, 2009. The Committee also interacted
with the representatives of the State Governments, Political Parties and media persons on the Bill
during its study visit to Kochi, Bangaluru and Hyderabad from 18th to 24th January, 2009.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:—
(i) Background note on the Bill received from the Government;
(ii) Proposals on Electoral Reforms forwarded by the Election Commission of India to the
Government of India in July, 2004; and
(iii) The comments of the Legislative Department on the views/suggestions contained in
the memoranda received from various organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on
the provisions of the Bill.
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 16th February, 2009.
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
16th February,  2009 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
♣Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 45497) dated the 3rd November, 2008.

1
REPORT
CHAPTER–I
The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 (Annexure-A) seeks to
amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
2. The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 was introduced* in the
Rajya Sabha on 24th October, 2008. It was referred by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha to this
Committee, namely the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice on 31st October, 2008 for examination and report.
3. The background note, furnished by the Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill, stated as
follows:
“...In July 2004, the Election Commission of India had forwarded a set of 22
proposals on electoral reforms to the Government of India for consideration. While the said
proposals were under consideration of this Department, the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
referred the entire matter of electoral reforms to the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice for examination and
report.
Meanwhile, while considering the proposals of the Election Commission, it was
considered appropriate to examine certain formal proposals in respect of some of the
actionable points and to make requisite amendment to the relevant laws. In the process,
four issues had been examined, which relate to (a) simplification of procedure for
disqualification of a person found guilty of corrupt practices; (b) appointment of the
appellate authority within the district against the orders of the electoral registration officers;
(c) increase in security deposit of the candidates; and (d) inclusion in section 123(7) of the
RP Act, 1951 of all officials appointed in connection with the conduct of elections...”
3.1 The Secretary, Legislative Department while making a presentation before the Committee on
the Bill stated thus:
“...the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 seeks to amend the
Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951. As
the Hon’ble Members are aware, electoral reform was taken up by the Election Commission
way back in 2004. Around 22 proposals were forwarded to the Government for
consideration. It has been the consistent view of the Government that unless there is a
consensus amongst all the political parties, we shall not take up any step for implementing
it because we need to carry all the political parties with us. So, we examined a few of them
and we thought that on a few of them where there is an agreement, we can implement
them...”
4. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/
suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the Bill. It, accordingly, authorised the
Secretariat to issue a press release inviting views/suggestions. In response to the press release
published in major English and Hindi dailies and vernacular newspapers all over India on 22nd
November, 2008, a number of representations/memoranda were received.
4.1 The Committee forwarded the memoranda so received from the individuals and
organisations to the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) for their comments
thereon. The comments of the Ministry (Annexure-B) were received on 3rd February, 2009.
*Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 24th October, 2008.

2
4.2 The major points raised in the memoranda are summarized as follows:
(i) Section 126(A) which is to restrict publication and dissemination of result of exit
polls, proposed to be inserted by clause 7 of the Bill, gives a sense of imposing restrictions for
conducting any exit poll. Therefore, this provision could be challenged in the Court of Law as it
is in violation of right to freedom of expression as enshrined in our Constitution.
(ii) The restriction proposed in the Bill, as regards to publication having regard to
provisions of section 126A(l) and 126A(2) seem to be reasonable. However, it has been proposed
that period may commence from beginning hours fixed for poll on the first day of poll and
continue till half an hour after closing of the poll, in all States and Union Territories. In case of
general election, the polling usually takes place in phases on the different dates in each State which
is geographically large. There will be usually a gap between each phase of polling. Therefore, the
aforesaid section would not achieve the objective because during this gap there would be
dissemination of exit poll results, which would influence the voters in the subsequent phase polling.
In other words, the voters will not caste the vote according to dictates of their conscience.
Therefore, clause (a) of Section 126A(2) needs an amendment by way of insertion on the first day
of poll in the “first phase” and till half an hour after closing of the poll in the “last phase”, in all
States and Union Territories, where polling takes place in phases. This provision appears to have
been made assuming that there is single phase of polling.
(iii) A provision should also be made for registration and accreditation of poll survey
agencies with the Election Commission in order to ensure a fair survey of exit polls, so as not to
influence pattern of voting during the period of polling.
(iv) As regards amendment of section 8A of the Representation of People Act, 1951, the
object is not for simplification of procedure for disqualification of a person found guilty of corrupt
practices. But this will provide some breathing time to such guilty person to move to the Court
of Law against any adverse order which may have been passed against him, by specifying a period
of three months during which a case shall be submitted to the President for determination of
question as to whether such person shall be disqualified or not. Therefore, this amendment will
have ample scope for prolonged proceedings in the Court of Law, and continue till the expiry of
term of Assembly or Parliament, as the case may be. Therefore, true objective of this amendment
is to provide suitable opportunity for aggrieved person to move the Court of Law. It is the function
of the Election Commission to ensure that elections are conducted in fair manner, hence obviously
powers to admit the case of every person found to be guilty of corrupt practice, for determination
of the question as to whether such person shall be disqualified or not, should also go to the
Election Commission. It is felt that the President as executive head should not be vested with such
powers. The powers of the President is to appoint or dismiss a Minister from the Council of
Ministers. This function of President is to deal with post election situation such as constitution of
Council of Ministers. Hence the proposal needs to be examined in light of nature of powers given
to President.
(v) Amendment of section 24 of the Act is unnecessary, as the main provision is clear
and correct.
(vi) The increase in security deposits shall be in public interest of eliminating self-
propelling candidature having no spirit of public service in them.
(vii) With reference to amendment of section 34 for increase in the security deposit of
the candidates nominated for elections, there are millions of people in this country who are well-
meaning but financially not well-off, who can contribute towards the enhancement of legislative
activity in the Parliament as country needs highly disciplined legislators who can give better
legislative output.

3
(viii) Only disciplined and well educated people can give a better legislative performance.
Accordingly, the proposed increase in security deposit should be deferred and it is suggested that
the educational qualifications of the candidates should be paid more attention to. The highest
amount of security deposit should not be more than Rs.10,000/-. It shall encourage well-meaning,
but not economically well-off people to join politics.
(ix) Regarding insertion of new sections 126A and 126B in the Representation of People
Act, 1951, it was opined that it is a welcome step. It was further stated that the All India Radio
and Doordarshan should be asked to work in a fair manner as soon as elections are declared.
Generally, a news item giving positive publicity to the ruling party is aired juxtaposing it with a
news item giving negative publicity to the Opposition.
(x) In respect of banning of exit poll, the guidelines from the Press Council of India
already exist, asking newspapers not to publish exit poll surveys until the last day of the polls. In
this regard, it was suggested that the authority to decide and enforce this issue, should be left with
the Election Commission of India.
(xi) In respect of amendment of section 24 of the Representation of People Act, 1950
it was proposed that the first appeal should be made to lie with the District Election Officer (DEO)
instead of Additional District Magistrate or District Magistrate, as they are the Officers of the State
administration.
(xii) In respect of increasing security deposit, it was suggested that it should be
Rs. 1,00,000/- and Rs.50,000/- for election to Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly respectively;
whereas, the amount would be half in case of SC/ST candidates. It was further suggested that the
power to increase the security deposit amount should vest with the Election Commission.
(xiii) Conducting and publishing Exit Polls were supported. However, it was opined that
the opinion poll surveys prior to the election should be prohibited, after the close of campaign.
(xiv) In respect of amendment for banning exit poll, apprehension was raised that it would
be violation of fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 19 of the Constitution and ultra vires
to Article 324.
(xv) The amendment in respect of increasing security deposit may be made in such a way
that it should be Rs.50,000/- and Rs.30,000/- for Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly respectively
for candidates belonging to recognized National/State political parties. The amount should be
half in case of candidates belonging to Female/SC/ST. Further, for all other candidates it should
be Rs.2 lakh and Rs. 1,50,000/- for Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly respectively, whereas, the
amount would be Rs. 25,000/- and Rs.15,000/- for Female/SC/ST candidates.
(xvi) Section 123(7) should cover not only the period of re-voting stage, but also should
cover the period from the day of election process till the election result is declared.
(xvii) There should be an appellate authority in the Taluka instead of District against the
order of Electoral Registration Officer.
(xviii) The person found guilty of corrupt practices should be made disqualified within the
time limit/period of three months by simplification of procedure based on the petitions of
documentary evidence etc.
(xix) The Security deposits should be as under:-
For Parliamentary Elections:-
(a) Gen. Cat. – Rs. 200000/-
(b) SC/ST – Rs.100000/-

4
For Assembly Elections
(a) Gen. Cat. – Rs.100000/-
(b) SC/ST – Rs.50000/-
(xx) The official found guilty of having been involved in corrupt practice should be fined
for not less than Rs. 1,00,000/- as well as removal from his job so as to create permanent fear
complex among such corrupt officials.
(xxi) The amendment in respect of the restriction of exit polls has been supported. Also,
it is of the view that the pre-poll survey and opinion polls should be banned/prohibited during the
applicability of model code of conduct.
(xxii) There should not be any restriction on media in respect of the exit polls as it would
tantamount to curbing freedom of expression of an independent and vibrant press as enshrined in
the Constitution.
(xxiii) The banning of exit polls is unconstitutional and infringement of the freedom of
press guaranteed under Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution. There is no empirical evidence to
prove that on the whole, voters would be affected by Exit polls result.
(xxiv) V ast majority of the voting population is exposed to more than one Newspaper and
News Channel, thereby leaving little scope for the voter to get influenced. In a way, multiple
opinions will help the voter take unbiased and independent decision. The Election Commission
should issue regulatory guidelines to streamline the publication and telecast of Opinion polls.
(xxv) To dispel the apprehensions that Opinion polls are “motivated and not impartial”,
publication/telecast of any such opinion poll should be mandatorily followed by a claimer. For
example, a box on Page 1 with specific font size, the details the agency employed to conduct the
survey, sample size vis-a.-vis actual size, methodology adopted, period of survey, etc. would enable
the reader/viewer judge the credibility of the publication/TV station and the Opinion polls published/
telecast.
5. The Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice made a presentation on
the Bill before the Committee on 19th November, 2008.
5.1 The Committee heard the oral evidence of the representatives of Outlook, Star News, Aajtak
and NDTV India on the Bill on 16th December, 2008. The representatives of NDTV Shri Prannoy
Roy and colleague deposed before the Committee on the Bill on 29th December, 2008 which has
immensely benefited the Committee. The Committee also heard the oral evidence of the
representatives of The Indian Express and The Week Magazine on 7th January, 2009.
5.2 The Committee, during its study visit to Kochi, Bangaluru and Hyderabad from 18th to 24th
January, 2009 interacted with media persons and representatives of Political Parties on the various
provisions of the Bill.
5.3 The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on 16th February, 2009.

5
CHAPTER–II
DELIBERATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Appointment of appellate authority in districts against orders of Electoral
Registration Officers – amendment of section 24 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1950.
1.1 Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “chief electoral officer” with the words
“district magistrate or additional district magistrate” in clause (a) of section 24 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1950. It also seeks to insert clause (b) “to the chief electoral
officer, from any order of the district magistrate or the additional district magistrate under clause
(a) above.”
1.2 Section 24 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 inter alia provides that an appeal
against the order of the Electoral Registration Officer shall lie to the Chief Electoral Officer.
1.3 The Legislative Department, in its background note furnished on the Bill, has stated that as
the office of the Chief Electoral Officers is based in the State capital, many electors having a
grievance are not willing to travel such a long distance merely for inclusion/deletion of a name from
the electoral roll. Sometimes, poor and downtrodden persons are unable to file an appeal due to
economic problem.
1.4 Even though the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 provides for a notice and a reasonable
opportunity to be heard before a person’s name is deleted, in actual practice, it is not followed and
their names are deleted suo-motu. Sections 22 and 23 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950
clearly stipulate a mandatory responsibility on the part of the Electoral Registration Officer to take
precautionary action before deleting a name from the electoral rolls. The proviso to rule 21A of
the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 dealing with deletion of names also envisages the same
responsibility on the part of the Electoral Registration Officer. Thus, the onus is on the officer to
ensure that an eligible person’s name is included and retained in the electoral rolls and even if his
name is to be deleted, it should be after proper verification of the facts and not in a casual manner.
1.5 In this regard, the proposal of the Election Commission was for appointment of appellate
authority in districts against orders of Electoral Registration Officers, in order to simplify the
redressal of grievances of electors in respect of registration in electoral rolls. The Commission had
proposed that section 24 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 should be amended to
provide for an appeal against the order of the Electoral Registration Officer to the District Election
Officer in the district itself.
1.6 In addition to the above, a new clause is proposed to be added in section 24 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1950 empowering the Chief Electoral Officer to hear the revision
petition against the orders passed by the District Election Officer.
1.7 In the comments of the Government furnished in response to the points raised in the
memoranda, it has been stated that “the amendment is moved to simplify the procedure, as the
present appellate authority is Chief Electoral Officer, who sits in the capital of the State and he
is not easily accessible to the common people. It necessitates an amendment to make an appellate
authority between Electoral Registration Officer and Chief Electoral Officer at district level to
facilitate the voters and early settlement of grievances.”
5

6
1.8 In one of the memoranda received by the Committee, it was suggested that there should
be an appellate authority in the Taluka instead of District against the order of Electoral Registration
Officer.
1.9 During the discussions of the Committee on the various provisions of the Bill, one of the
Members of the Committee opined that District Collectors in States will also have to be taken into
account in clause 2 of the Bill.
1.10 The Committee could gather that at the time of revision of Electoral Rolls, numerous
complaints arise alleging that suo motu removal/deletion of names from the electoral rolls
was done without any intimation to the persons concerned. There have also been numerous
instances when the voter reaches the polling station to cast his/her vote, and the
opportunity to vote is denied on the ground that his/her name is not in the Electoral Roll,
which makes mockery of his democratic rights.
1.11 The Committee, therefore, endorses the proposed amendment and feels that this
would provide a reasonable opportunity to the elector to be heard regarding removal/deletion
of name from the electoral roll, without incurring much expense of money and time.
2. Simplification of procedure for disqualification of a person found guilty of corrupt
practices—specifying a time limit in Section 8A of the RP Act, 1951.
2.1 Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to specify a time limit of three months in Section 8A(1) of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951.
2.2 In the background note furnished by the Legislative Department, it has been stated that the
current procedure for disqualification of a person found guilty of corrupt practice is that after a
High Court pronounces its judgment in an election petition as per the provisions of sections 98 and
99 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 finding a person guilty of corrupt practice, the
case of every such person goes to the President of India under section 8A (1) of the said Act,
through the concerned State Legislature Secretary or the Secretary General of Lok Sabha or Rajya
Sabha, as the case may be. Thereafter, from the President it comes under section 8A (3) to the
Election Commission, where a judicial hearing is given to the affected party and the period of
disqualification is judged by the Commission and its opinion in this regard communicated to the
President, who thereupon decides the period of disqualification according to such opinion.
2.3 It has been further stated that under the existing provisions, the order of the High Court
takes a very circuitous route consisting inter alia the Registry of the High Court, the Secretary
of the concerned House of Legislature and the President of India before reaching the Election
Commission of India for enabling it to render its opinion to the President thereon. The journey
requiring the references of cases of guilty persons to be submitted to the President involves, for
very obvious political reasons, a very inordinate delay in emanating from the Secretaries of the
Houses concerned.
2.4 The Election Commission had favoured the proposal that a person, by the operation of law,
would be automatically disqualified for a period of six years from the date of the order passed by
the High Court under the provisions of Sections 98 and 99 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951. Subsequently, the Election Commission revised its stand and instead proposed that steps
should be taken to minimize/avoid the inordinate delay in submitting the orders to the President.
2.5 The Election Commission was of the view that it, being a multi–member body, is in close
touch with the polity and is aware of the political reality that exists in the country. Therefore, it
is in the best position to decide on the gravity of the corrupt practice and the period of
disqualification that it should attract.

7
2.6 Further, it is pertinent that Election Commission arrives at findings after giving a judicial
hearing to the person convicted of corrupt practice. The Commission had, therefore, suggested that
the above procedure could be simplified considerably and that the required objective may be
ensured, if the Secretary to the Election Commission of India is specified as the authority under
sub-section (l) of section 8A to submit cases of disqualification under that section to the President.
2.7 The matter was then examined by the Government and it was of the view that a better
alternative shall be to have a time limit in section 8A (l) within which the reference shall be
submitted to the President, while retaining the present provision.
2.8 The Committee strongly feels that the inordinate delay which occurs in the current
procedure for disqualification of a person found guilty of corrupt practice, defeats the very
purpose of punishment of the guilty since he can take advantage of the delay to enjoy the
benefits accrued to him during the interim period. Therefore, the Committee is of the view
that prescribing a time limit within which the reference shall be submitted to the President,
in disqualification cases as proposed in clause 4 of the Bill is a welcome step and endorses
this provision.
3. Increase in security deposit of the candidates—amendment of section 34 of the RP
Act, 1951.
3.1 Clause 5 (i) of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “a sum of ten thousand rupees or
where the candidate is a member of a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe, a sum of five thousand
rupees” with the words “a sum of twenty-five thousand rupees or where the candidate is a
 member of a scheduled caste and scheduled tribe, a sum of twelve thousand five hundred rupees”
in Section 34(1)(a) of the RP Act, 1951.
3.2 Clause 5 (ii) of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “a sum of five thousand rupees or
where the candidate is a member of a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe, a sum of two thousand
five hundred rupees” with the words “a sum of ten thousand rupees or where the candidate is a
member of a scheduled caste and scheduled tribe, a sum of five thousand rupees” in Section
34(l)(b) of the RP Act, 1951.
3.3 The Legislative Department, in its background note, has stated that Sub-section (l) of
section 34 containing the requirement of security deposit was substituted by the Representation of
the People (Amendment) Act, 1996 (21 of 1996) with a view to discourage non-serious candidates
for filing nominations and contesting elections. Under section 34 of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951, each candidate for election to the House of the People is required to deposit an
amount of Rs.10,000/- as security deposit. For State Assembly elections and elections to the
Council constituency, the security deposit is Rs.5,000/-. The amount of security deposit for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes is half the amount so specified for the two respective
categories. The amount of security deposit was last revised in 1996, raising the earlier amount of
Rs.500/- for Lok Sabha elections and Rs.250/- for Assembly elections to the current levels.
3.4 It has been further stated that the revision in 1996 was made primarily to discourage non-
serious candidates from jumping to the electoral arena. The revision in the security deposit in 1996
had the desired result in the Lok Sabha elections in 1998 and 1999, as there was a substantial
decline in the number of candidates in these elections and in the assembly elections during this
period. The average number of candidates at the Lok Sabha elections of 1998 was nine. At the last
general election to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies, the number of contesting
candidates showed an increasing trend again. A large number of such candidates are non-serious
candidates and they predictably end up polling negligible number of votes.
3.5 In this backdrop, the Election Commission of India had sent a proposal regarding increase
in the security deposit of the candidates to Rs.20,000/- in case of election to the House of People

8
and Rs.10,000/- for Legislative Assembly election. For candidate belonging to Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes, the deposit amount would be half the respective amounts.
3.6 In the memoranda received by the Committee and during the interactions of the Committee
with political parties, one of the views presented was that increasing the security deposit of the
candidates would prevent deserving, but not economically very well off candidates, from contesting
elections. On the other hand, the Committee takes into account the opinion raised from various
quarters endorsing the proposed amendment. It was opined that the increase in security deposit
would discourage non-serious candidates from filing nominations and contesting elections.
3.7 The Committee feels that non-serious candidates whose aim is to get publicity rather than
to win the elections, end up polling negligible number of votes. When too many candidates enter
the election fray, some of them just to create a record of contesting so many number of elections
only, it warrants increased expenditure in terms of manpower and balloting units. The Committee
feels that the proposed amendment will, to a certain extent, discourage such non serious candidates
and it endorses the amendment.
4. Including all officials appointed in connection with conduct of elections within the
ambit of section 123(1) of the RP Act, 1951 as regards the corrupt practices.
4.0 Clause 6 of the Bill proposes to substitute the words “from any person in the service of
the Government” with the words “from any person whether or not in the service of the
Government”. It also proposes to insert sub-clause (h) in Section 123 (7).
4.1 Section 123 of the said Act deals with certain practices, which are deemed to be corrupt
practices for the purposes of the said Act. Clause (7) of the said section mentions the categories
of the officials of the Government whose involvement in the furtherance of the electoral prospects
of any candidate at an election is to be treated as a corrupt practice for the purposes of the Act.
The categories of officials mentioned in the said clause are as follows:
(a) gazetted officers;
(b) stipendiary judges and magistrates;
(c) members of the armed forces of the Union;
(d) members of the police forces;
(e) excise officers;
(f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers known as lambardars, malguzars, patels,
deshmukhs or by any other name, whose duty is to collect land revenue and who are
remunerated by a share of, or commission on, the amount of land revenue collected by
them but who do not discharge any police functions; and
(g) such other class of persons in the service of the government as may be prescribed.
4.2 In the background note furnished by the Legislative Department, it has been stated that
the proposal to amend the aforesaid clause (7) of section 123 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 has emanated out of the judgment of the Madras High Court, dated 11.4.2003 delivered
in Election Petition No.6 of 2000 (R. Thirumavalavan Vs. Mrs. Sumathi Udayakumar and Others).
In the said judgment, the Court found an elected candidate guilty of serious corrupt practice in as
much as he cast his vote in a polling station where his name was not registered with the
permission of the Presiding Officer of the polling station. However, his election could not be set
aside due to the technical reason that the concerned Presiding Officer was not a gazetted officer
and therefore, did not fall in any of the categories of officers mentioned under clause (7) of section

9
123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. In paras 118 and 119 of the said judgment,
the Court observed as under:—
“118...Winning an election by illegal means with the blessings of the Presiding Officer will
be easily possible by appointing officials not being Gazetted Officer and thereby ensure that
the issue of corrupt practice under section 123(7) cannot be invoked.
119. This Court can only hope and trust that this anomaly is removed at the earliest and
the Presiding Officers irrespective of their official status and such other important officials
of the election machinery are also included under section 123(7).”
4.3 It has been further stated that apart from bringing officers of the Government including the
non-gazetted staff within the purview of section 123(7), it was also necessary to amend the said
sub-section to bring within its scope the staff of public sector undertakings whose service have
been requisitioned for election work.
4.4 It also states that clause (6) of article 324 of the Constitution provides that the President,
or the Governor of a State, shall, when so requested by the Election Commission, make available
to the Election Commission or to a Regional Commissioner such staff as may be necessary for the
discharge of its functions. The Supreme Court of India, taking note of aforesaid provisions of law,
held in its judgment, dated the 7th February, 1995, in Civil Appeal No.6026 of 1993, Election
Commission of India vs. State Bank of India Staff Association, Patna and others and Civil Appeal
No.4611 of 1989 – Election Commission of India vs. Northern Zone Insurance Employees
Association, Rajasthan, AIR 1995 SC 1078, that the Election Commission could not requisition the
services of employees of State Bank of India and Life Insurance Corporation of India for election
duties as such employees were neither employees of the Central Government or of a State
Government or of a local authority. It was observed that the persons whose services might be
placed at the disposal of the Election Commission must be persons who were either employee of
the Central Government or of State Government or of a local authority.
4.5 With a view to overcome the above difficulty, section 159 of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 was amended vide the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1998,
which enabled requisitioning of the services of the staff of any of the following authorities for
election work:—
(a) every local authority;
(b) universities;
(c) Government companies; and
(d) any other institution, concern or undertaking established under a Central, Provincial
or State Act or controlled or financed or funded wholly or substantially by the Central
Government or a State Government.
4.6 The Election Commission had, therefore, recommended that clause (7) of section 123 of
the said Act might be amended to include all officers appointed in connection with the conduct of
elections in the category of officers specified under the said clause so as to avoid recurrence of
such instances in future. The amendment will, therefore, remove the lacuna in the law.
4.7 During the deliberations of the Committee on the Bill, one of the Members opined that to
include a whole class of people – all LIC Officers/employees, Bank employees, Local body
employees etc. is an erosion of democratic rights. But the employees or officers are not compelled
to go for poll duty. Only the person who consents to go for poll duty is also allowed to use the
postal ballot to retain his/her right in democracy.

10
4.8 The Committee is of the firm opinion that the amendment proposed in this Clause
of the Bill would not serve the purpose intended by the Government to engage every person
irrespective of whether he is in the service of Government or not, for election duty. At the
same time, this initiative of the Government may also result in curtailing the democratic
rights of certain categories of employees who presently are enjoying such democratic rights.
In this background, the Committee feels that Government should redraft this clause for
engaging any person for election duty and thereafter go for classification ensuring that the
democratic rights being enjoyed by any class at present are not taken away. The Committee
therefore, recommends that this clause be redrafted de novo.
5. Restriction on publication and dissemination of result of Exit Polls
5.1 Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert Section 126A(1) in the Representation of the People
Act, 1951.
5.2 Section 126A(1) proposes that no person shall conduct any Exit Poll and publish or
publicise by means of print or electronic media or disseminate in any other manner whatsoever,
the result of any exit poll during such period as may be notified by the Election Commission in
this regard.
5.3 In the background note furnished by the Legislative Department, it has been stated that the
Election Commission had discussed this issue with all recognized national and State Political Parties
at the meetings held in New Delhi on 22nd and 23rd December, 1997. It has been further stated
that almost all Political Parties emphatically stated that the opinion polls, the way they are
conducted, are unscientific; and there is considerable bias in the size and the nature of the sample
drawn to make such an opinion poll; and that they tend to influence the voters in an unbecoming
manner. They also stated that many of the polls are motivated and are not impartial, because of
the known leanings or prejudices of some of the organizations conducting such polls, towards or
against certain political parties and/or their leaders. In the year 1998 when the Election Commission
prohibited the Exit Polls it was challenged in the Supreme Court of India which told the Election
Commission that it has no authority to ban the Exit Polls. But in a recent judgment the Supreme
Court has held that the Election Commission has the right to ban the Exit Polls.
5.4 The background note also states that the consensus among the Political Parties, on the issue
of Exit Polls, was that in a phased election, the result of Exit Poll conducted during any stage
should not be published before the close of poll in the last phase of election. In view of the above,
the Election Commission recommended to the Government for the need for a specific provision in
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 prohibiting the publishing and disseminating of results
of any opinion poll starting from the date of notification or election and publishing and
disseminating the result of Exit Polls till the completion of poll in the last phase of election.
5.5 Section 126 B(1) proposes that where an offence under sub-section (2) of section 126 A
has been committed by a Company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was
in charge of, and was responsible to the Company for the conduct of, the business of the
Company, as well as the Company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
5.5.1 The proviso to the Section exempts any such person liable to any punishment provided in
this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
5.6 During the deliberations of the Committee on the Bill, some of the Members opined that
total and outright denial of Exit Polls is not correct and that it may be banned when the electoral
process starts and when polling process starts. Some Members, while supporting the proposed

11
amendment, raised apprehension that media may not always be free from their own bias and that
professional ethics is sometimes not followed in Exit Polls.
5.7 Since the Committee could gather that neither the Election Commission of India nor the
Legislative Department had consulted the representatives of print and electronic media while
considering the proposal to restrict the conduct and dissemination of Exit Polls, the Committee
decided to hear the views of the stakeholders in this regard.
5.8 Majority of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee to tender oral evidence on
the Bill, were of the opinion that the voter is matured enough to take a decision independent of
the Exit Polls and that they make up their mind mainly on the basis of performance of the
Governments. They opined that Exit Polls, which is only a sample survey, do not influence the
mind of the public.
5.9 Some of the witnesses suggested that the penal provision in the Bill is not called for and
that a reprimand, in case of violation of the prohibition on Exit Polls, would be adequate.
5.10 The Editors Guild of India, in its written memorandum submitted to the Committee, has
stated that freedom of the press is protected by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and that the
reasons put forward in the Statement of objects and reasons appended to the Bill, to ban Exit Polls
do not come under reasonable restrictions provided in Article 19(2) of the Constitution and that it
is therefore, ultra vires the Constitution. It has been further stated that Exit Polls are part of the
attempt to look at the trends of the elections and voters’ preferences and that no evidence has been
produced on how Exit Polls affect either the voter turnout or the outcome of subsequent phase
of elections. The same view was expressed by the News Broadcasters Association in its
memorandum submitted to the Committee.
5.11 In the comments of the Government furnished in response to the points raised in the
memoranda, it has been stated in this regard that “the matter has been examined in consultation
with the learned Attorney General and the proposed legislation does not violate the fundamental
rights guaranteed under article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution. Further, the Supreme Court in its
several judgments has stated that free and fair election is one of the basic features of the
Constitution and to ensure it, the Government can make any law under article 326 of the
Constitution.”
5.12 In one of the memoranda submitted to the Committee, it was suggested that a provision
should also be made for registration and accreditation of poll survey agencies with the Election
Commission, in order to ensure a fair survey of Exit Polls, so as not to influence pattern of voting
during the period of polling. The Committee is of the view that this is a good suggestion and
it may be considered by the Government.
5.13 During the discussions of the Committee on the Bill, the Chairman of the Committee
observed that”.......in certain countries, they are totally prohibiting Exit Polls; in certain countries
they are prohibiting for a particular period, say, for 15 days or 3 weeks before the election; in
certain countries, they are not at all allowing this kind of Exit Polls; in certain countries, they are
not allowing it within the premises of the polling stations;.......we feel that the freedom of
expression and information is a very important right...”
5.14 One of the media persons who tendered oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill
opined that “.......it is obvious that this is, in a very real sense, a curtailment of a certain freedom
that we all enjoy today. It may be justified to ban it, but before we do, we have to be very clear
that there are no ambiguities.......any curtailment of freedom should be based on a solid,
incontrovertible evidence, and not based on hunch that this is good or bad for the country because
it is a very, very serious issue that we are planning to, you know, impose on the country...There

12
has been extensive research in every country including India about whether Opinion Polls or Exit
Polls do have an impact on voting behaviour and the result is uniform across the world. There is
zero correlation between Exit Polls, Opinion Polls and the voting behaviour...”
5.15 The witness further stated that “.......Again, in the 30 years that we have been reporting,
particularly, in the earlier days before the Exit Polls and the Opinion Polls became very widespread,
the biggest form of information that used to spread were rumours by political parties. The job of
the campaign machinery is to create rumours that I am winning or he has done something wrong,
or, this is what is happening here.......One thing that Exit Polls have done is, it is tended to stop
political parties from spreading rumours.......So, it is good information driving out bad
information...”
5.16 Further, one of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee to tender oral evidence
on the Bill opined that “.......we cannot have Exit Polls when the election is going on. More or less,
there is consensus in the Print Media.......” The Press Council of India, in its written memorandum
submitted to the Committee, has opined that “.........So far as Section 126A is concerned, it is the
considered view of the Council that “No newspaper shall publish Exit Poll surveys, however,
genuine they may be, till the last of the polls is over”, and the Press Council has already issued
guideline to that effect. The Press Council therefore supports Section 126A of the proposed Bill
because the same will give statutory endorsement of the view taken by the Press Council of India.”
5.17 The Committee takes into account the opinion of the media persons who deposed before
the Committee that “.......we have gone through the Bill and we feel that this is not required in
the democracy. We are a democracy and we are a matured democracy. We are having polls-after-
polls and the public and voters of India proved that they are matured enough and they cannot be
influenced by anything. They make up their mind mainly on the basis of performance of the
Government. We have seen how public reacted during the recent elections. So many slogans came
up during the last moment of polling, but they did not change the mind of the public, it is not
very easy to change the mind of the public, it is not very easy to change the mind of the public
that too with the exit polls...”
5.18 One of the witnesses, while opposing the proposed amendment restricting exit polls, stated
that “.......Today, the voter has a variety of sources through which he can get access to
information, he can assess the performance of the Government, and he can assess the performance
of the leaders and take the decision accordingly. So, things have changed. We don’t think that this
Bill is at all required. Further, the freedom of the Press is going to be curtailed. And, we are not
in favour of that...”
5.19 The Committee also takes cognizance of the deposition made by another witness before the
Committee that “.......the notion of restraint for the media to exercise voluntarily is a good thing.
But to have a legislation or to have a Bill to do that, I think, the principle of that, is something
that we would very strongly state may not be a good idea in the long-term. This is what we feel.
It is very open to misuse. When there is an attempt to do this, a particular Government in a
particular context may not misuse it. But, it lays itself open to misuse. And, eventually, the
framework is laid on legislating what the media can or cannot do. Our objection is, basically in
principle, on the need for legislation on this...”
5.20 The Committee could gather that restrictions on Exit Polls exist in other counties is as
under:—
Canada — Requires the publication of any election survey to include details of the
survey. Prohibits publishing any new survey results on election date
before the polls close.

13
France — Bans the publication of opinion polls on the day before the ballot and
the day of the ballot. Requires individuals who publish opinion surveys
to also release information on the data collection.
Italy — Allows the conduct of election polls but forbids publication and
diffusion of these 15 days prior to election day; exception are allowed
if the publication is released with an information note about the poll and
it is recorded on a website.
United States — No restriction.
United Kingdom — Forbids publication of Election Day exit polls or any forecast, before
the polls are closed. Punishment includes fines up to level 5 on the
standard scale or imprisonment upto six months.
South Africa — Prohibits any person from printing, publishing, or distributing the
results of exit polls during the prescribed hours for an election.
5.21 In a nutshell, the media feels that by imposing mandatory restriction on publication and
dissemination of result of Exit Polls etc., there is an attempt from the executive to throttle the
freedom of the press which is the fourth pillar of a democracy and this is being done without the
requisite data to support that Exit Polls do affect the outcome of the poll results. On the other
hand, the supporters of this restriction i.e. the representatives of the political parties feel that the
casting of vote by every elector in our country is secret and by conducting and disseminating the
Exit Poll, the media is, in the name of the freedom of press, breaching this secrecy by eliciting
from the voter as to whom he voted, which is against the Constitutional norm. They also feel that
media too does not have any data to claim that its Exit Polls do not affect the outcome of poll
results. On the contrary, on their personal experience, they feel that the dissemination of Exit Poll
results do affect the outcome of the poll results and therefore, restrictions are very much
necessary.
5.22 The Committee supports and respects the freedom of the press in unequivocal terms
and therefore, is of the considered opinion that Exit Polls is a part of the democratic process
and to a certain extent, it counters unhealthy rumours propagated by vested interests
during the polls. But at the same time, the media too should introspect as to why the Exit
Polls are being opposed by the contesting candidates and give due respect to their
sentiments.
5.23 The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should handle this
complicated issue cautiously and the media may be allowed to conduct Exit Polls during the
elections; but reasonable restrictions should also be there so that free and fair elections are
not affected in any manner by the dissemination of the results of the Exit Polls and the
Committee endorses the provisions made in the Bill by way of inserting new Sections 126A
and 126B in the principal Act.
5.24 As regards the punishment for contravention of the Section is concerned, the
Committee feels that it is quite harsh for the media and it should be re-examined before
a final decision is taken to go ahead with the provision.
5.25 Guarding its rights by the media is its democratic right; but contesting hassle free
election is the right of the candidates and even if there is an iota of doubt on the Exit Polls,
the media should restrain itself from conducting the same, respecting the sentiments of the
candidates because in a democratic polity, give and take is the best policy. The Committee
hopes that media will certainly do introspection on this issue.

14
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL
Clause 2
6.0 Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to:
(i) substitute in clause (a) of Section 24 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950,
for the words “Chief Electoral Officer”, the words “District Magistrate or Additional
District Magistrate”; and
(ii) insert after clause (a) of Section 24 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950
clause (b) “to the chief electoral officer, from any order of the district magistrate or
the additional district magistrate under clause (a) above”.
6.1 Clause 2 was adopted with the suggestion that the words “District Magistrate or
Additional District Magistrate” be substituted with the words “District Magistrate or
Additional District Magistrate or Executive Magistrate or District Collector or by whatever
name called in different States and Union Territories”.
Clause 3
7.0 Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to substitute the entry “39” for the entry “38” in column 7 in
the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 against serial number 18 relating
to the State of Mizoram.
7.1 Clause 3 was adopted without suggesting any changes.
Clause 4
8.0 Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “as soon as may be within a period of
three months from the date such order takes effect” for the words” as soon as may be after such
orders takes effect” in sub-section (1) of Section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
8.1 Clause 4 was adopted without suggesting any changes.
Clause 5
9.0 Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to:
(i) substitute in clause (a) of Section 34 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, for
the words “a sum of ten thousand rupees or where the candidate is a member of a
Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of five thousand rupees”, the words “a sum
of twenty-five thousand rupees or where the candidate is a member of a Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of twelve thousand five hundred rupees”; and
(ii) substitute in clause (b) of Section 34 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951,
for the words “a sum of five thousand rupees or where the candidate is a member
of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of two thousand five hundred
rupees”, the words “a sum of ten thousand rupees or where the candidate is a member
of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of five thousand rupees”.
9.1 Clause 5 was adopted without suggesting any changes.
Clause 6
10.0 Cl ause 6 of the Bill seeks to:
(i) substitute in clause 7 of the Section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951,
for the words “from any person in the service of the Government”, the words “from
any person whether or not in the service of the Government”; and

15
(ii) insert after sub-clause (g) of Section 123 (7) of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 sub-clause (h) “class of persons in the service of a local authority,
university, government company or institution or concern or undertaking appointed or
deputed by the Election Commission in connection with the conduct of elections”.
10.1 Subject to the recommendations of the Committee given in para 4.8 of the Report,
Clause 6 was adopted.
Clause 7
11.0 Clause 7 seeks to insert Sections 126A and 126B in the Representation of the People
Act, 1951.
11.1 Section 126A (1) proposes to restrict the conduct and publication or dissemination of the
result of any exit poll during the period that may be notified by the Election Commission of India.
Sub-section 2 of this Section provides the period during which the restriction under sub-
section 1 of this Section would be applicable. Sub-section 3 of this Section provides the
punishment in case of violation of the restriction.
11.2 Section 126B (1) provides the liability in case of an offence under sub-section 2 of section
126A committed by a company. The proviso to the Section provides the circumstances for
exemption from punishment.
11.3 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the publication or dissemination of the
result of any Exit Poll during the period notified by the Election Commission may be restricted;
but the conduct of Exit Poll during this period may not be banned. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the term “conduct” may be deleted from sub-section 1 of section 126A
proposed to be inserted in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 by clause 7 of the
Bill.
Long Title
12.0 The Long Title of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any changes.
Enacting Formula
13.0 In the enacting formula of the Bill, for the word “Fifty-ninth”, the word “sixtieth”
shall be substituted.
Short Title
14.0 In clause 1 of the Bill, for the figure “2008”, the figure “2009” shall be substituted.

16
16
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE COMMITTEE
1.10 The Committee could gather that at the time of revision of Electoral Rolls, numerous
complaints arise alleging that suo motu removal/deletion of names from the electoral rolls
was done without any intimation to the persons concerned. There have also been numerous
instances when the voter reaches the polling station to cast his/her vote, and the
opportunity to vote is denied on the ground that his/her name is not in the Electoral Roll,
which makes mockery of his democratic rights.
1.11 The Committee, therefore, endorses the proposed amendment and feels that this
would provide a reasonable opportunity to the elector to be heard regarding removal/deletion
of name from the electoral roll, without incurring much expense of money and time.
2.8 The Committee strongly feels that the inordinate delay which occurs in the current
procedure for disqualification of a person found guilty of corrupt practice, defeats the very
purpose of punishment of the guilty since he can take advantage of the delay to enjoy the
benefits accrued to him during the interim period. Therefore, the Committee is of the view
that prescribing a time limit within which the reference shall be submitted to the President,
in disqualification cases as proposed in clause 4 of the Bill is a welcome step and endorses
this provision.
3.7 The Committee feels that non-serious candidates whose aim is to get publicity rather
than to win the elections, end up polling negligible number of votes. When too many
candidates enter the election fray, some of them just to create a record of contesting so
many number of elections only, it warrants increased expenditure in terms of manpower and
balloting units. The Committee feels that the proposed amendment will, to a certain extent,
discourage such non serious candidates, it endorses the amendment.
4.8 The Committee is of the firm opinion that the amendment proposed in this Clause
of the Bill would not serve the purpose intended by the Government to engage every person
irrespective of whether he is in the service of Government or not for election duty. At the
same time, this initiative of the Government may also result in curtailing the democratic
rights of certain categories of employees who presently are enjoying such democratic rights.
In this background the Committee feels that Government should redraft this clause for
engaging any person for election duty and thereafter go for classification ensuring that the
democratic rights being enjoyed by any class at present are not taken away. The Committee
therefore, recommends that this clause be redrafted de novo.
5.22 The Committee supports and respects the freedom of the press in unequivocal terms
and therefore, is of the considered opinion that Exit Polls is a part of the democratic process
and to a certain extent, it counters unhealthy rumours propagated by vested interests
during the polls. But at the same time, the media too should introspect as to why the Exit
Polls are being opposed by the contesting candidates and give due respect to their
sentiments.
5.23 The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should handle this
complicated issue cautiously and the media may be allowed to conduct Exit Polls during the
elections; but reasonable restrictions should also be there so that free and fair elections are
not affected in any manner by the dissemination of the results of the Exit Polls and the

17
Committee endorses the provisions made in the Bill by way of inserting new Sections 126A
and 126B in the principal Act.
5.24 As regards the punishment for contravention of the Section is concerned, the
Committee feels that it is quite harsh for the media and it should be re-examined before
a final decision is taken to go ahead with the provision.
5.25 Guarding its rights by the media is its democratic right; but contesting hassle free
election is the right of the candidates and even if there is an iota of doubt on the Exit Polls,
the media should restrain itself from conducting the same respecting the sentiments of the
candidates because in a democratic polity, give and take is the best policy. The Committee
hopes that media will certainly do introspection on this issue.

MINUTES

21
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19th November, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
4. Shrimati Brinda Karat
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
7. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
8. Shri S.K. Karventhan
9. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Adv. P. Satheedevi
15. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
16. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary;
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel.

22
2. The Chairman informed the Members that the Representation of the People (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2008 as introduced in Rajya Sabha on 24th October, 2008 and pending therein,
has been referred to the Committee for examination and Report within three months.
3. The Chairman then requested the Secretary, Legislative Department to make a presentation
on the provisions of the Bill. While elucidating upon the various provisions of the Bill, the Secretary
apprised the Committee that the Bill was brought by the Government in pursuance of the
examination of the 22 proposals submitted by the Election Commission of India on “Electoral
Reforms”.
4. Thereafter, Members of the Committee expressed their views and apprehensions on the
various provisions of the Bill. Some Members desired that the Ministry should furnish the logic for
raising the deposit amount of candidates; norms chalked out to curb corrupt practices; guidelines
framed to curb media trials during elections; reasons for the Government in bringing out proposed
legislation on few selected issues out of the 22 proposals of the Election Commission; details of
consultations with stakeholders and the international experience with regard to ‘exit polls’. The
witness responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
The Chairman of the Committee also instructed the Secretary to furnish written replies thereon.
(The witness then withdrew)
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 12.15 
P.M. to meet again on 4th December, 2008.

23
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16th December, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Virendra Bhatia
3. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
10. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
11. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. Representatives of Media
1. Outlook
• Shrimati Saba Naqvi.
2. Star News
• Shri Rajan Singh.
23
*** Relates to some other matter.

24
3. Aajtak
• Shri Shailesh Kumar
• Shri Ashok Virmani.
4. NDTV India
• Ms. Kadambini Sharma
V. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
A. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
B. The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008
4. The Chairman welcomed representatives of Outlook, Aajtak, Star News and NDTV – India
to the meeting. He apprised them of the provisions of the Bill under consideration of the Committee
and informed them of the formalities required of them as witnesses before the Committee.
Thereafter, he requested them to make their submissions one after the other on the various
provisions of the Bill.
5. The witnesses gave their views on the issue of ‘exit polls’ as provided for in the Bill.
Thereafter, Members raised certain clarifications which were responded to by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
C. * * *
6. * * *
D. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 4.15 
P.M. to meet again on 29th December, 2008.
*** Relates to some other matter.

25
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 29th December, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shrimati Brinda Karat
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
7. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
9. Dr. C. Krishnan
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh Rana, Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
A. The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008
WITNESSES
I. NDTV
1. Dr. Prannoy Roy
2. Shri Daurav R. Supariwala.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
25

26
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Dr. Prannoy Roy, Chairman, NDTV and his colleague
Shri Daurav R. Supariwala at the meeting. He apprised them of the various provisions of the Bill
under consideration of the Committee and informed them of the formalities required of them as
witnesses before the Committee. Thereafter, he requested them to make their submissions one after
the other on the various provisions of the Bill.
3. The witnesses gave their views on the issue of ‘exit polls’ and informed the Committee of
their apprehensions on the subject as provided for in the Bill. The witnesses supported their claims
with their experiences in the past twenty odd years of conducting ‘exit polls’ in the many elections
that have been held in the country. Thereafter, Members raised certain clarifications which were
responded to by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
B. * * *
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

27
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 7th January, 2009 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Brinda Karat
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Adv. P. Sathedevi
11. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh Rana, Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
A. * * *
2. * * *
B. * * *
3. * * *
C. The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008
WITNESSES
Representatives of Media
1. The Indian Express
(i) Ms. Seema Chisti, Resident Editor; and
(ii) Shri Vinay Sitapati, Assistant Editor.
27
*** Relates to some other matter.

28
2.2.2.2.2. The Week Magazine
Shri K.S. Sachidananda Murthy, Resident Editor.
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
(i) Shri V .K. Bhasin, Additional Secretary; and
(ii) Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
4. The Chairman welcomed Shri Sachidanand Murthy, Resident Editor, ‘The Week’,
Ms. Seema Chisti, Resident Editor and Shri Vinay Sitapati, Assistant Editor of the Indian Express
at the meeting. He apprised them of the various provisions of the Bill under consideration of the
Committee and informed them of the formalities required of them as witnesses before the
Committee.
5. The witnesses gave their views on the issue of ‘exit polls’ as provided for in the Bill.
Shri Murthy viewed that a ban of ‘exit polls’ in any form is ultra vires to Article 19 (l) of the
Constitution and therefore, raised his apprehensions to this provision of the Bill. He further
supported his claim that since no organization has a total influence on the media as a whole, ‘exit
polls’ cannot be dubbed to control the voting pattern of the people. He also stated that the ‘Objects
and Reasons’ appended to the Bill indicates that the proposed legislation stemmed not from proved
facts but hypothesis. The representatives of the ‘The Indian Express’, however, above many
issues, stated that they are not strictly opposed to the imposition of the ban as provided for in the
Bill, but oppose the principle of bringing a legislation on such ban. Thereafter, Members raised
certain clarifications which were responded to by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
D. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

29
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16th February, 2009, in Committee Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
9. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Adv. P. Sathedevi
12. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
A. Adoption of draft 33rd and 34th Reports
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft 33rd Report on the Representation of the
People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 and the draft 34th Report on the High Court and Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008, suggesting minor
changes in both the Reports. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shrimati
Brinda Karat, to present both the Reports in Rajya Sabha; and Dr. C. Krishnan, and in his absence
Adv. P. Sathedevi, to lay them in Lok Sabha on the 18th February, 2009.
B. * * *
3. * * *
29
*** Relates to some other matter.

30
C. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.05 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

31
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-A
INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
24 OCT., 2008
Bill No. LII of 2008.
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (SECOND
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and
the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Representation of the
People (Second Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS  TO THE R EPRESENTATION OF THE P EOPLE A CT, 1950
2. In section 24 of the Representation of the People Act,
1950,—
(i) in clause ( a), for the words “chief electoral officer”,
the words “district magistrate or additional district magistrate”
shall be substituted;
33
Short title and
commencement.
43 of 1950.
Amendment of
section 24.

34
(ii) after clause ( a), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(b) to the chief electoral officer, from any order
of the district magistrate or the additional district
magistrate under clause (a) above.”.
3. In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People
Act, 1950, against serial number 18 relating to the State of Mizoram,
in column 7, for the entry “38”, the entry “39” shall be substituted.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE R EPRESENTATION OF THE P EOPLE A CT, 1951
4. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section ( 1) of section 8A, for
the words “as soon as may be after such order takes effect”, the
words “as soon as may be within a period of three months from the
date such order takes effect” shall be substituted.
5. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) in clause ( a), for the words “a sum of ten thousand
rupees or where the candidate is a member of a Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of five thousand rupees”, the
words “a sum of twenty-five thousand rupees or where the
candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Tribe, a sum of twelve thousand five hundred rupees” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in clause ( b), for the words “a sum of five thousand
rupees or where the candidate is a member of a Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of two thousand five hundred
rupees”, the words “a sum of ten thousand rupees or where the
candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Tribe, a sum of five thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
6. In section 123 of the principal Act, in clause (7),—
(i) for the words “from any person in the service of the
Government”, the words “from any person whether or not in
the service of the Government” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-clause ( g), the following sub-clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(h) class of persons in the service of a local
authority, university, government company or institution
or concern or undertaking appointed or deputed by the
Election Commission in connection with the conduct of
elections.”.
7. After section 126 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment
of Second
Schedule
Amendment of
section 8A.
Insertion of
new sections
126A and
126B.
Amendment of
section 34.
Amendment of
section 123.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
48 of 1951.

35
‘126A. ( 1) No person shall conduct any exit poll and
publish or publicise by means of the print or electronic media
or disseminate in any other manner, whatsoever, the result of
any exit poll during such period, as may be notified by the
Election Commission in this regard.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Election
Commission shall, by a general order, notify the date and time
having due regard to the following, namely:—
(a) in case of a general election, the period may
commence from the beginning of the hours fixed for poll
on the first day of poll and continue till half an hour after
closing of the poll in all the States and Union territories;
(b) in case of a bye-election or a number of bye
elections held together, the period may commence from
the beginning of the hours fixed for poll on from the first
day of poll and continue till half an hour after closing of
the poll:
Provided that in case of a number of bye-elections held
together on different days, the period may commence from the
beginning of the hours fixed for poll on the first day of poll and
continue till half an hour after closing of the last poll.
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this section
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years or with fine or with both.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “exit poll” means an opinion survey respecting how
electors have voted at an election or respecting how all the
electors have performed with regard to the identification of
political party or candidate in an election;
(b) “electronic media” includes internet, radio and television
including Internet Protocol Television, satellite, terrestrial or
cable channels, mobile and such other media either owned by
the Government or private person or by both;
(c) “print media” includes any newspaper, magazine or
periodical, poster, placard, handbill or any other document;
(d) “dissemination” includes publication in any ‘print media’
or broadcast or display on any electronic media.
126B. ( 1) Where an offence under sub-section ( 2) of section
126A has been committed by a company, every person who at the
time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as
well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Restriction on
publication and
dissemination of
result of exit
polls, etc.
Offences by
companies.

36
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate, and includes
a firm or other association of individual; and
(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the
firm.’.

37
37
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In any Parliamentary form of Government and in a democracy, the process
of election has to be free, fair and equitable. During the years, it has been felt
that it is necessary to take some need-based measures to remove certain
loopholes noticed in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of l950) and
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951). In July, 2004, the
Election Commission of India had forwarded a set of 22 proposals on electoral
reforms to the Government for consideration.
2. While considering the proposals of the Election Commission, it was
considered appropriate to examine certain proposals in respect of the electoral
reforms. The following five proposals have been examined by the Government
which relates to amendments of the aforesaid Acts of 1950 and 1951. The said
amendments are as follows:—
(a) the Representation of the People Act, 1950:—
appointment of the appellate authority within the district
against the orders of the electoral registration officers (amendment
of section 24);
(b) the Representation of the People Act, 1951:—
(i) simplification of procedure for disqualification of a person
found guilty of corrupt practices (specifying a time limit in
section 8A);
(ii ) increase in the security deposit of the candidates
nominated for elections (amendment of section 34);
(iii) inclusion in section 123(7) of all officials appointed in
connection with the conduct of elections so as to bring them within
the ambit of corrupt practices, if they indulge in furtherance of the
prospects of the candidates at elections; and
(iv) restricting the publication of results of all exit polls by
whatever means till the last poll in an election is held, by insertion
of new sections 126A and 126B. This is considered necessary due
to the complexities of the election process, which is increasing day-
by-day, and as such elections are being held in several phases. In
such staggering of election schedules over a large period of time it
is felt that the telecast of exit polls after each phase of polling
affects the outcome in the subsequent phase of elections. It is
believed that such telecast of exit polls affect the turnout of voters’
also.
4. The Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 seeks
to achieve the above said objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; HANS RAJ BHARDWAJ.
The 20th October, 2008.

38
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE R EPRESENTATION OF THE P EOPLE A CT, 1950
(43 OF 1950)
* *** *
24. An appeal shall lie with such time and such manner as may be prescribed—
(a) to the chief electoral officer, from any order of the electoral
registration officer under section 22 or section 23.
* *** *
The Second Schedule
(See sections 7 and 7A)
Total number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies
Name of the Number of seats in the Number of seats in the
State/Union House as constituted House as subsequently
territory on the basis of the constituted as per the
Delimitation of Delimitation of Parliamentary
Parliamentary and and Assembly Constituencies
Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008
Order, 1976 as amended
from time to time
Total Reserved Reserved T otal Reserved Reserved
for the for the for the for the
Scheduled Scheduled Scheduled Scheduled
Castes Tribes Castes Tribes
1 2 34 56 7
1. States:
18 Mizoram 40 39 40 38
* *** *
EXTRACTS  FROM THE R EPRESENTATION OF THE P EOPLE A CT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
* *** *
8A. (1) The case of every person found guilty of a corrupt practice by
an order under section 99 shall be submitted, as soon as may be after such
order takes effect, by such authority as the Central Government may specify in
this behalf, to the President for determination of the question as to whether such
person shall be disqualified and if so, for what period:
Provided that the period for which any person may be disqualified under
this sub-section shall in no case exceed six years from the date on which the
order made in relation to him under section 99 takes effect.
38
Appeals.
Disqualifica-
tion on
ground of
corrupt
practices.

39
** * * *
34. ( 1) A candidate shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election
from a constituency unless he deposits or causes to be deposited,—
(a) in the case of an election from a Parliamentary constituency,
a sum of ten thousand rupees or where the candidate is a member of a
Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of five thousand rupees; and
(b) in the case of an election from an Assembly or Council
constituency, a sum of five thousand rupees or where the candidate
is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of two
thousand five hundred rupees:
Provided that where a candidate has been nominated by more than one
nomination paper for election in the same constituency, not more than one
deposit shall be required of him under this sub-section.
** * * *
PART VII
CORRUPT PRACTICE AND ELECTORAL OFFENCES
CHAPTER I.—Corrupt Practices
123. The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the
purposes of this Act,—
** * * *
(7) The obtaining or procurring or attempting to obtain or procure by a
candidate or his agent or, by any other person with the consent of a candidate or
his election agent any assistance (other than the giving of vote) for the furtherance
of the prospects of that candidate’s election, from any person in the service of
the Government and belonging to any of the following classes, namely:—
(a) gazetted officers;
(b) stipendiary judges and magistrates;
(c) members of the armed forces of the Union;
(d) members of the police forces;
(e) excise officers;
(f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers known as
lambardars, malguzars, patels, deshmukhs or by any other name, whose
duty is to collect land revenue and who are remunerated by a share of,
or commission on, the amount of land revenue collected by them but who
do not discharge any police functions; and
(g) such other class of persons in the service of the Government
as may be prescribed:
Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government and
belonging to any of the classes aforesaid, in the discharge or purported discharge
of his official duty, makes any arrangements or provides any facilities or does
any other or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any candidate or his agent or any
other person acting with the consent of the candidate or his election agent
(whether by reason of the office held by the candidate or for any other reason),
such arrangements, facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to be assistance
for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate’s election.
** * * *
Deposits.
Corrupt
Practices.

40
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the
People Act, 1951.
(Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice)

ANNEXURE-B
COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT)
ON THE VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS CONTAINED IN MEMORANDA SUBMITTED BY
INDIVIDUALS ORGANISATIONS/EXPERTS ON THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL
M. Name of Comments/suggestions Response of
No. organization/individual Government
12 3 4
1. Unnamed and According to the writer the section The Government will
unsigned 126(A) which is to restrict look forward to the
Memoranda. publication and dissemination of result recommendation of the
of exit polls also gives a sense of Committee.
imposing restrictions for conducting
any exit poll. Therefore, the writer has
strong apprehension that this provision
could come under challenge in the
Court of Law as violation of right to
Freedom of expression as enshrined in
our Constitution.
(ii) The writer is of the view that the No comments, as it supports
restriction proposed as regards to the Bill. Moreover, the
publication having regard to provisions restriction on conduct and
of section 126(2) and 126(2)(b) seems publication of exit poll, as
to be reasonable.However, he is of the provided in the Bill, starts
view that the vide section 126(1)(2)(a) from the first day of polling,
it has been proposed that period may in cases where polling is done
commence from beginning hours fixed in phased manner, and ends
for poll on the first day of poll and after half hour on the last
continue till half an hour after closing day of polling. Hence, there
of the poll, in all States and Union is no gap in the restriction
Territories. In case of General Election, provided in the Bill.
the polling usually takes place in phases
on the different dates in each State
which is geographically large. There
will be usually a gap between each
phase of polling. Therefore, the
aforesaid section would not achieve
the objective because during this gap
there would be dissemination of exit
poll result, which would influence the
voters in the polling subsequent phase.
In other words the voters will not
caste the vote according to dictates of
their conscience. Therefore, clause (a)
needs an amendment by way of
41

42
12 3 4
insertion on the first day of poll in
the “first phase” and till half an hour
after closing of the poll in the “last
phase”, in all States and Union
Territories, where polling takes place
in phases. This provision appears to
have been made assuming that there
is single phase of polling.
(iii) The writer is of the view that a The Central Government
provision should also be made for would examine this issue
registration and accreditation of poll in the light of the
survey Agencies with the Election recommedations of the
Commission in order to ensure a fair Hon’ble Committee.
survey of exit polls, so as not to
influence pattern of voting during the
period of polling.
(iv) As regards to amendment of section The interpretation of the
8A, the writer is of the view that the writer is not correct as the
object is not for simplification of proceedings and other
procedure for disqualification of a modalities starts only after
person found guilty of corrupt practices. a judgment is pronounced
But this will provide some breathing by the High Court.
time to such guilty person to move to
the Court of Law against any adverse
order which may have been passed
against him, by specifying a period of
three months during which a case shall
be submitted to the President for
determination of question as to whether
such person shall be disqualified or not.
Therefore, this amendment will have
ample scope for prolonged proceedings
in the Court of Law, and continue till
the expiry of term of Assembly or
Parliament, as the case may be.
Therefore, true objective of this
amendment is to provide suitable
opportunity for aggrieved person to move
the Court of Law. It is the function of
the Election Commission to ensure that
elections are conducted in fair manner,
hence obviously powers to admit the
cases of every person found to be
guilty of corrupt practice, for
determination of the question as to
whether such person shall be disqualified
or not should also go to the Election

43
12 3 4
Commission. It is felt that the President
as executive head should not be
vested with such powers. The powers
of the President is to appoint or dismiss
a Minister from the Council of Ministers.
This function of President is to deal with
post election situation such as
constitution of Council of Ministers.
Hence the proposal needs to be
examined in light of nature of powers
given to President.
2. Anand Prakash His views and suggestions are as
Singhal, Advocate, follows:—
C-2, Sarvodaya
Colony, Jail Chungi, (i) Amendment of section 24 of the Act The amendment is moved
Meerut (U.P.) is unnecessary, as the main provision to simplify the procedure,
is clear and correct. as the present appellate
authority is Chief Electoral
Officer, who sits at the
capital of the State and he
was not easily accessible to
the common people. It
necessitates an amendment
to make an appellate
authority between Electoral
Registration Officer and
Chief Electoral Officer at
district level to facilitate the
voters and early settlement
of grievances.
(ii) The increase in security deposits No comment, as it supports
shall be in public interest of eliminating the Bill.
self-propelling candidature having no
theme of public service in them.
(iii) Under section 3/7  and 8 of the It does not relates to the
Act, the Government shoul d be the provisions of the Bill,
authorized to direct the Delimitation hence no comments.
Commission to reduce the membership
of all Legislative bodies by enlarging
the areas of the Constituencies and
the Schedule-l be amended to reduce
membership. This shall have a salutary
advantage:—
(a) the parochial dispensation of the
people and the polity in the form of
casteism, communalism and regionalism
shall have a break;

44
12 3 4
(b) the outburst stainted by mob
mentality and avoved animosity between
treasury and opposition benches shall be
banished to conserve parliamentary time;
(c) Coalition Government shall be
replaced by principled Governance.
(A) There has to be pre-qualification –Do–
condition for electoral candidature, it
should not be seized by “Aya Ram
Gaya Ram” and the value minus people
or aiminals especially when even the
lowest ranking job does not allow all
and sundry to join the job, I submit that
a candidate for these bodies must be at
least a 10+2 qualified persons having
served the people for 3 years in the
field of universal education, family
planning or health promotion.
(B) Only parties having a secular –Do–
agenda and development schedule and
open membership for the peoples should
be recognized by Election Commission;
(C) Parties misusing the funds of State –Do–
Exchequer by naming State and
Government projects in their or in the
name of their party leaders should be
de-recognised, with the exceptions of
those names who are defined as
Karamyogies by Bhagwat Gita, i.e.
persons who made sacrifices for the
country without receiving or aspiring
for any reward, i.e. like Mahatma
Gandhi, Subhash Bose, Moti Lal Nehru
and Jai Prakash Narain Ji.
3. Amrit Lal Rawal, His views and suggestions are as
Reader, DCAC, Univ. follows:—
of Delhi, 48/12, GF,
Backside, East Patel (i) With reference to amendment of The proposed increase
Nagar, New Delhi-8. section 34 for increase in the security in the security deposit is to
deposit of the candidates nominated for discourage the non-serious
elections, his point is that there are candidate and by amending
millions of people in this country this provision on the
who are well-meaning but financially recommendation of Election
not well-off who can contribute towards Commission. The other
the enhancement of legislative activity suggestion relates to the

45
12 3 4
in the Parliament. The Hon’ble Speaker qualification of candidates
of the the Lok Sabha is repeatedly not being within the scope
heard saying to the Hon’ble Members: of the Bill, hence no
“I am ashamed of you.” This not only comments.
shows the deep anguish of a great
person and a great  Indian but also
makes concerned Indians think as
how to improve the legislative functioning
of the country. Therefore, country
needs highly disciplined legislators
who can give better legislative output.
Only disciplined and more educated
people can give a better legislative
performance. Accordingly, he submits
that the proposed increase in security
deposit be deferred and suggests that
the educational qualifications of the
candidates should be paid more attention
to. The highest amount of security
deposit should not be more than
Rs.10,000/-(Ten thousand only). It shall
encourage well-meaning but not well-off
people to join politics.
(ii) As regards to insertion of new No comments as it supports
sections 126A and 126B, he submits provisions of the Bill. Further,
that it should be carried out. He further after the publication of
submits that the All India Radio and notification for an election,
Doordarshan should be asked to work the Mode Code of Conduct
in a fair manner as soon as elections comes into force and the
are declared. Generally a news item Government as well as the
giving positive publicity to the ruling ruling party is guided by it.
party is aked juxtaposing it with a news Suggestion does not relate
item giving negative publicity to the to specific provision of the
opposition. In this connection he Bill.
also refers his representation submitted
to the Election Commission of India
in 1999. He wishes that this mischief
should be stopped. He is also prepared
to submit orally if required.
4. Shri Jagdeep S. Chokar, i. In respect of banning of exit poll he The Central Government
Former Professor and is of the view that the guidelines from look forward to the
Dean, IIM Ahmedabad. the Press Council of India already exist, recommendations of the
On behalf Association asking newspapers not to publish exit- Hon’ble Committee.
Democratic Reforms poll surveys until the last day of the
polls. In this regard he has suggested
that the authority to decide and
enforce this issue, should be left with
the Election Commission of India.

46
12 3 4
ii. In respect of amendment of section The authority to which an
24 of the RP Act, 1951 is of the view appeal shall lie has merit
that the first appeal should be made to in it. However, Central
lie with the district Election Officer Government will look
(DEO) instead of Addl. DM or DM as forward  to the recomm-
they are the Officers of the State endations of the Hon’ble
Administration. Committee.
iii. He has suggested some other It does not relate to the
amendments which are not concerned provisions of the Bill. This
with the provisions of the Bill and is merely a suggestion on
these are mainly related with different electoral reforms and within
form of electoral reforms. the scope of present Bill.
5. Transparency i. The provision made under section 24 No comments as it
International India of the RP Act, 1950, of the Bill has supports provisions of the
been supported. Bill.
ii. In respect of amendment in section –Do–
8A of the RP Act, 1951, it supported
the proposal.
iii. In respect of increasing security –Do–
deposit it was of the view that it
should be Rs. 100000/- and Rs.50000/-
for election to Lok Sabha and
Legislative Assembly respectively.
Whereas, the amount would be half in
case of SC/ST candidates. It was
further suggested that the power to
increase the security deposit amount
should vest with the Election Commission.
iv. In respect of amendment of section –Do–
123(7), it supported the proposal.
v. In respect of exit poll it supported No comments as it supports
the proposal. However, it was of the provisions of the Bill.
view that the opinion poll surveys prior However, in respect of the
to the election should also be prohibited, opinion poll. The Central
after the close of campaign. Government will look
forward to the guidance by
way of recommendations of
the Hon’ble Committee.
vi. It has further suggested that there The Dinesh Goswami
must be a provision for negative/neutral Committee has considered
voting. this proposal and was of
the view that it does not
serve any purpose. However,
the matter is sub-judice and
pending in the Apex Court.

47
12 3 4
6. Shri V .A. Dhana In respect of amendment for banning The matter has been
Aravindha Balaji, exit poll they are of the view that it examined in consultation
246, Alagu Palani would be violation of fundamental rights with the Ld. Attorney
St., guaranteed under Article 19 of the General and the proposed
Meenakshi Nagar, Constitution and ulta-vires to Article 324. legislation does not violate
Madurai. the fundamental rights
Shri R.M. Vinod guaranteed under article
Khanna, 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
9/11, New Corporation Further, the Supreme Court
colony, West in its several judgement
Ponnagaram, 4th has stated that free and
St., Madurai. fair election is one of the
basic features of the
Constitution and to ensure
it the Government can
make any law under article
326 of the Constitution.
7. Shri K.K. Mital, i. He is of the view that the amendment The suggestion if accepted
Political Analyst, in respect of increasing security deposit may become a tool of
41C, Pocket-C, may be made in such a way that it money power. However,
Ashok Vihar-III, should be Rs.50,000/- and Rs.30,000/- the Central Government
Delhi – 1100052. for Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly would consider recommen-
respectively for candidates belonging to dations of the Hon’ble
recognized Nationa1/State Political parties. Standing Committee in this
The amount should be half in case of regard.
candidates belonging to Female/SC/ST.
Further, for all other candidates it
should be Rs.2 lakh and Rs.1,50,000/-
for Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly
respectively, whereas, the amount
would be Rs.25,000 and Rs.15,000/-
for Female/SC/ST candidates.
ii. In respect of restriction on exit poll No comments as it supports
they support the proposal. In addition provisions of the Bill.
they are of the view that the opinion However, in respect of
poll may also be restricted. the opinion poll Central
Government will look
forward to the recommen-
dations of the Hon’ble
Committee.
8. Uttarakhand i. He has welcomed the Amendments of No comments as it supports
Pradesh Congress the Bill. He has further suggested some provisions of the Bill.
Committee reforms to be carry out in respect of
21, Rajpur Road, postal ballot system.
Dehradun.

48
12 3 4
ii. He has further suggested that section The service of the officials,
123(7) should cover not only the period as understood in this
of re-voting stage but should cover the Department is requisitioned
all period from the day of election for election work and will
process till the election result is declared. be on disposal of the
Election Commission of India.
9. Madkai Rashtrhita i. It is of the view that there should be The suggestion may not be
Manch, an appellate authority in the Taluka acceptable, as Electoral
Madkai Tonk, .O. instead of District against the order of Registration Officer is an
Mardol-403 404, Electoral Registration Officer. Officer at the level of Block
Goa, P.O. Box 258, or Tehsil and the next level
Panaji-403001 to that is the District.
ii. it is of the view that the person This suggestion is broadly
found guilty of corrupt practices should covered within clause 4 of
be made disqualified within the time the Bill, hence no comments.
limit/period of three months by
simplification of procedure based on
the petitions of documentary evidence
etc.
iii. It is of the view that the security The suggestion may not be
deposits should be as under:— accepted, as the suggested
For Parliamentary Elections:— amount is quite high.
(a) Gen. Cat. – Rs. 200000/-
(b) SC/ST – Rs. 100000/-
For Assembly Elections
(a) Gen. Cat. – Rs. 100000/-
(b) SC/ST – Rs. 50000/-
iv. It is of the view that the official Provisions under Sections
found guilty having involved in 123(7), 129, 134 and 134A
corrupt practice should be fined not of the RP Act, 1951 deal
less than Rs. 100000/- as well as with the offences made by
removal from his job so as to create the Government officials
permanent fear complex among such appointed in connection
corrupt officials. with the elections.
v. The amendment in respect of the No comments as it supports
restriction of exit polls has been provisions of the Bill.
supported. Also, it is of the view that However, in respect of the
the pre-poll survey and opinion polls opinion poll, Central
should be banned/prohibited during the Government will look
applicability of model code of conduct. forward to the
recommendations of the
Hon’ble Committee.

49
12 3 4
10. Indian Newspaper It is of the view that there should not See comments against
Society, be any restriction of media in respect Sl. No. 6
INS Buildings, Rafi of the exit polls as it would tantamount
Marg, New Delhi- to curbing freedom of expression of an
110001. independent and vibrant press as
enshrined in the Constitution.
11. Shri S. Krishnamurthy, He is of the view that the increase of See comments against
D.D.O. security deposit should be made as Sl. No. 7.
(Panchayati Raj) under:—
(Retd.)
No.1, Panchayat For election to the House of People:—
Lane, (i) Rs. 50000/-
Chromeet, (ii) for candidate belonging to
Chennai-600044. SC/ST the amount would be
Rs. 25000/-
for election to the Legislative Assembly:—
(i) Rs. 25000/-
(ii) for candidate belonging to
SC/ST the amount would be
Rs. 12500/-
12. From Star News. i. It is of the views that the banning See comments against
of exit polls is unconstitutional and Sl. No. 6
Media Content and infringement of the freedom of press
Communications guaranteed under article 19(1) (a) of
Services (India) the Constitution.
Pvt. Ltd.
A-37, Sector-360, ii. It is of the view that there is no
Noida, U.P.-201307 any empirical evidence to prove that
on the whole voters would be affected
by Exit polls result and requested that
the Committee to share any study/survey
done on this subject.
13. Editors Guild of It has opposed the proposed amendment See comments against
India. of the Bill which relates to the Media S1. No. 6
C/o IBN Network, regarding banning of exit poll. In it
Express Tower, support it has stated that it would
violate the right of freedom enshrined
in the Constitution under article 19(1) (a).

50
MEMORANDA NOS. 14 TO  17 RECEIVED FROM DIFFERENT  ORGANIZA TIONS/INDIVIDUALS ON THE
REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
Memo- Name of the Comments/views Response of Government
randa O rganization/indi-
No. vidual
12 3 4
14 Hemant Kumar (i) He has expressed view on the exit poll part of Bill No comments as it support the Bill.
Kubade and has expressed that there are a number of aspects
(09822492277) to this issue that cannot be discussed or explained in
letter or e-mail. If he is given a chance, he would be
glad to clear the picture in person.
(ii) He has commented on the increase in security The proposed increase in the security deposit
deposit of candidates contesting elections and has is to discourage the non-serious candidate and
stated that the way of increase is not genuine. Instead this amendment has been carried out on the
he advocates for gradual increase in security deposit, recommendation of the Election Commission.
say about 5% to 10% increase every term. It can
also be kept in proportion to maximum limit of
expenditure.
(iii) Sections 128 to 132 of the R.P. Act, 1951 have It does not relate to the provisions of the Bill.
provisions regarding corrupt practices but sometimes This is merely a suggestion on electoral
even the contesting candidates are not aware of these reforms and the Central Government will look
provisions. Each and every candidate has his polling/ forward to the recommendations of the
voting agents present inside the polling stations Hon’ble Committee in this regard.
throughout the polling procedure. If these agents are
trend properly regarding the code of conduct and all the
provisions under different sections, they will do half of
the part. For this purpose, he has requested to prepare
a handbook/booklet or audio-video CD and distribute to
all candidates for any cost between Rs.50 to 100, it
will reduce the burden of election process costing.
That he is interested in giving oral presentation
regarding amendments in the Bill if he is allowed.

51
15. Annie Joseph, The association wishes to submit that by imposing the The matter has been examined in consultation
Secretary General, ban on exit poll, it has deviated from the Fundamental with the Ld. Attorney General and the proposed
News Broadcasters Rights [article 19(1)(a)] of the Constitution since it legislation does not violate the fundamental
Association, ME-5, guarantees the right to freedom of speech and expression. rights guaranteed under article 19(1)(a) of the
Sah Vikas By interpreting this provision, the perspective of the Constitution. Further, the Supreme Court in its
Apartments, 68, person whose freedom to express himself is impacted several of its judgment has stated that free and
Patparganj, as also from the perspective of the person who’s right fair election is one of the basic features of
Delhi-92. to know is affected. Thus, article 19(1)(a) is equally Constitution and to ensure it the Government
meant for the protection of people’s right to receive can make any law under article 326 of the
information as it is meant to protect the people’s right Constitution.
to express themselves. Moreover, the ban on exit poll
sought to be imposed by law does not legitimately relate
to any of the grounds contained in article 19(2) of the
Constitution and accordingly the amendments sought to
be made would not pass the constitutional muster. Apart
from the above, there exists no experimental data to
demonstrate that exit/opinion polls affect voter preferences
or turnout or otherwise influence in election.. Accordingly,
they have urged the Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee to decline to accept the amendments suggested
in the Bill.
16. Shaileshreddy. He has stated that restricting the publication or telecast The suggestion as regards the opinion poll
blogspot.com of opinion polls infringes upon the right of freedom of does not come within the purview of the
speech and expression guaranteed by article 19(1)(a) of proposed legislation, hence no comments.
the Constitution. The Election Commission should However, as regards exit polls, it does not
instead issue regulatory guidelines to streamline the violate the fundamental rights guaranteed under
publication and telecast of opinion polls. article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. Further,
the Supreme Court in its several of its
judgment has stated that free and fair election
is one of the basic features of the Constitution
and to ensure it the Government can make any
law under article 326 of the Constitution.

52
12 3 4
17. Shri S. He has commented on the increase in security deposit The proposed increase in the security deposit
Krishnamurthy, of candidates contesting elections and has stated that is to discourage the non-serious candidate and
B.SC., Divisional the enhancement which is made after twelve years is this amendment has been carried out on the
Development not enough for matching the current situation. He has recommendation of the Election Commission.
Officer, suggested for an increase of Rs.50,000/- for the
(Panchayati Raj) general candidates and Rs.25,000/- for a candidate of
(Retd). No.1, Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe. He is also interested
Panchayat Lane, in giving oral evidence before the Committee
Chromepet,
Chennai-44.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.