PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARPERSONNEL, PUBLIC GR
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY ACTION TAKEN ON THE ONE HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS(MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE)(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
       PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEPERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE      Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  December, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT ON  ACTION TAKEN ON THE ONE HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) PERTAINING TO  DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS (MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE)  Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2025) Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2025) Y STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE REPORT NO. 158 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE ONE HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT OF THE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail: rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
  PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
i-ii 
2. INTRODUCTION iii 
 
3. ACRONYMS 
 
iv-v 
4. REPORT 
 
1-13 
 (I) CHAPTER I 
                                                                          
2-3 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH 
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 (II) CHAPTER II                                                                                      4-8 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 (III) CHAPTER III                                                                                9-12 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
 (IV) CHAPTER IV 
 
13 
 THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN          RECEIVED 
 
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
                            
14-16 
6. ANNEXURES 17-26  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
  

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal         Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri N.R. Elango 
3. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
4. Shri Naveen Jain 
5. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri Kapil Sibal 
     
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Arup Chakraborty 
14. Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandanagouda 
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
16. Shri Varun Chaudhry 
17. Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
18. Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
19. Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
20. Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
21. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
22. Shri Radhakrishna 
23. Shri A. Raja 
24. Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao 
25. Shri Saleng A. Sangma 
26. Shri Pushpendra Saroj 
27. Shrimati Manju Sharma 
28. Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
 

ii 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri P. Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
3.  Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Purva Khanna, Under Secretary 
5.  Shri Divyanshu Kant, Security Assistant Grade-I 
 
 
 
  

iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
      ,    I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Fifty Eighth Report 
(158th) on the Action Taken on One Hundred Forty Eighth Report (148th) of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & 
Justice). 
 
2. The One Hundred Forty Eighth Report (148th) of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was 
presented to Rajya Sabha on the 27th March, 2025 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the   
27th March, 2025. 
 
3. The Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) furnished their Action Taken 
Replies on the One Hundred Forty Eighth Report (148th) of the Committee on 08th July, 2025.  
 
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Fifty Eighth Report and adopted the 
same in its meeting held on 2nd December, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
2nd December, 2025          BRIJ LAL 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice 
 
 
  

iv 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ACC  Appointments Committee of the Cabinet 
ADR Alternative Dispute Resolution 
A.M. Accountant Member 
BE Budget Estimate 
CAT Central Administrative Tribunal 
CIWTC Central Inland Water Transport Corporation 
DoLA Department of Legal Affairs 
DoP&T Department of Personnel & Training 
DRPSC Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
FY Financial Year 
IFD Internal Finance Division  
ILS Indian Legal Service 
IIAC India International Arbitration Centre 
ITAT Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
J.M. Judicial Member 
LIMBS Legal Information Management & Briefing System 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
ODR Online Dispute Resolution 
OM Office Memorandum 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PIMS Pre-Institution Mediation and Settlement 
RE Revised Estimate 
RR / RRs Recruitment Rule(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
SCSC Search-Cum-Selection Committee 
SSC Staff Selection Commission  
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
VP Vice-President 
 
  

1 
 
R E P O R T 
 
 This Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) on the 
recommendations/observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred Forty Eight (148th) 
Report of the Committee on “Demands for Grants (2025-26)” pertaining to the Department of 
Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice), which was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 27th 
March, 2025 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 27th March, 2025. 
2. The Committee had made 16 recommendations/observations in its 148th Report. 
Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized under four chapters 
on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Ministry: Paras:- 2.12, 2.14, 3.9, 3.15 and 3.33 (Total-05) 
Chapter – II:     Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry: Paras:- 2.8, 3.7, 3.8, 
3.19, 3.22, 3.27, 3.51 and 3.52 (Total-08) 
Chapter – III:      Recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry: Paras:- 3.23, 3.35 and 3.44 (Total-03) 
Chapter – IV:     Recommendations/observations (Nil) in respect of which final replies of 
the Government have not been received.  
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by the 
Committee in Chapter – III of this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e., of the 148th 
Report) have been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
  

2 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE DEPARTMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1 The Committee notes that despite the approval of the Constitution of Law Commission 
in September, 2024, the appointment of Chairman has not been made till date. This act 
hinders the effective functioning of the Commission, which plays a crucial role in legal 
reforms and policy recommendation. The Committee, therefore, urge the department may 
take necessary steps to appoint the Chairman and Members of the Law Commission at the 
earliest. In future, a clear timeline may be desired for appointment of Chairman and 
Members of Law Commission of India.           (Para 2.12) 
Action Taken 
1.2 It is submitted that Hon'ble Mr. Justice (Retd.) Dinesh Maheshwari, Judge, Supreme 
Court of India has been appointed as full time Chairperson of the 23rd Law Commission of 
India along with Prof. D P Verma, and Shri Hitesh Jain, Advocate as full time Member of the          
23rd  Law Commission of India with effect from 15.04.2025 (FN). 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 The Committee is pleased to note that ITAT Office at Delhi location has been shifted 
to its own building in July, 2024. While, on other 26 locations they are operating from the 
premises given by the Central Government and other Government bodies and on 7 locations 
from buildings of private owners. The Committee urges the Department to take steps to move 
the ITAT Office from the rented premises either to Government premises at the earliest. The 
ITAT may approach the Department to help in this matter. The Department may also 
consider allocating suitable land and adequate funds to ITAT for constructing its own 
premises at these locations at the earliest.                                              (Para 2.14) 
Action Taken 
1.4 As advised by the Committee, ITAT has ensured to issue instructions to the respective 
Benches which are functioning from private owned premises to find out the availability of 
space in Government Buildings, i.e., CPWD, etc. or to find out availability of land in the 
suitable area for construction of own office building. 
 
1.5 It is informed that a land admeasuring 2,153.86 Sq. Mtrs has been purchased at a total 
amount of Rs. 4.03 Crore from Central Inland Water Transport Corporation (CIWTC) in 
2016 for construction of own office building of ITAT Guwahati.  Now, as per the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) dated 30.04.2025 between ITAT and Inland 
Waterways Authority of India (IWAI), Ministry of Shipping, Govt. of India,  it is agreed by 
both the parties that the construction work of 6 storied building will be carried out by IWAI 
at their own cost against which one floor will be provided to the ITAT, Guwahati for 
functioning and  remaining floors will be occupied by IWAI on 99 years lease agreement. 
 
 
1.6 As regards allocation of funds for utilization by the ITAT, the same has been 
considered by the Department through Budget and Internal Finance Division (IFD) from time 

3 
 
to time and as and when demands are raised by the ITAT, in consultation with the 
Department of Expenditure, for funds against any additional requirements.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.7 The Committee also acknowledges that the digital revolution has transformed the 
landscape of information sharing to a large extent. The Committee wishes to point out that 
Indian Legal Service Officers are not making full use of it. The Committee is of the opinion 
that its officers should make use of it wherever possible.                (Para 3.9) 
 
Action Taken 
1.8 The Department has already implemented the e-office system and references received 
from various Ministries/ Departments for Legal advice are processed in digital mode. The 
suggestion made by the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.9 The Committee welcomes the steps taken by the Department to implement the 
recommendations made by it earlier. The committee further notes that the Department has 
inaugurated a dedicated Notary Portal. With this act, the Committee hopes that the process 
of filling up of remain Notary Positions in various States would be soon completed. The 
Committee also urges upon the Department that the amendment to Rule 10 of the Notaries 
Rules may be fast-tracked.                 (Para 3.15) 
 
Action Taken  
1.10 The module of the Notary Portal related to scrutiny of documents and eligibility and 
issuance of digitally signed Certificate of Practice to the provisionally selected Notaries is 
functional.  As on 03.06.2025, digitally signed Certificates of Practice has been issued to 
33267 Notaries through the Notary Portal.  Further, the Department is in the process of 
making necessary amendment in Rule 10 of the Notaries Rules, 1956 in pursuance of the 
recommendation made by the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.11 The Committee is pleased to note the pace of digital transformation in tax appeal 
filing and hopes that the process should continue till we achieve the goal of paperless filing 
of appeals, is achieved.                  (Para 3.33) 
 
Action Taken:  
1.12 ITAT is working on the digitization process in tax appeal filing till achieving the goal 
of paperless filing of appeals.  
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE DEPARTMENT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 2.1 The committee recognizes that legal representation is essential for the effective 
defense of government interests, but the rising costs call for a thorough review of expenditure 
patterns and potential measures for optimization. Therefore, the committee recommends that 
the department strengthen the pre-litigation process by promoting the use of Alternative 
Dispute Resolution (ADR) and taking steps to reduce frivolous and repetitive litigation. To 
support this, all government departments and PSUs may review all the ongoing cases by 
setting a team of officers and withdraw those that are weak in nature. Additionally, a 
periodic review of the empanelment and performance of legal counsel may also be 
conducted.                             (Para 2.8)  Action Taken 
2.2 During the past decade, the Government of India has taken various initiatives in the 
realm of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanisms. The major policy and 
legislative initiatives taken by the Central Government over the years in this regard include:  
i. the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 has been progressively amended in the 
years 2015, 2019 and 2021. These amendments aims at ensuring timely conclusion of 
arbitration proceedings, neutrality of arbitrators, minimizing judicial intervention in 
the arbitral process, promotion of institutional arbitration and quick enforcement of 
arbitral awards. 
ii. The India International Arbitration Centre Act, 2019, was enacted to provide for the 
establishment and incorporation of the India International Arbitration Centre for the 
purpose of creating an independent, autonomous and world class body for facilitating 
institutional arbitration and to declare the Centre to be an institution of national 
importance. 
iii. The Commercial Courts Act, 2015 was amended in the year 2018 to provide for Pre-
Institution Mediation and Settlement (PIMS) mechanism. This is aimed at providing 
an opportunity to the parties to resolve the commercial disputes through mediation 
before approaching the court. 
iv. The Mediation Act, 2023, was enacted recently, to lay down the legal framework for 
mediation to be adopted by parties to a dispute, especially institutional mediation. 
Section 5 of the Mediation Act, 2023, provides for voluntary pre-litigation mediation 
as well. 
v. The Department and the India International Arbitration Centre continue to take steps 
including organizing of conferences and seminars to disseminate the advantages of 
arbitration and mediation. 
 2.3 As regards periodic review of the empanelment and performance of legal counsel is 
concerned Advocates are empanelled as panel counsel generally for a term of three years 
after that either new panels are formed or terms of earlier panel are extended by this 
Department keeping in view the requirement of litigation, performance, etc. reviewed at the 
level of Hon'ble Minister of Law & Justice. Besides, there is already a system of litigation in-
charge as defined in this Department's OM dated 21.10.2019 (Annexure-I) who are to submit 
monthly reports on allocation of cases, performance of counsel, etc. Further, Ministries / 

5 
 
Departments also report their issues with the performance of panel counsel which are 
examined and decided on merits. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4 The Committee notes that nearly 50% of the sanctioned positions in the Department 
have remained vacant for quite some time, across various grades despite the Department 
taking active steps to fill the vacancies. The vacant posts are crucial for smooth functioning 
of the Department. The Committee, therefore, urges the Department to expedite the process 
of filling these vacancies at the earliest. The Committee has been given to understand that a 
Cadre Review Committee is under consideration of Cabinet, the Committee hopes that it 
would be approved soon.                    (Para 3.7)  
      
2.5 In order to improve operational efficiency and for ensuring timely delivery of legal 
assistance and policy implementation, the committee urges the Department to prioritize 
revision of Recruitment Rules (RRs) as recommended by the UPSC at the earliest.                     
                                                                                                                                      (Para 3.8) 
 
Action Taken 
 2.6 Filling up of vacant posts in the Department is a continuous process and it is constant 
endeavor of the Department to ensure that vacancies in various grades are filled up 
expeditiously. The measures taken for filling up of vacancies include the following:-  
(i) The Government on 03.05.2025 approved appointment of two officers as Additional 
Secretaries; 
(ii) Six officers have been appointed in the grade of Joint Secretary & Legal Advisers on 
15.04.2025; 
(iii)Ten posts of Additional Legal Adviser have been downgraded to the post of Deputy 
Legal Advisers,  and a proposal is being sent to UPSC for filling up these downgraded 
posts on promotion basis; 
(iv) On the basis of requisition sent by this Department, SSC has included 10 vacancies in 
the grade of Assistant (Legal) in the SSC Selection Posts Phase XIII Examination; 
and  
(v) This Department has taken up the issue of filling up of vacant posts in the Indian 
Legal Service (ILS) under the direct recruitment quota with UPSC, and as sought by 
UPSC, detailed requisition for direct recruitment to various posts in Legal Advisers 
and Government Advocates cadres of ILS is being sent to the UPSC.  
 
2.7 Further, the Cadre Review Committee considered the proposal of the Department of 
Legal Affairs in its meeting held on 5th October 2023. The recommendations made by the 
Cadre Review Committee of Personnel & Training and Department of Expenditure. A 
Cabinet Note in this regard is under consideration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.8 Though the Government has been making efforts to appoint best Panel Counsels, 
many are not forth coming for reasons best known to them, thus it has resulted in not getting 
favourable outcomes in the litigation process. The committee, therefore, recommends a 
systematic, transparent, and performance-oriented approach may be adopted for selecting 
legal counsels. Further, having clear qualification criteria and utilizing technology for 

6 
 
performance tracking, the appointment process can be made more efficient and effective. This 
in turn will help in reducing delays and improve litigation outcomes thereby ensuring that 
only the most competent and thoroughly vetted legal professionals are selected. In addition, 
the Department may consider implementing a feedback mechanism to evaluate the quality of 
legal services provided by the counsels, in the respective departments. Based on it, contract 
renewal criteria linked to performance may be introduced.              (Para 3.19) 
Action Taken 
2.9 (1) Panel Counsel are engaged court-wise on the approval of Hon’ble Minister for 
Law & Justice and there is already a system of court-wise litigation in-charge, vide OM dated 
21.10.2019 to be read with OM dated 13.09.2022, (Annexure-II) for allocation of cases to 
Panel Counsel at local level. For reporting on performance of Panel Counsel following 
mechanism is in place: 
(i) the litigation in-charge are to send monthly reports, vide OM dated 
16.10.2024 (Annexure-III) including report on performance of 
counsel. 
(ii) Following field units are established by this Department to manage 
litigation   
     before respective courts: 
a) At Delhi: 
1. Central Agency Section (Supreme Court) 
2. Litigation (High Court) Section for Delhi High Court 
3. Litigation (CAT) Section for CAT (PB) 
4. Litigation (Lower Court) Section for District Courts in Delhi 
b) At Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Bengaluru: One Branch 
Secretariat at each of these four stations for all courts/tribunals 
within the municipal area. The above field units are also report to 
this Department on various aspects of litigation and performance of 
counsel as and when required.  
(2) Besides the above, in important, sensitive and high-stake matters, Ministries / 
Departments send proposals to this Department, for engagement of particular Law Officer / 
Panel Counsel / Private Advocate as special counsel keeping in view their special expertise 
and performance in matters on a particular nature / subject.  Such proposals are also 
considered and decided by this Department on merits and case to case basis.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.10 The Committee observes that a significant number of cases are pending in various 
High Courts, District, and Sessions Courts across States, with the Union of India being a 
party in most of these cases. The Committee also observes that mainly, Ministries of Finance, 
Defence, Railways, Labour and Employment are involved in a large number of cases, as 
litigants. As a result, the Government's annual litigation expenses have risen substantially, 
from ₹26.64 crore in 2014-2015 to ₹66.57 crore in 2023-24. The Committee is of the view 
that the Department may call a meeting with the representatives of these Ministries to find 
out the reasons for same and try to address it, so that the litigation expenses can be 
minimised.                                                                                                                 (Para 3.22) 
 
 
 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.11 One of the significant reason for increase in expenditure on litigation after F.Y. 2014-
15 was revision of fee of Law Officers and Panel Counsel both with effect from 01.10.2015. 
The Ministries mentioned, viz., Finance, Defence, Railways and Labour and Employment are 
some of the largest Ministries owing to their multifaceted functioning affecting a larger 
section of people contributing to the high number of their litigation.   
 
2.12 However, a set of 'Directive for the efficient and effective management of litigation of 
Government of India' has been issued by this Department for all the Ministries / Departments 
of Central Government with main purpose to prevent unnecessary litigation. Review of 
implementation of these Directives will be taken up by the Committee of Secretaries chaired 
by the Cabinet Secretary. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.13 The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the department to link LIMBS portal, 
with that of PFMS, which will enable the advocates to submit their bills and track their 
payment information. The Committee hopes that the integration process will be completed 
soon. The Committee notes that a mobile app for LIMBS being developed to make the 
platform more user-friendly and accessible to all stakeholders which may be completed at the 
earliest.                                                                                                                     (Para 3.27) 
 
Action Taken 
2.14 a) LIMBS-PFMS linking: The development phase of the linking of LIMBS portal 
with PFMS portal has been completed and currently a security audit of the same is to 
carried out. 
b) Mobile App for LIMBS: Mobile app for LIMBS portal has been developed for 
Android platform and currently its version for iOS platform is being developed. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.15 One of the main aim for enacting the Mediation Act and establishment of Mediation 
Council is to promote both pre- and post-litigation mediation,  which will effectively reduce 
the backlog of cases in courts. However, the Committee notes that the Department is yet to 
establish Mediation Council of India. The Committee desires it may be expedited, so that the 
purpose of enacting the Act can be achieved.              (Para 3.51) 
 
Action Taken 
2.16 The government has taken several steps to facilitate the early establishment of 
Mediation Council of India such as notification of relevant Rules related to salary and 
allowances, etc. of Chairperson and other full time or part time members, manner of 
maintenance of accounts by the Council. Also, representative of a recognized body of 
commerce and industry has been approved for appointment as Part Time Member. The 
appointment of Chairperson and other Members of the Council, is also under way. 
 
  

8 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.17 The Committee desires that a comprehensive awareness campaign across the country, 
at both the State and district levels, through all possible channels may be launched as many 
are not aware about its establishment. This campaign will help in knowing the existence of 
the Mediation Council of India and enable the shift of public mindset from a litigation-
oriented approach to a pre-litigation mediation mindset.             (Para 3.52) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.18 Necessary steps are being taken to spread awareness regarding the Mediation Act, 
2023. Recently, a National Level Mediation Conference was organized by Ld. Attorney 
General for India in association with Department of Legal Affairs and IIAC on 03.05.2025 at 
Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi. The aim of the conference was to promote mediation as an 
efficacious mode of dispute and conflict resolution across the country. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
DEPARTMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.1 The Committee feels that addressing the backlog in various courts requires a 
multifaceted approach, including judicial reforms, adoption of latest technology, promotion 
of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR), and streamlining of procedures. The Committee is 
of the opinion that if mandatory pre-litigation mediation is introduced for commercial, 
family, and civil disputes before allowing litigation in a large extent it will reduce pendency. 
Additionally, the expansion of Lok Adalats and the establishment of fast-track courts may be 
prioritized for small claims, consumer disputes, and contract enforcement. The use of AI-
based Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) may be explored to streamline the resolution 
process.                                                                                                   (Para 3.23) 
 
Action Taken 
3.2 The Commercial Courts Act, 2015 as amended in 2018 provides for Pre-Institution 
Mediation and Settlement (PIMS) mechanism for commercial disputes. Under this 
mechanism, where a commercial dispute of specified value does not contemplate any urgent 
interim relief, the parties have to first exhaust the mandatory remedy of PIMS before 
approaching the Court. 
3.3 Further, the Government had introduced the Mediation Bill, 2021 in December, 2021 
which inter-alia provided for the mandatory pre litigation. However, the DRPSC in its 117th 
report on the Mediation Bill, 2021 vide para no. 3.96 had suggested for introducing voluntary 
prelitigation mediation. The relevant observations of the committee is as under: 
 “3.96 The Committee further notes that making pre-litigation mediation mandatory may 
actually result in delaying of cases and may prove to be an additional tool in hands of 
litigants to delay the disposal of cases. The Committee also notes the views of few 
experts that not only pre-litigation mediation should be made optional but also be 
introduced in a phased manner instead of introducing it with immediate effect for all 
civil and commercial disputes and the challenges faced in implementing Pre-Litigation 
Mediation under the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 should be studied before mandating 
it across other categories of cases.” 
3.4 Pursuant thereto, official amendments to the Mediation Bill, 2021 were moved and 
Section 5 of the enacted Mediation Act, 2023, now provides for voluntary pre-institution 
mediation as against mandatory pre-institution mediation as provided in the Bill. As regards 
ODR, the Mediation Act, 2023 inter-alia provides a separate chapter, i.e., chapter VII on 
online mediation. The process of online mediation is to be conducted in the manner to be 
specified by the Mediation Council of India. The Mediation Council of India would consider 
the role and requirement of AI, in the process as well.  
 
 

10 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.5 The Committee suggests expanding and modernising of Lok Adalats and 
establishing fast track courts for small claims, consumer and contract disputes will 
ensure timely resolution. Integration of AI based Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) 
mechanism supported by Mediation Council of India will enhance accessibility, 
efficiency and transparency in the justice delivery system. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
3.6 The Committee notes that Government has appointed  17 Judicial Members and 20 
Accountant Members in 2024, however, many positions for Members are still vacant. 
Additionally, there is a shortage of Registry Officers and other officials. Another aspect that 
is contributing for large vacancies is the recruitment. The Committee wishes to point out that 
all these have contributed to a growing backlog of cases, impacting the efficiency and 
timeliness of case resolution. The Committee, therefore, desires that if recruitment process is 
streamlined,  all vacancies can be filled up the backlog in disposing of cases can be 
considerably reduced. Additionally, the Committee suggests the extensive use of virtual 
courts for ITAT may be explored, which will also help in disposing of cases quickly.  
                                                                                                            (Para 3.35) 
 
Action Taken: 
3.7             
POST Sanctioned Strength Filled Vacant 
President 1 1 0 
Vice-President 10 10 0 
A.M. 63 50 13 
J.M. 63 56 7 
TOTAL 126* 106** 20 
*including (01) President and 10 Vice Presidents 
**including (01) President and 10 Vice-Presidents 
 
3.8 Presently, the Department is in progress of filling up of 16 vacancies of Members (6- 
Judicial and 10-Accountant) through a series of meeting of a Search-Cum-Selection 
Committee (SCSC) constituted under the Chairpersonship of a sitting Judge of Supreme 
Court of India, the process of which is at final stage to seek the approval of the Appointments 
Committee of the Cabinet (ACC).  
3.9 Besides, framing of amendment of Recruitment Rules (RR) of 11 Cadre posts of the 
ITAT are under active consideration of the Department and is in progress in consultation with 
the DoP&T, Department of Expenditure, Legislative Department and UPSC, as the case may 
be.    
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.10 The Committee appreciates the Department’s ongoing efforts to fill up 16 
vacancies of Members and urges that the process be expedited to ensure early approval 
by the ACC. It further recommends instituting a time-bound mechanism for future 

11 
 
recruitments to avoid delays. The Committee also desires that the amendment of 
Recruitment Rules (RRs) for the 11 cadre posts be finalized at the earliest to strengthen 
administrative support. Additionally, wider adoption of virtual courts and digital case 
management systems may be pursued to enhance efficiency and reduce case pendency.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.11 The Committee notes that even after establishment of IIAC many arbitration cases are 
still being conducted outside the country, and not many international cases are dealt with. 
One of the factors that is affecting the IIAC is lack of sufficient funds. To transform the IIAC 
into a globally recognized premier arbitration center known for its efficiency, expertise, and 
neutrality, the Government may provide sufficient budget allocation to it. Focus should also 
be placed on enhancing infrastructure, capacity building, and international outreach. 
Though, the Department has taken various steps to appoint 161 Arbitrators of Domestic 
Arbitration and 51 Arbitrators for International Arbitration. Considering the number of cases 
pending in various courts, the strength of Domestic Arbitrators should be increased. The 
Department may also take steps to appoint the most qualified arbitrators to the IIAC panel, 
so that IIAC can be positioned as a trusted and influential hub in global arbitration.  
                                                                                                          (Para 3.44) 
 
Action Taken:  
3.12 Government has been providing adequate funding to the IIAC since its establishment 
in 2022. The details of the funds provided to IIAC over the last 4 years, based on the 
demands and utilization, are as follows: 
YEAR FUNDS (₹) 
2022-23 3 Crore 
2023-24 3 Crore 
2024-25 (RE) 4.5 Crore 
2025-26 (BE) 3.56 Crore 
  
3.13 IIAC is also taking various steps for enhancing its infrastructural capabilities, 
administrative support for conducting arbitrations and capacity building of all stakeholders.  
 
3.14 India International Arbitration Centre, in terms of Section 28 of the India International 
Arbitration Centre Act, 2019, has established the Chamber of Arbitration, consisting of 
experienced practitioners and professionals, to scrutinize applications for admission in the 
panel of arbitrators in terms of the criteria laid down in the India International Arbitration 
Centre (Criteria for Admission to the panel of arbitrators) Regulations, 2023, to ensure the 
quality of arbitrators on the panel. 
 
 

12 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.15 The Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Government in providing 
financial support to the IIAC and appreciates the measures taken to strengthen its 
infrastructure and capacity building. However, the Committee recommends that the 
budgetary allocation to IIAC be reviewed periodically to ensure that adequate resources 
are available for its international outreach and operational expansion. It further 
suggests that the strength of Domestic Arbitrators be increased in proportion to the 
rising number of cases and that international collaboration and promotional initiatives 
be enhanced to position IIAC as a globally recognized arbitration hub. The Committee 
also emphasizes the need to maintain a high standard in the selection of arbitrators 
through transparent and merit-based procedures under the existing regulations.  
 
***** 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MINUTES 

15 
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on 02.12.2025 in Room No. 3, PHAE,  
New Delhi – 110001. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Shri Brij Lal - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
3.  Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
4.  Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
5.  Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandangouda 
6.  Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
7.  Shri Varun Chaudhry 
8.  Shri Saleng A Sangma 
9.  Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
10.  Smt. Manju Sharma 
11.  Shri M Mallesh Babu 
12.  Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
13.  Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
14.  Shri Arup Chakraborty 
15.  Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
16.  Shri A. Raja 
17.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
18.  Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
19.  Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
20.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
(i) Shri P. Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
(ii) Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
(iii) Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary 
(iv) Ms. Purva Khanna, Under Secretary 
 
  

16 
 
2.  The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members of the Committee and informed 
them about agenda of the meeting. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the 
following draft reports of the Committee:- 
 
i. *              *      * 
 
ii. *              *      * 
 
iii. *              *      * 
 
iv. Draft 158th Report on Action Taken on 148th Report of the Committee on Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law 
& Justice); and 
 
v. *              *      * 
 
3. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted draft *, *, *, and 158th Reports 
without any modification. * * * .  
The Committee decided that these Reports would be presented to the Parliament on 4th 
December, 2025. Shri Varun Chaudhry , M.P. and in his absence Shri Madhavaneni 
Raghunandan Rao, M.P. were nominated to lay the Reports in Lok Sabha while in the 
absence of Chairman, Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla, M.P. was nominated to present the 
Reports in Rajya Sabha. 
 
4.  *              *      * 
 
5.  The meeting adjourned at 03.15 PM. 
 
INDIRA CHATURVEDI VAIDYA 
DIRECTOR 
 
New Delhi 
2nd December, 2025 
 
To, 
The Chairman and Members of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
*pertains to other matters 
 
  

17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ANNEXURES 

18 
 
 


19 
 
 
  


20 
 
 
  


21 
 
 
  


22 
 
 


23 
 
 


24 
 
 


25 
 
 


26 
 
 
