 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
157 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT  
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT  
OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON "DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)"  
 
PERTAINING TO  
 
THE DEPARTMENTS OF 
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS & PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND  
PENSION & PENSIONERS' WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS) 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 04th, December, 2025) 
(Laid on the table of the Lok Sabha on 04th, December, 2025) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              i 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   ii 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                         iii-iv 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                1-19 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                    2-6                                 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN          
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                 7-12 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                13-18                                                                                
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
            (IV)  CHAPTER IV                                                                                                             19 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF       
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN          
RECEIVED 
            
  5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                             20-22 
 
  6. ANNEXURES                                                                                                                       23-27 
 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Re-constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal         Chairman 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri N.R. Elango 
3. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
4. Shri Naveen Jain 
5. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri Kapil Sibal 
 
    LOK SABHA 
11. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Arup Chakraborty 
14. Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandanagouda 
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
16. Shri Varun Chaudhry 
17. Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
18. Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
19. Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
20. Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
21. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
22. Shri Radhakrishna 
23. Shri A. Raja 
24. Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao 
25. Shri Saleng A. Sangma 
26. Shri Pushpendra Saroj 
27. Shrimati Manju Sharma 
28. Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P. Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary  
Ms. Purva Khanna, Under Secretary 
Shri Deepanshu Tatwal, Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 
 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on 
its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Fifty Seventh (157th) Report on Action Taken on One 
Hundred Forty Sixth (146th) Report of the Committee on "Demands for Grants (2025-26)" pertaining to 
the Departments of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances and Pension & Pensioners' Welfare 
(Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions). 
2. The One Hundred Forty Sixth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya 
Sabha on 27th March, 2025 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 27th March, 2025.  
3. The Departments of Administrative R eforms & Public Grievances and Pension & Pensioners' 
Welfare (Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions ) furnished their Action Taken Replies 
on the One Hundred  Forty Sixth Report of the Committee on 21st April, 2025 and 11th April, 2025 
respectively.  
4. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Fifty Seventh Report and adopted the same 
in its meeting held on 02nd December, 2025. 
 . 
 
 
New Delhi     
2nd December, 2025                                                                                                          BRIJ LAL 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                                            Law and Justice 
 
  

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ANUBHAV Anubhav portal (retiring officials‘ experiences)   
ASCI Administrative Staff College of India   
ATIs Administrative Training Institutes   
BE Budget Estimate   
Bhashini National Language Translation Mission platform (Bhashini)   
BHAVISHYA Pension sanction and tracking portal (Bhavishya)   
CGDA Controller General of Defence Accounts   
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme   
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme   
CPAO Central Pension Accounting Office   
CPAO Central Pension Accounting Office   
CPENGRAMS Centralized Pension Grievance Redress and Monitoring System   
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System   
CSC Common Services Centre   
DARPG Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances   
DESW Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare   
DESW Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare   
DLC Digital Life Certificate   
DoE Department of Expenditure   
DoPPW Department of Pension and Pensioners‘ Welfare   
e-Office Electronic Office (e-Office)   
EPFO Employees‘ Provident Fund Organisation   
GOI Government of India   
GRO Grievance Redressal Officer   
GROs Grievance Redressal Officers   
HOO Head of Office   
iGOT Integrated Government Online Training   
IMRM Inter-Ministerial Review Meeting   
IPPB India Post Payments Bank   
ISTM Institute of Secretariat Training and Management   
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology   
MoD Ministry of Defence   
MoF Ministry of Finance   
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare   

iv 
 
NCGG National Centre for Good Governance   
NDMC New Delhi Municipal Council   
NIC National Informatics Centre   
NICNET NIC Network   
NKN National Knowledge Network   
OM Office Memorandum   
PAO Pay and Accounts Office   
PCDA (P) Principal Controller of Defence Accounts (Pensions)   
POC Proof of Concept   
PRAGATI Pro-Active Governance And Timely Implementation   
PRC Pre-Retirement Counselling   
PSC Parliamentary Standing Committee   
RE Revised Estimate   
RFP Request for Proposal   
SAML Security Assertion Markup Language   
Sevottam Service Delivery Excellence Model  
SI System Integrator   
SSO Single Sign-On   
TNA Training Needs Assessment   
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India   
UT Union Territory   
VC Video Conference   
VPN Virtual Private Network   

 
1 
 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Departments of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and Pensions and Pensioners‘ 
Welfare on the recommendations/observations of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred 
Forty Sixth Report on the Demands for Grants (202 5-26) of the Ministry, which was 
presented to the Rajya Sabha  on 27h March, 2025 and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha  on 
the 27th March, 2025. 
2. The Committee had made 21 recommendations/observations in its One Hundred Forty 
Sixth Report. Replies of the Departments of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
and Pensions and Pensioners‘ which have been categor ized and scrutinized under four  
chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have been categorized as 
follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations which have been  accepted by the 
Ministry: Paras:- 2.2, 2.7, 2.9, 2.13, 3.5 and 3.34. (Total- 06). 
Chapter – II:   Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministr y: Paras:- 3.9, 3.11, 3.17, 
3.32, 3.36 and 3.56. (Total- 06).  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Ministr y: Paras:- 2.5, 2.15, 3.18, 3.23, 3.30 and 
3.42. (Total- 06). 
Chapter-IV: Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
ministry have not been received: Paras:- 3.53, 3.54, and 3.55. (Total- 03). 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by the 
Committee in Chapter – III of this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages.  For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e. of 14 6th 
Report) have been mentioned at the end of each Recommendation/Observation.   
  

 
2 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1 It is observed that the budgetary allocation for the Department has been steadily 
increasing during the past few years. BE for the financial year 2025 -26 of DARPG is Rs. 
174.37 crore , which is an increase of Rs. 42.412 Crore  (32.14% approximately) over RE 
2024-25. The Committee notes that except for the year  2022-23, where the Department was 
able to spend almost the entire budget allocation, in subsequent years, the Department has 
not been able to fully utilise the allocation, while the allocations kept on increasing. The 
Committee hopes the Department would be able to spend the allocation as it has already 
done in 2022-23.                                                                                                      (Para 2.2) 
Action Taken 
1.2 The Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances  has one Scheme , 
i.e., ‗Scheme for Administrative Reforms‘ which was recast into a new Scheme with two 
components (i) Administrative Reforms Component , and (ii) Comprehensive S ystem for 
Redressal of Public Grievances Component, with the following budget outlay: 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S.I. 
No. 
Component 2024-25 2025-26 Total 
1. Administrative Reforms 
Component 
56.89 50.11 107.00 
2. Comprehensive system for 
Redressal of Public Grievances 
Component 
51.35 76.75 128.10 
Total 108.24 126.86 235.10 
 
 

 
3 
 
1.3 An amount of Rs. 100.00 core has been allocated under the ‗Scheme for 
Administrative Reforms‘ for both components in B.E 2025 -26 against amount of Rs. 80.00 
crore which was allocated in BE 2024 -25. Further an amount of Rs. 50.57 crore under Non -
Scheme and 2.30 crore under Capital outlay and Rs. 21.50 crore under Grant -in-Aid for 
NCGG. Accordingly, an amount of Rs. 174.37 crore has been allocated to this Department 
during 2025-26 against the total allocation of Rs. 124.41 crore in B.E 2024-25. 
1.4 During the financial year 2024-25, the funds could not be fully utilized due to: 
● Prime Ministers Awards 2023 could not be conferred on 21.04.2024 due to General 
Election 2024 to Lok Sabha. 
● ‗Next Gen CPGRAMS Project‘ under the component of Comprehensive Redressal of 
Public Grievances, could not be materialized due to non- completion of tender process. 
1.5 An additional allocation in BE 2025 -26 was projected by this Department for 
organizing Prime Ministers Awards 2023 & 2024. Also, this increased budget requirement in  
B.E 2025-26 was due to proposed revamping of CPGRAMS ―NextGen CPGRAMS‖ Project. 
1.6 The existing CPGRAMS, developed in 2006, required a major overhaul to keep pace 
with the rapid advancements in technology. An upgraded system was essential not only for 
ensuring faster and higher -quality resolution of public grievances, but also for transforming 
CPGRAMS into an intelligent platform capable of predicting risks related to policies, 
processes, and personnel —thereby enhancing accountability across the governanc e 
ecosystem. It was decided to engage a System Integrator to design and implement an end -to-
end solution for the Next Gen CPGRAMS. The Department of Expenditure approved a 
comprehensive proposal for the development of this enhanced system, with a total out lay of 
₹128.10 crore. Of this, ₹ 87 crore was earmarked specifically for the creation of a new IT 
infrastructure and an advanced analytical dashboard. 
1.7 The Department had floated a Request for Proposal  (RFP) through Central Public 
Procurement Portal for selecting the System Integrator for this project. Since, this was highly 
technical project, the Department had scheduled multiple stakeholders consultations and 
industry consultations. The validity of RFP was extended multiple times on demand of  the 
prospective bidders. Further, the date of submission of POC/presentation was also extended 
on request of bidders who qualified in the pre -qualification criteria. Due the process, the 
finalisation of bids was delayed. This delay resulted short expenditure in the respective heads 
allotted for PG. The Department would be able to spend the allocation made in the Budget 
Estimate 2025-26. 

 
4 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.8 The Committee notes that there is an increase of 81.91% in Non -Scheme 
allocation. The Committee desires that the key areas driving the rise may be identified to 
ensure that administrative and operational expenses remain constant and do not lead to 
excessive overheads. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to utilize the 
funds more uniformly throughout the year.                                                           (Para 2.7)                                                                          
Action Taken 
1.9 The reasons for increasing of about 81.91% under the Non-Scheme heads of this 
Department are mainly as under: 
a. An amount of Rs. 10 crore was allocated to this Department under head ‗Rents, 
Rates and Taxes‘ during B.E. 2024 -25 which was enhanced to Rs. 25 crore in R.E. 2024 - 
25 for payment of monthly rent of Office space.  
b. For B.E. 2025 -26, an amount of Rs. 30.00 crore has been allocated due to 
escalation in rental charges. In object heads of Salaries and Allowances, 8.54 % and    
41.70 % funds increased respectively due to periodical revision of salary & allowances . 
In addition to the above, the increment in some other object heads has been made to meet 
the regular expenses.  
1.10 The expenditure is being monitored regularly in Senior Officers Meeting and all 
efforts are being made to utilize the funds uniformly throughout the year. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.11 The Committee notes that there is a significant variation of 52.81% between BE  
2024-25 and BE 2025 -26. The Committee feels that improved forecasting and budget 
management processes may be used to reduce the variation. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that regular monitoring of expenditures by the Department should be done to 
optimize fund utilization.                                                                                             (Para 2.9)                                                                                                   
Action Taken 
1.12 The observations made by the Committee is noted. The NCGG furnishes the 
utilization certificate with every request for release of funds to Department Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG) which is a useful tool for monitoring of the 
expenditures and Budget by DARPG. The final allocation to NCGG for FY 2024 -25 was Rs. 
19.00 crore and the BE 2025-26 has been projected for Rs.21.50 crore. 

 
5 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.13 The Committee observes that the Revised Estimate (RE) for 2024 -25 is 104.10%  
higher than the Budget Estimate (BE) for the same year, indicating a substantial increase. 
Additionally, there is a 70.91% increase from BE 2024 -25 to BE 2025 -26. Furthermore, the 
BE for 2025 -26 is 10.05% lower than the projections submitted to the Minist ry of Finance 
(MoF). The Committee feels that the Department should take adequate steps to utilize the 
funds timely, completely and efficiently in future.                                                    (Para 2.13) 
Action Taken  
1.14 The increase in budget in RE 2024 -25 over BE 2024 -25 was due to  direct tenancy 
with NDMC as per office area available/allotted to the Department.  The annual estimation 
for the rent is Rs. 7.00 crore. However, only Rs. 2.50 crore were allocated in BE 2024 -25. 
Further, funds were sought in RE 2024 -25 for procurement of MSQL software for 
Bhavishyawhich is procured at Rs. 4.41 C rore. As per the expenditure statement for FY 
2024-25, the percentage of expenditure over RE 2024-25 is 93.39%. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.15 The Committee appreciates the 10-step CPGRAMS reforms process that was adopted 
by DARPG for improving the quality of grievance disposal and reducing the time lines. The 
Committee commends the Department for faster rate of di sposal of grievances by reducing 
the average disposal time from 32 days in 2021 to 16 days in May 2023.  To further improve 
the disposal rate, the Committee recommends the Department to integrate State portals with 
CPGRAMS, standardize naming conventions, and establish a feedback mechanism to 
monitor and enhance the quality of grievance redressal.                                           (Para 3.5)                                      
Action Taken  
1.16 In order to enhance the quality and pace of grievance redressal, the Department 
launched the 10-Step CPGRAMS Reforms in April 2022. These reforms aim at streamlining 
operations through end -to-end digitization, intelligent routing of grievances, real -time 
performance monitoring, and inclusive service delivery. A significant aspect of these reforms 
has been the integration of State grievance portals into CPGRAMS to create a unified 
national platform. To date, all States and Union T erritories, except West Beng al have been 
integrated. In addition to platform integration, DARPG has undertaken the standardization of 
grievance categorization, enabling precise routing and monitoring of grievances. Over 
1,03,840 Grievance Redressal Officers have been mapped as per th e categorization structure. 
This has led to a reduction in average disposal time from 45 days to 30 days in 2022, and 

 
6 
 
further to 21 days in 2024. 
1.17 The feedback mechanism has also been significantly strengthened. Upon resolution of 
a grievance, citizens  receive SMS and email notifications inviting feedback. In July 2022, 
DARPG operationalized a multilingual Feedback Call Centre to capture direct responses 
from citizens. As of 28th February 2025, over 20.48 lakh feedback calls have been completed. 
A dedic ated feedback portal, developed by DARPG, now enables Ministries and 
Departments to analyze monthly trends and take corrective action in areas with low 
satisfaction ratings. This continuous feedback loop is instrumental in shaping departmental 
responsiveness. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.18 To alleviate the burden on pensioners regarding the submission of annual life 
certificates, the Committee recommends the Department to promote the use of the Aadhaar -
based Digital Life Certificate (DLC) system, which will enable online submissions without 
their physical presence. Furthermore, life certificates attested by authorized officials of 
Indian Embassies, High Commissions, or Consulates may be allowed for submission for 
pensioners, residing abroad eliminating t heir need for travelling to India solely for this 
purpose.                                                                                                                     (Para 3.34) 
Action Taken  
1.19 The Department has taken a number of steps to spread awareness and provide access 
to digital technology for Life certificate generation. For this DoPPW has collaborated with 
India Post Payments Bank (IPPB), Pension Disbursing Banks, M/o Railways, M/o Defen ce, 
D/o Posts, D/o Telecom, Pensioners‘ Welfare Ass ociations, MeitY& UIDAI.  This 
Department has issued a comprehensive guidelines dated 9th August, 2024 on Nationwide 
DLC Campaign 3.0. 
1.20 Face Authentication technique has digitally empowered the pension ers and they no 
longer need to visit bank branches/ service centers for submission of Life Certificates. 
Through this App a pensioner can submit a Digital Life Certificate from the comfort of home 
using any Android smart phone or on the iOS platform of iPhone. 
1.21 For submission of Annual Life certificates in respect of pensioners/ family 
pensioners‘ residing abroad, DoPPW has issued OM No. 11(15)/2022 -P&PW ( H) dated 
15.10.2024 (Annexure- I). Hence, the recommendation has already been complied. 
***** 

 
7 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1 The Committee feels that the Department should enhance capacity-building initiatives 
for Grievance Officers (GROs) by strengthening partnerships with ISTM, ATIs, and ASCI. 
Regular training programs, b oth online (iGOT  Karmayogi) and offline, may be conducted 
with updated content and practical case studi es. Further, the Sevottam scheme may be 
reviewed and expanded for better grievance redressal.                                              (Para 3.9)                                                   
Action Taken 
2.2 Taking cognizance of the Committee‘s views on enhancing the capacity of Grievance 
Officers, the Department has stepped up efforts to provide structured training through 
collaborations with reputed institutions. A sustained partnership with the Institute of  
Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM) has enabled the creation of a cadre of master 
trainers for CPGRAMS. Additionally, ISTM has been instrumental in developing online 
courses hosted on the iGOT Karmayogi platform, making learning more accessible. 
2.3 The Department has also deepened its engagement with State Administrative Training 
Institutes (ATIs) under the Sevottam programme. This initiative focuses on three pillars —
Citizen‘s Charter, Grievance Redress Mechanism, and Capability Building. Over the last 
three years, financial assistance has been extended to ATIs for establishing dedicated training 
cells. A total of 756 training sessions have bee n conducted, benefiting 24,942 Officers across 
States. 
2.4 DARPG has partnered with the Administrative Staf f College of India (ASCI) to 
conduct a Training Needs Assessment (TNA) of Grievance Officers. This will culminate in 
the development of a standardized training curriculum and andragogical framework, enabling 
uniformity in training delivery across States. F urther, the Department organized two national 
workshops—in Pune (May, 2023) and Bhopal (February , 2025)—with participation from 22 
States/UTs to showcase best practices in grievance redress and capacity building. 
 
 

 
8 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5 The Committee observes that the feedback of grievance redressal measured through 
Grievance Redressal Index, indicates positive progress with a significant rise in satisfaction 
rates and reduction in appeals, wherein the overall satisfaction rate of 52% in 2024 still 
points to considerable room for improvement. The 61% satisfaction rate for the top 10 
Ministries/Departments is a moderate outcome, suggesting that more efforts are needed to 
achieve higher citizen satisfaction.                                                                            (Para3.11) 
Action Taken 
2.6 The endeavour of the government is that the individual citizen‗s voice must be heard, 
and the citizen must be empowered adequately to repose trust in the system. In this regard, 
DARPG ha s introduced several measures for strengthening CPGRAMS and improve the 
quality of the public grievances and citizen satisfaction as under:- 
(i) Introduction of Appeal Mechanism to increase the accountability and quality of 
grievances. 
(ii) Operationalization of feedback call centre to ensure that the every voice must be 
heard. 
(iii) Conducting monthly meeting with all Nodal PG officers of Ministries/Department of 
Central Governments and States with the focus to ensure the redressal timely and as per 
citizen expectaction. 
(iv) Capacity building through Sevotttam to ensure effective redressal. 
2.7 Besides, in pursuance to the direction of Hon‘ble  Prime Minister during the 
PRAGATI meeting held on 26th February, 2025, Department of Administrative Reforms and 
Public Grievances (DARPG) has operationalized a dedicated module for review of public 
grievances by Secretaries to the GOI in CPGRAMS. The Modu le enables 
Ministries/Departments to structure meeting agenda, monitor the progress in a systematic 
manner. In the module, the Ministries/Department can also review the close case to monitor 
the quality of the disposal by the GROs. A D.O. letter from Cabinet Secretary and O.M. from 
Secretary (DARPG) were also issued to all Ministries/Departments for compliance 
(Annexure-II). As on 8.4.2025 26 Review meetings were conducted by 
Ministries/Department through this module, wherein, more than 50 individual CPGRAM S 
cases were reviewed. 
2.8 Further, to make CPGRAMS more sensitive, accessible and meaningful to the citizen, 
the Department had issued Comprehensive Guidelines for Effective Redressal of Public 

 
9 
 
Grievances on 23rd August 2024. These guidelines envisage int egration of various public 
grievance platforms, creation of dedicated grievance cells in Ministries/ Departments, 
appointment of experienced and competent nodal officers, emphasis on root cause analysis of 
grievances and action on feedback, strengthening e scalation processes by appointing 
appellate authorities, and grievance closure guidelines with further reduction in upper limit of 
resolution time from 30 days to 21 days. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.9 The Committee observes that, adopting e -Office mechanism requires establishing 
24/7 support, conducting regular user training, and promoting awareness of new features. 
Integration with other government platforms and a stronger feedback mechanism are 
essential for continuous improvement. Further, the Committee feels that Cyber -Security 
through audits and multi - factor authentication for data protection may be ensured to 
improve efficiency.                                                                                                    (Para 3.17) 
Action Taken 
2.10 There is a multi -level support mechanism in place for the e -Office project to handle 
issues on daily basis and escalate to the next level if needed. A 24*7 help desk 
[https://servicedesk.nic.in/] is already available. Users can register issues online or call the 
24*7 available NIC Service desk support number at 1800111555. 
2.11 User training and promoting awareness of new features is provided by the eOffice 
Project Division through regular structured training and support to help users transition to the 
eOffice platform. Training includes a 4-day structured program covering theory and practical 
application, with additional customized training at the user organization‘s premises and 1-day 
sessions for senior officials. 
2.12 Integration with other government platforms – External entities, like Parichay SSO or 
equivalent (e.g. SAML, Active directory), Web VPN, eSign, Applications, Bhashini and 
Kanthasth for languages are already integrated with eOffice. Further, eOffice serves as a 
feeder to other eGovernance systems by offering read/write APIs for seamless integration 
with external applications. To meet the generic requirements for interaction with other 
eGovernance systems, the 'eOffice Web Services' are available to provide read/write APIs for 
seamless integration and provide information to other dashboard services as well. 
2.13 The eOffice Project Division has a feedback mechanism for receiving feedback from 
all its user organizations for continuous im provement, and are maintained and recorded 

 
10 
 
centrally, on a structured platform. These feedbacks are assessed, prioritized and then 
released into the application in an iterative and incremental continuous delivery process. 
From January 2024 until March 2025 , 39 features were released in six different versions of 
the eFiles application. Application security audits are done regularly along with continuous 
vulnerability assessment. Annual comprehensive audit are also conducted. E -Office access is 
restricted to NICNET/NKN or through VPN only and 2-Factor authentication is enabled. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.14 A fluctuating trend can be observed in the number of cases received and disposed 
over the years. In 2021 -22, 66,736 cases were received with a 95.26% disposal rate, which 
declined to 91.8% in 2022-23 despite a lower number of cases received (58,964). In 2023-24, 
cases received surged to 94,108, but the disposal rate slightly dropped to 90.88%. The trend 
continued in 2024-25 (till 27.01.25) with a sharp rise in cases (1,05,058) and a further dip in 
disposal rate (87.1%), indicating a growing backlog and potential challenges in handling the 
increased workload efficiently. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Department to 
improve its efficiency, by enha ncing its staff strength and adopting automation, and 
streamline workflows. The Committee also feels that coordination and leveraging digital 
tools will ensure timely resolution and prevent backlog amidst rising volumes of cases.           
(Para 3.32) 
Action Taken 
2.15 DoPPW constantly coordinates with other Ministries/ Departments through meetings, 
e-mails and reminders for ensuring expeditious redressal. Also, monthly Inter Ministerial 
Review Meetings (IMRMs), through VC, and Pension Adalats have prov ed their utility in 
redressal of long pending grievances. The recommendations of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee have been noted and it is submitted that the frequency of interaction with 
Ministries/Departments having majority of long pending cases, would  be increased through 
issue of DOs and physical meetings with the concerned Nodal Officers. For this, adequate 
manpower would be deployed.  
2.16 The DoPPW is also in the process of introducing technological advancements, 
thereby reducing redressal time. Fo r this, meetings with the stakeholders, especially 
Ministries/Departments having majority of the pension grievances, are being convened on the 
issue of auto forwarding of the grievances directly from the complainants to the concerned 
GROs and auto lateral movement of the grievances among Ministries/ Departments as the 
redressal of pension grievances require action from different stakeholders. 

 
11 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.17 The Committee observes that rate of grievances have increased drastically, 
particularly in the Ministry of Defence (MoD) [72%], which remains a major concern for 
pensioners of PCDA, Pension Allahabad and Department of Ex -Servicemen Welfare, 
indicating persistent issues in pension processing. Further the trends in other ministries like 
Railways, Financial Services, and Posts show s a decline, which means that Mo D requires 
targeted intervention rather than general reforms. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Department to establish a specialized grievance c ell with representatives from M oD, 
PCDA, and Ex-Servicemen Welfare to identify key bottlenecks and expedite timely resolution 
of grievances.                                                                                                            (Para 3.36) 
 Action Taken 
2.18 In the backdrop of increased receipts of the Defence pension grievances, the level of 
interaction with Ministry of Defence was elevated and meetings with Secretary (Defence), 
Secretary (ESW) and Controller General of Defence Accounts (CGDA) were conducted on 
regular intervals, apart from monthly Inter-Ministerial Review Meetings (IMRMs). However, 
the recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Committee  have been noted and 
nominations, not below the rank of Director, are being sought from the major stakeholde rs, 
viz., CGDA, PCDA(P), Prayagraj, DESW and Department of Military Affairs. On receipt of 
the same, the specialized grievance cell would be constituted. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.19 The Committee appreciates the Department of Pension and Pensioners Welfare for its 
overall performance and hopes that it will continue good work to bring about 'ease of living' 
for pensioners, especially for super senior citizens and family pensioners.             (Para 3.56) 
Action Taken 
2.20 The Ministry has noted the recommendation/observation of the Committee.  
2.21 DoPPW is committed for the welfare of Pensioners‘ especially super senior citizens 
and family pensioners. The Face Authentication Technique is a game changer and very 
beneficial for pensioners as no external device is required and DLC generation is very fast, in 
less than a minute. It can be submitted through any smart phone and is being widely used 
which ensures ease of living for Pensioners. 

 
12 
 
2.22 Pensioners‘ Awareness Programmes , Bankers‘ Awareness Programmes and Pre - 
Retirement counseling workshops are held on regular basis, both physically and online to 
familiarize and popularize DLCs and the Face Authentication Technique.  Pensioners were 
apprised of new initiatives by Government of India through social media also. 
 
***** 
  

 
13 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN FOR NOT 
ACCEPTING ITS RECOMMENDATIONS AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS. 
Overall Assesement of the Demands for Grants 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1 The Committee observes that the Department should ensure timely implementation 
and efficient utilization  of allocated funds of Rs. 97.00 Crore by establishing well -defined 
performance indicators. The en hancement of CPGRAMS through AI -driven analytics and 
regional language support is imperative to improve the accessibility and inclusivity. The 
Committee hopes that the proposed Data Strategy Unit will leverage advanced technologies 
to enhance governance efficiency. Strengthening collaborations with premier institutions like 
IIT Kanpur will further drive innovation and technological advancements, in upgrading 
CPGRAMS.                                                                                                                 (Para 2.5) 
Action Taken 
3.2 In alignment with the vision for Next Generation CPGRAMS, the Department has 
adopted a comprehensive approach to introduce measurable performance indicators and 
operational benchmarks for technology deployment and public grievance redress. The 
enhancement of CPGRAMS with AI -based analytics is currently underway through 
collaboration with premier institutions such as IIT Kanpur, where efforts are focused on 
predictive grievance routing, automatic prioritization, and detection of habitual complaints. 
Furthermore, a regional language interface is being developed in partnership with Bhashini 
under MeitY, to make the platform inclusive and accessible to every citizen in their native 
language. Simultaneously, the proposed Data Strategy Unit, now operational, is ta sked with 
generating actionable insights and thematic analytics to improve overall governance 
efficiency. These measures are fully aligned with the Committee's expectation of leveraging 
advanced technology and institutional collaborations to ensure citizen -centric grievance 
redressal. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.3 The Committee notes the Ministry’s comprehensive response regarding the 
enhancement of Next Generation CPGRAMS, including the adoption of performance 

 
14 
 
indicators, AI -driven analytics, regi onal language support, and institutional 
collaborations. However, the Committee observes that the Ministry has not provided a 
definitive timeline for the full operationalization of the Next Generation CPGRA MS. 
Additionally, the status and expected completi on timeframe for the development of the 
regional language interface may be specified.  
3.4 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should  furnish a 
detailed and time -bound action plan outlining the milestones for the complete 
deployment of the Next Generation CPGRAMS. This should include  the phased rollout 
of the regional language interface. The Committee feels that s uch clarity will enable the 
Department to timely implement and efficiently utilize allocated funds.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.5 It may be observed that there are significant variations of Non -Scheme (Revenue) 
budget estimates, revised estimates, and actual expenditures over the last three financial 
years. In 2023-24, the revised estimate (₹14 crore) w as substantially higher than the budget 
estimate (₹9.03 crore), with actual expenditure (₹13.74 crore)close to full utilization. In 
2024-25, the revised estimate (₹21.67 crore) shows a sharp increase, but actual expenditure 
as of 20.01.2025 remains lower ( ₹7.62 crore). Even if the figure of ₹8 crores is included, 
then also the actual expenditure is significantly lower when compared with the allocated 
budget. The Committee hopes that in the rest of the period, the Department would be able to 
fully utilize th e allocated sum. Further, the Committee desires a detailed reason for under -
utilization of funds during the year 2024-25.                                                            (Para 2.15) 
Action Taken 
3.6 As per the expenditure statement for the FY.2024-25, funds are efficiently utilized 
and a brief of the budget is as under. 
 (Rs in Lakh) 
 Non Scheme Scheme Capital Total 
BE 1209 350 74 1633 
RE 2167 505 700 3372 
Actual 2104.74 466.66 580.39 3151.79 
Percentage 96.99 92.41 82.91 93.47 
 
The overall percentage of expenditure w.r.t. RE 2024-25 is 93.47%. 

 
15 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.7 The Committee observes that as on 20.01.2025, the actual expenditure reported 
was only ₹7.62 crore . Moreover, even after accounting for the payment towards rent of 
the premises . i.e. ₹8 Crore, which was to be made in F Y 2024-25, the estimated 
expenditure amounts to  ₹15.62 Cr ore. Y et, by the end of the financial period, the 
expenditure rose sharply to ₹ 21.04 crore. The Ministry has not explained how such a 
substantial expenditure was incurred within  a short span of time. Further, the 
Committee finds that no explanation has been given for the significant variations 
observed in the Non -Scheme (Revenue) budget estimat es, revised estimates, and actual 
expenditures over the last three years. The Department may  furnish a comprehensive 
statement detailing the reasons for the sharp expenditure increase in the closing period.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.8 EPFO- It has come  to the notice of the Committee, that in the form of public 
grievances a large number of employees who work in private sector where funds are under 
the watch of EPFO, the employer do not pay their share of contribution and even sometimes 
do not even pay th e employees contribution as well. Secondly, some of the private sector 
organizations have made trusts and employee and employer’s contribution is kept in the 
trusts. The money is also not paid to the employees. The hard earned money of employees 
which have  been mandatorily deducted and employer’s share is not credited to the 
employee’s EPFO account. In such instance when any grievance of such type is received by 
the Department, the Committee feels that it should take up with EPFO.                 (Para 3.18)                               
Action Taken 
3.9 With reference to the Committee‘s concern about grievances related to EPFO, 
especially regarding defaulting private employers, the Department plans to intiate targeted 
action. Pursuant to the Hon‘ble  Prime Minister‘s directive during the PRAGATI meeting of 
26th February 2025, DARPG activated the grievance review module for EPFO -related 
complaints. In the April 2024 review meeting with Nodal Officers, the Secretary of DARPG 
specifically raised the matt er of increasing grievances involving non -payment of 
employee/employer contributions and the misuse of employee trusts. 
3.10 DARPG has started compiling a list of such grievances and will coordinate with the 
Ministry of Labour and EPFO for redressal. The D epartment will ask EPFO to review 
previously disposed cases using the Secretary -level grievance review module to assess their 
quality. Additionally, in collaboration with Common Services Centre (CSC), DARPG plans 

 
16 
 
to organize a Facebook Live session with EP FO in May 2025 to directly engage citizens on 
these matters and guide them on grievance resolution procedures. This outreach initiative is 
expected to bridge information gaps and address the concerns highlighted by the Committee. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.11 The Committee acknowledges the Department’s prompt action in addressing 
grievances related to EPFO contributions and misuse of employee trusts, including the 
activation of the grievance review module and planned citizen engagement initiati ves. 
However, the Committee is concerned about the continuing incidence of defaulting 
employers and the impact on employees’ hard -earned funds. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department and EPFO expedite the resolution of pending cases 
and s trengthen monitoring mechanisms to prevent future defaults. The Committee 
further desires that the Ministry may devise a result-oriented effective action plan.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.12 The Committee observes that the training sessions had covered only 224 Indian 
officials across s elect States, which is insufficient for nationwide impact. However, it is also 
observed that States with high grievance redressal needs (e.g., Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
Maharashtra) were not adequately covered. The Committee r ecommends that, to enhance the 
effectiveness of CPGRAMS, the Department should focus on expanding domestic outreach by 
integrating digital learning platforms and strengthening post training assessments.        
 (Para 3.23) 
Action Taken 
3.13 The observation s made by the Committee is noted. As far as NCGG is concerned, 
CPGRAMS, which has revolutionized the grievance redressal and monitoring system of the 
Government of India, is introduced as a topic in Capacity Building Programmes for the 
international Civil Servants. Earlier in the reply, it was emphasized that NCGG has trained 
224 domestic Civil Servants of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and the UT of Jammu & 
Kashmir. As such with regard to the recommendation, NCGG does not conduct any capacity 
building programme specifically for CPGRAMS. 
 
 
 

 
17 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.14 The Committee is of the view that capacity building for CPGRAMS should be 
extended to all Civil Servants across the country in a phased manner. In the initial 
phase, priority may be given to officials from States with high grievance redressal 
requirements, followed by others in subsequent phases. The Committee also emphasizes 
that NCGG should design and conduct dedicated capacity -building programmes on 
CPGRAMS. This would significantly  contribute towards enhancing the efficiency and 
responsiveness of the public grievance redressal system. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.15 The Committee feels that as the mortality rates among the employees within the first 
two to three years post -retirement remain elevated, the Department should implement 
comprehensive pre -retirement counselling programs for all the retiring employees. These  
programs should be universally accessible, utilizing both online and offline platforms, to 
prepare employees for significant lifestyle changes and associated challenges.       (Para 3.30) 
Action Taken 
3.16 Department of Pension & Pensioners‘ Welfare has been organizing Pre -Retirement 
Counseling (PRC) Workshops regularly for the benefit of retiring Central Government 
officials. So far, 55 PRC Workshops have been conducted in different parts of the country 
which have benefited more than 10000 retiring centr al government officials. In order to 
facilitate the smooth transition for the retiring employees, various sessions on Retirement 
Benefits, CGHS, Investment modes, BHAVISHYA portal, Integrated Pensioners Portal, 
Family Pension, CPENGRAMS, ANUBHAV and Digita l Life Certificate etc. are conducted 
in the workshops. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.17 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s initiatives in organizing pre -
retirement counselling workshops and informing retiring officials about welfare schemes 
and retirement benefits. However, the Committee observes that these programmes 
mainly focus on government benefits . It  should also cover broader opportunities 
available to retirees  like agricultural and digital entrepreneurship  and avenues for 
pursuing hobb ies and talents. Enhanced guidance on productive engagement beyond 
voluntary work, such as leveraging retirees’ experience and skills in various domains, 
will support their well-being and make post-retirement life more rewarding. 

 
18 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.18 The Committee appreciates the Department for holding Pension Adalats every year 
since 2017. The Committee is of the view that, while the Nationwide Pension Adalats have 
played a crucial role in grievance redressal , the resolution rate of 71.38% indicates that 
nearly 29% of cases remain unresolved, which raises concerns about efficiency. The 
Committee therefore, desires that efforts may be made to address the unresolved cases by 
constantly pursuing them with the concerned Departments.                                     (Para 3.42) 
Action Taken 
3.19 The objective of the Pension Adalat is to provide on -the-spot resolution of unresolved 
and chronic grievances in CPENGRAMS. After giving advance notice to all the stakeholders, 
involving the Head of Office (HOO), Pay and Account Office (PAO), Central Pension 
Accounting Office (CPAO), Pension Disbursing Bank , etc., and representative of the 
Pensioner are called on a common platform for resolution of the grievances across th e table. 
Most of the cases taken up in Pension Adalats are resolved on the spot. However, due follow -
up with the respective Ministry/Department is carried out and Action Taken Reports are 
sought for the cases that are resolved. The unresolved cases are rev isited and their status is 
considered before holding the next Pension Adalat. There is a slight overall improvement in 
the redressal of pension grievances, increasing from 71.38% to 71.44%. This Department has 
decided to organize 3 Pension Adalats each yea r to resolve more long -pending grievances 
with increased success rate. This will enable the consideration of additional grievances and 
more effective redressal, thereby reducing the duration of pendency and enhancing 
efficiency. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.20 The Committee appreciates the decision of the Department to organize three 
Pension Adalats every year to ensure early redressal  of pension grievances. However, 
the Committee is of the considered view that, in order to further expedite the resolution 
of long -pending and chronic grievances, the Pension Adalats may be conducted on a 
quarterly basis. This will facilitate more frequent  review and resolution of cases, 
thereby improving the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the grievance redressal 
mechanism. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may take 
necessary steps to institutionalize quarterly Pension Adalat s for enhanced grievance 
redressal. 
***** 

 
19 
 
CHAPTER IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.1 Sankalp – A number of pensioners feels the loss of a daily routine as well as of feeling 
if not being wanted. To alleviate this condition and keep them busy, physically, mentally and 
to remain relevant in society it will be a great help that the Department opens CSOI branches 
in NCR to start with immediately and till such a time this facility comes up the Department 
may take up with Haryana and UP Govt. to allow membership of their existing clubs to the 
pensioners who do not hold CSOI membership as on date. This f acility will go a long way in 
improving the quality of life to remain physically and mentally agile.                     (Para 3.53) 
4.2 CGHS – A large number of Pensioners are availing CGHS facilities, as a welfare 
measure the pensioners may be allowed to  avail private hospitals facilities without the 
necessity of referral slip from the dispensaries. The Committee feels this will reduce a lot of 
mental and physical pressure on pensioners and the matter may be taken up with the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare to issue necessary instructions in this regard.           (Para 3.54) 
4.3 Pension – The Committee observes that many a times the disbursing banks take away 
money unilaterally in the name of over disbursal, without even informing the pensioners and 
that too in one go. Since pension is meant for sustenance such a money lender behaviour or a 
coercive measure of taking funds on its own by the bank goes to show a complete disrespect 
to the system. The Committee feels that the banks should be sensitized about it and this sort of 
exercise should be stopped immediately.                                                                  (Para 3.55) 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.4  The Committee has not received replies to recommendations of the Committee of 
the above paras , i.e., 3.5 3, 3.54 and 3.55 . The Committee would like to remind the 
Department that Action taken Replies should be furnished before the Committee within 
three mont hs from the day when Report on Demands for Grants is presented in 
Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, directs the Department that replies on the 
Report should be furnished within the prescribed timeframe. 
***** 
 
 

 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 
21 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM  on 02.12.2025 in Room No. 3, PHAE,  
New Delhi – 110001. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Shri Brij Lal - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
3.  Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
4.  Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
5.  Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandangouda 
6.  Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
7.  Shri Varun Chaudhry 
8.  Shri Saleng A Sangma 
9.  Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
10.  Smt. Manju Sharma 
11.  Shri M Mallesh Babu 
12.  Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
13.  Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
14.  Shri Arup Chakraborty 
15.  Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
16.  Shri A. Raja 
17.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
18.  Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
19.  Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
20.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
(i) Shri P. Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
(ii) Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
(iii) Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary 
(iv) Ms. Purva Khanna, Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
22 
 
2.  The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members of the  Committee and informed 
them about agenda of the meeting. The  Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the 
following draft reports of the Committee:- 
 
i. *      *     * 
 
ii. *      *     * 
 
iii. Draft 157 th Report on Action Taken on 146 th Report of the Committee on Demands 
for Grants (2025 -26) pertaining to the Departments of Administrative Reforms & 
Public Grievances and Pension & Pensioners‘ Welfare (Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances & Pensions); 
 
iv. *      *     * 
 
v. *      *     * 
 
3.  After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted draft *, *, 157 th, and * Reports 
without any modification. *     *             *      . 
The Committee decided that these Reports would be  presented to the Parliament on 4 th 
December, 2025. Shri Varun  Chaudhry , M.P. and in his absence Shri Madhavaneni  
Raghunandan Rao, M.P. were nominated to lay the Reports in Lok  Sabha while in the 
absence of Ch airman, Shri Harsh Vardhan  Shringla, M.P. was nominated to present the 
Reports in Rajya Sabha. 
 
4.  *      *     * 
 
 
5.  The meeting adjourned at 03.15 PM. 
 
INDIRA CHATURVEDI VAIDYA 
DIRECTOR 
 
New Delhi 
2nd December, 2025 
 
To, 
The Chairman and Members of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
______________________ 
*pertains to other matters 
 
 
 
 
 

 
23 
 
ANNEXURES 

 
24 
 
Annexure-I 
  


 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
26 
 
Annexure-II 
 
 
 
 


 
27 
 
Annexure-II 
 
 
 
 
