PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 31
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N P E R S O N N E L , PU B L IC G R IE V A N C E S , 
L A W  A N D J U S T IC E
THIR TY  FIRST  REPOR T
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF  THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE 25TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR  GRANTS (2008-09)
OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
AND PENSIONS
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
D E C E M B E R , 2008/A G R A H A Y A N A , 1930 (SA K A )D E C E M B E R , 2008/A G R A H A Y A N A , 1930 (SA K A )

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

61
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE 25TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
AND PENSIONS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-61

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1
(i) C HAPTER –I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry .......................................................................................................... 2—11
(ii) C
HAPTER –II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the replies by the Ministry ............................ 12—28
(iii) C
HAPTER –III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Committee
has not accepted replies of the Ministry ....................................................... 29—35
(iv) C
HAPTER –IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies
of the Ministry have not been received ......................................................... 36—55
(v) C
HAPTER –V
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Ministry
has not furnished replies ................................................................................... 56
4. M
INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 57—60

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2008)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Shri Ram Jethmalani
10. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
14. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
15. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
23. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
24. Prof. M. Ramadass
25. Adv. P. Sathedevi
26. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
27. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
28. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
29. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Thirty first Report on Action Taken by Government
on the recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Twenty fifth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2008.
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action Taken Note
on the Twenty fifth Report of the Committee on 16th September, 2008. The Committee considered
the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 16th December, 2008.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
16th December, 2008 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations of the Department
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its
25th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya
Sabha on 29th April, 2008 and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2008.
2. The Action taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned
Report. These replies have been categorised as follows:
Chapter – I – The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry
in respect of paras 5.13, 7.1, 9.1, 9.2, 11.1, 14.2, 16.1, 19.1, 21.2, 22.1, 23.1, 24.8, 25.1,
27.3, 28.3, 28.4, 31.1, 39.3, 39.4, 44.5, 47.5, 47.7, 47.15, 49.1, 50.1, 52.7 and 31.1. The
Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as mentioned in
Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter – II – The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies given by the Ministry in respect of paras 5.15, 5.17, 8.3, 12.1, 13.1, 18.1,
26.4, 37.1, 37.2, 39.6, 42.3, 44.1, 44.2, 44.6, 44.7, 46.3, 46.5, 47.12, 51.8, 53.1, 53.2, 53.4,
5.17, 30.1, 33.1, 37.1 and 37.2. The Committee is convinced with the explanations advanced by
the Ministry and does not want to pursue them as of now.
Chapter – III – The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not
accepted replies given by the Ministry with regard to paras 5.16, 10, 10.1, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 26.5,
36.2, 39.8, 41.2 and 41.3. The Committee expresses its concern for not accepting the
recommendations of the Committee contained in Chapter–III of this Report and desires that the
Ministry should furnish logical explanations in respect of these recommendations.
Chapter – IV – The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry
have not been received with regard to paras 11.3, 11.4, 15.1, 20.1, 20.2, 25.2, 28.3, 28.4, 29.2,
29.3, 29.4, 29.5, 30.1, 32.1, 33.1, 34.2, 39.1, 40.1, 40.2, 42.1, 42.2, 47.8, 47.10, 51.5, 51.10,
51.12, 51.13, 53, 28.3, 28.4, 29.2, 29.3, 29.4, 29.5, 32.1 and 27.3. The Committee observes that
the Ministry has furnished evasive or interim replies and the Committee desires that the Ministry
should furnish action taken notes in respect of recommendations categorised in Chapter–IV .
Chapter – V – The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Ministry has not
furnished the replies with regard to paras 35.1 and 35.2. The Committee observes that the Ministry
has not furnished the replies and the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish action
taken notes in respect of recommendations categorised in Chapter–V .
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 25th Report, the ATRs furnished
by the Ministry and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been dealt with in
the succeeding Chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
DEMAND NO. 78
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee observes that the budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions has increased from Rs. 366.00 crore in 2007-08 to
Rs. 443 crore in the current year, reflecting a hike of Rs. 77.00 crore, i.e., 21.03% increase
over the previous financial year, whereas for UPSC, it has increased from Rs. 75.12 crore
to 77.81 crore reflecting a hike of Rs. 2.69 crore i.e., 3.58% increase over the previous
financial year. The Committee expects that this enhanced allocation would be optimally
utilised. Out of the total budgetary allocation of Rs. 443 crore, Rs. 305 crore is devoted to
Non Plan expenditure. A minimum sum of Rs.138 crore has been allocated for various Plan
schemes/programmes of the Ministry. The Committee notes that this Ministry is the nodal
agency for wide ranging crucial matters like personnel policy, recruitment, training,
administrative reforms, public grievances and pensions and in the absence of adequate
facilities and infrastructure, it practically becomes impossible to render these services.
Hence it is of the opinion that this Ministry has a very vital role to play in formulating as
well as implementing the Plan schemes in these fields, for which infrastructure and assets
are to be created. Therefore, the Committee feels that more focus should be given on Plan
expenditure. [Para 5.13]
Action Taken Reply
1.1 The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
ANNUAL HEALTH CHECK-UP FOR ALL INDIA SERVICE OFFICERS
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee appreciates such initiatives of the Ministry. It is pleased to note that
maintaining a healthy working environment and ensuring the welfare of employees are
accorded top priority by the Ministry. It hopes that the Ministry would assess the feedback
on implementational aspects of the above mentioned initiatives and take necessary follow
up action. The Committee recommends that similar welfare initiatives may also be explored
by the Government in case of other officers and employees as well. [Para 7.1]
Action Taken Reply
AIS Division
2.1 A new system of assessment of the performance of members of the All India Services has
been adopted by replacing the All India Services (Confidential Roll) Rules, 1970 with the All India
Services (Performance Appraisal Report) Rules, 2007. This system has been made applicable for
assessment from the year 2007-08.
2

3
2.2 The new system provides for mandatory health check up for all the members of the Indian
Police Service (IPS) and the Indian Forests Services (IFS) while it is mandatory for the members
of the Indian Administrative Services (IAS) above the age of 40. The concerned Cadre Controlling
Authorities of the three Services i.e. the Department of Personnel and Training for the IAS, the
Ministry of Home Affairs for the IPS and the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the IFS are
required to devise the modalities for conducting health check-up for the members of the Services.
2.3 The Department of Personnel and Training, in consultation with the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare has fin alized the formats for the health check up of the IAS officers. 5 Government
hospitals and 16 private hospitals have been assigned the job of conducting health check-up of IAS
officers posted in the Centre as per the rates approved by them Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare.
2.4 Necessary instructions in this regard have been issued to all Ministries/Departments of the
Government of India in January, 2008. The system has also been made simple as instructions have
also been issued to the effect that for the purpose of health check-up, no prior reference of the
Authorised Medical Attendant is required. Copies of the instructions have also been sent to the State
Governments with the request to formulate similar arrangement in the State Government for IAS
officers posted under the States.
2.5 In order to avoid inconvenience, a comprehensive list containing the name and address of
the contact persons of the private hospitals alongwith their contact telephone numbers/fax etc. has
also been issued in February, 2008.
2.6 In the case of IAS officers working with Central Government outside Delhi, instructions have
also been issued to the Ministries/Department in June, 2008 that they have their medical check-up
done in the approved hospitals of the State Governments where they are currently posted. The
concerned Ministry/Department would reimburse their claims as per the rates prescribed by the
concerned State Governments for the IAS officers posted in connection with the affairs of that State.
2.7 The Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Environment and Forests have been
requested to take necessary action relating to formulation of formats and modalities for Health Check-
up for IPS and IFS respectively in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
2.8 The feedback received in this regard will be assessed from time to time.
CS Division
2.9 A proposal to prescribe an Annual Medical Health check-up for CSS officers is already
under consideration of the Government.
MID CAREER TRAINING FOR ALL INDIA SERVICE OFFICERS
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has envisaged such training
programmes. It hopes that such training would boost their self confidence and ensure that
the trainees hone their skills and capabilities and that modern management techniques are
infused into governance by the trainees. The Committee recommends that training
programmes should be visualized in such a manner that it should enhance the morale,
knowledge, accountability, democratic compulsions in delivery system and productivity of the
trainees. [Para 9.1]
Action Taken Reply
3.1 The Primary objective of the Mild Career Training Programme for IAS officers is to help
develop “next level competency” before the officers get promoted to higher positions. It is

4
envisaged that the training would contribute meaningfully to updating knowledge of the IAS officers
based on the rapidly changing global environment.
3.2 The course curriculum has thus been designed keeping in view specifically the need to
enhance the morale, knowledge, accountability, democratic compulsions in delivery system and
productivity of the officers. Thus the recommendations of the Committee have been followed.
Recommendation/observation
4. The Committee feels that time is a powerful segmentation variable for the Government
service as it is the only ‘objective’ dimension on which the citizen can gauge quality of
governance. It recommends that punctuality, duration, availability, speed of response and speed
of innovation in delivery system are to be inculcated in the in-service training. [Para 9.2]
Action Taken Reply
4.1 Government has realized that the entire career profile of an IAS officer has changed
substantially over the last 50 years, with far greater emphasis on policy formulation and programme
implementation now as against the emphasis on district administration earlier. The recommendations
of the Committee have been implemented in the design of the programme of Mid Career Training
of IAS Officers by incorporating the course content which lays more stress on the quick delivery
systems keeping in view the rapid advances in technology as well as the need for greater
transparency. It is believed that this training would enable the IAS officers to address the new
challenges before them with the speed of response and speed of innovation in the delivery system
as recommended by the Committee.
CADRE REVIEW
Recommendation/observation
5. The Committee recommends that cadre review should be made in such a way as to
remove the deficiencies which exist in the Service and that the Ministry should ensure that
it satisfies the functional, structural and personnel considerations of the Service. [Para 11.1]
Action Taken Reply
5.1 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. While examining the cadre review
proposals in the Department, attempt is made to bring about congruence between the functional
needs and legitimate aspirations of the Members of the Service.
TONING OF STATE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
6. The Committee desires that the Ministry should put in place an effective mechanism
to ensure that State PSCs which are the main recruiting agencies at the State level, should
be free from the shackles of nepotism and favouritism and function independently and in
a transparent manner. [Para 14.2]
Action Taken Reply
6.1 The State Public Service Commissions are constitutional bodies and the power to appoint
the Chairman and Members in the State Public Service Commissions is exclusively with the
Governor of the respective States. However, the Constitution has reserved the power to remove
the Chairman/Members in any State PSCs to the President of India subject to the provisions

5
contained in Article 317 of the Constitution. The DoPT has no role in the day-to-day administration
or internal functioning of the State PSCs. Whenever any proposal is received from the State
Government for removal of a Chairman/Member in the State PSC, further action is taken in this
Department keeping in view the provisions of Article 317 of the Constitution.
Committee’s further observation
6.2 The Committee knows the provision and legal frame work of State PSCs. Within the legal
frame work, UPSC and DoPT should discharge duties as leaders and guides at the National level
and for that, UPSC and DoPT are accountable morally for corruption and inefficiency at State
level PSCs .
LIAISON OFFICERS
Recommendation/observation
7. The Committee acknowledges the initiative and is of the opinion that the liaison
officers should be suitably equipped with the provisions of reservation policy and in terms
of resources, to ensure due compliance with the policy of reservation. [Para 16.1]
Action Taken Reply
7.1 Keeping in view the fact that the Liaison Officers for SCs/STs/OBCs/Persons with
Disabilities should be well equipped with the knowledge about various provisions relating to
reservation, this Department has been requesting the Ministries/Departments etc. to take advantage
of training programmes conducted by various organizations on the subject. Officers of this
Department are also deputed to the institutions conducting training programmes on the subject to
give first hand information to the trainees which include the Liaison Officers and other officers
involved in implementation of reservation.
SPECIAL CASUAL LEA VE FOR PERSON WITH DISABILITIES
Recommendation/observation
8. The Committee takes note of the interest shown by the Ministry in the welfare of
disabled employees and welcomes such a step. [Para 19.1]
Action Taken Reply
8.1 No further action is required. Hence no comments. The observations of the Committee have
been noted.
PLACEMENT SYSTEM
Recommendation/observation
9. While recording its appreciation on the initiative of the Ministry for transparent and
efficient ‘placement system’, the Committee is of the view that the true essence of the
initiative will lose its sheen if delayed in its operation, in view of the advancement of
technology. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such initiatives should be made
workable at least within a quarter of a financial year of its initiation. [Para 21.2]
Action Taken Reply
9.1 The system is already in operation and advancement in technology is not likely to delay its
operation. Regarding the Online Validation of Application Form, the software being designed is a
part of the existing software and would use the same technology.

6
Recommendation /observation
10. The Committee acknowledges this initiative of the Ministry and desires that
transparency should be ensured in the selection and non-selection of a candidate with the
specific reasons provided for that. [Para 22.1]
Action Taken Reply
10.1 While making selections to such posts, a transparent method is adopted while culling out
the names of suitable officers for foreign assignment and other jobs. The domain experience which
fits the job requirement of the specific post is fed into the system (software) alongwith other
criteria like level of the officers required, age limit and other eligibility criteria, decided for the
particular assignment. The time period of experience (in no. of months) in the specified fields, is
also fed into the system. The names of the officers so generated by the system, are further
scrutinized on the basis of their ACR gradings etc. Finally, selection is made by the competent
authority from the short listed panel, so generated.
Committee’s further observation
10.2 The Committee appreciates the efforts and desires quicker implementation for the benefit
of efficient personnel and better Governance.
ACC V ACANCY MONITORING SYSTEM
Recommendation/observation
11. The Committee is pleased to note the initiative of the Ministry and opines that in
selection and non-selection of a candidate, transparency should be the mode and specific
reasons should be given for the same. [Para 23.1]
Action Taken Reply
11.1 The A VMS (ACC Vacancy Monitoring system) has been developed and put in place to
monitor the vacancies which are to be filled up with the approval of the ACC.
11.2 This system, per se,  is meant to only help in timely initiation of action for submission of
ACC proposals in time.
11.3 The selection and non-selection of a candidate is a separate activity which is done by
different organizations for different type of posts, such as by the PESB for PSU vacancies (Board
level appointments) and the UPSC for the DPC based vacancies in various Ministries/Departments.
Committee’s further observation
11.4 The mode of reply itself shows the DoPT’s mind of shrugging the duty as nodal agency.
GENDER ISSUES
Recommendation/observation
12. The Committee takes note of the activities undertaken under this Project. It is of
the opinion that at the stage of formulation/framing of policies, programmes and schemes
by the Ministry, women should be given adequate representation. [Para 24.8]
Action Taken Reply
12.1 The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.

7
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL (CAT)
Recommendation/observation
13. The Committee hopes that more Government employees will be benefited by this step
and that it will ensure the welfare of those officials who are the back bone of
administration. [Para 25.1]
Action Taken Reply
13.1 No A TN is required.
PENSIONERS’ PORTAL
Recommendation/observation
14. The Committee commends the excellent work done by the Department in this aspect
to help the pensioners. The Committee is happy to note that the Department is seeking a
security audit for this system and envisaging an impact assessment for its evaluation. The
Committee would like to suggest that the service register of each Government employee
should be opened in an electronic form and that it should be updated electronically. Also,
the concerned employee should be allotted a unique registration code for accessing
information in his electronic service register. [Para 27.3]
Action Taken Reply
14.1 The matter regarding Impact Assessment Study for evaluation of the ‘Pensioners’ Portal’
has been taken up with Department of Information Technology who is the nodal Department for
all Mission Mode Projects. They have been requested to set up a Team for undertaking the Impact
Assessment Study of the Project early.
14.2 Security audit for the ‘Pensioners’Portal’ is an ongoing activity for implementation of the
Project and the same is being taken care of by the National Informatics Centre on continuous basis.
14.3 As regards the matter relating to opening of Service Register for each Government employee
in electronic form, this has been taken up as a pilot project in respect of Group ‘C’ employees of
Department of Personnel and Training. Once the result is evaluated, suitable instructions will be
issued to all Ministries/Departments for introducing e-Service Book in respect of each Gov ernment
employee.
CENTRALISED PUBLIC GRIEVANCES REDRESS AND MONITORING SYSTEM (CPGRAMS)
Recommendation/observation
15. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has acted upon its
recommendation made in its 19th Report that the PGRAMS should be introduced in all
Ministries and Departments and that the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances may pursue the matter with those Ministries who have yet to install PGRAMS
and to take expeditious steps to install the same without further delay. It appreciates that
this has led to the birth of Centralized PGRAMS, the implementation of which started in
June, 2007. [Para 28.3]
15.1 The Committee is happy to note that the CPGRAMS has been benefited by many
user organisations such as Railways and that its benefits are utilized by even the Zonal
Offices of the Railways. [Para 28.4]

8
Action Taken Reply
15.2 The old PGRAM System was server based and required investment in servers in each
Ministry/Department where PGRAM System was to be installed leading to delay. However, with the
birth of the new centralized PGRAMS which is web based and does not require investment in
servers for installing it in Ministries/Departments, this process has been expedited. This system was
introduced in June, 2007, wherein each of the Nodal Officer of 89 Ministries/Departments have
been given a user name and password through which they can access the CPGRAMS software
from the Centralised Server. The Ministries/Departments could also open accounts of their
subordinate offices which in turn can access the CPGRAMS software from the same Centralised
server. This has facilitated the usage of CPGRAM software in all Ministries/Departments of Central
Government and also the field attached offices under them. However, to ensure implementation of
CPGRAM system in all Ministries/Departments and its effective usage and in order to keep close
vigil on grievances, an Action Plan has been drawn up. This Plan includes organizing monthly
meetings of 20-25 Ministries under Chairmanship of Additional Secretary where grievances of these
Ministries/Departments are reviewed and progress of CPGRAM is monitored. Wherever necessary,
training with the help of NIC is being organized for better utilization of this system.
Committee’s further observation
15.3 The Committee is happy to note that the CPGRAM software is being used by the
Ministries/Departments of Government of India. The Committee also welcomes the Action Plan
drawn to monitor the effective implementation of the system. The Committee is, however, keen
to know whether the system is effectively working as the Committee understands that CPGRAM
is a devise to redress the grievances and to what extent this objective is being achieved.
GOVERNANCE KNOWLEDGE CENTRE PORTAL
Recommendation/observation
16. The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. [Para 31.1]
Action Taken Reply
16.1 In view of the Committee’s observation, no action taken report is felt necessary. The
observation has been noted.
V ACANCIES IN CBI
Recommendation/observation
17. The Committee fails to understand the total absence of co-ordination and
communication between two organisations functioning within the jurisdiction of the same
Ministry. It would like to impress upon the Ministry that immediate remedy should be
devised to build better co-operation amongst the various organisations and agencies
functioning under the Department of Personnel and Training, particularly between CBI and
UPSC for that matter. [Para 39.3]
Action Taken Reply
UPSC
17.1 As already noted by the Parliamentary Standing Committee in para 39.2 there was not a
single case of CBI vacancy pending with the UPSC. The UPSC takes up the action for making
its recommendations on any proposal from the Department when the proposal is complete in all

9
respects. The A VD Branch of this Department is being requested to look into the inaction on the
part of CBI to send their response on the proposals returned by the UPSC or on the
communications received from the UPSC.
CBI
17.2 It is the endeavour of the Department to ensure that there is no lack of co-ordination and
co-operation between the UPSC and CBI in regard to various issues of the CBI wherein UPSC is
concerned. Recent approval by UPSC of Recruitment Rules for the posts of Sr. Public Prosecutor
and Addl. S.P. and holding of DPC meetings for promotion to the posts of Addl. Legal Adviser,
Dy. Legal Adviser, Sr. Public Prosecutor and Public Prosecutor indicate the improved co-ordination
and co-operation between the UPSC and the CBI.
Recommendation/observation
18. The Committee is upset over the vacancies existing in CBI at various grades which
it had, on various counts pointed out to the organisation, but have yielded no results. It
recommends that if vacancies are not filled in the deputationist quota, they should be filled
by direct recruitment or through promotions. It strongly recommends that stringent plans
should be chalked out and the recruiting agency, i.e. the UPSC should be pressed upon to
ensure that the vacancies are filled up without delay. While filling up vacancies, CBI should
provide more preference to women in various levels of the organisations, at least to the
level of 33%. [Para 39.4]
Action Taken Reply
18.1 The posts are required to be filled up in accordance with the provisions contained in the
relevant recruitment rules. With a view to overcome the problem of deputation quota vacancies
remaining unfilled, the Department has recently decided to amend the RRs for the posts of Sr. PP,
Addl. SP and Dy. SP, CBI so as to increase the promotion/DR quota while decreasing the
deputation quota correspondingly.
STRATEGY FOR TRAINING
Recommendation/observation
19. The Committee hopes that such visits/interactions have a salutary effect on these
officers and that they help them in understanding the social and political milieu in the
country. The Committee applauds such steps and feels that active participation of the like
as in the drought relief work on the part of trainees is indeed commendable. It appreciates
the innovative methods adopted by the Academy in sensitizing the trainees regarding the
problems faced by the common man and applauds the schemes adopted by the Academy for
upgrading the infrastructure, IT assets, library, academic syllabus etc. It is pleased to note
that the Academy has taken steps to strengthen the relations with other training
institutions within the country and that regular training programmes, workshops, seminars
and conferences are being held in the Academy. [Para 44.5]
Action Taken Reply
19.1 The para being commendatory, no comments are required.
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
20. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by SSC to facilitate the physically
handicapped people. [Para 47.5]

10
Action Taken Reply
20.1 The Commission is grateful to the Committee for appreciating the steps taken by the
Commission to provide facilities to the Handicapped candidates including the Visually Handicapped
candidates. Scribes are provided to Visually Handicapped candidates including blind and partly blind,
free of cost. One invigilator is exclusively posted with every VH candidate. They are also allowed
extra time in examination for completing their paper. A few examination venues are dedicated to
such candidates where they are provided assistance by the Commission to reach their allotted seats
etc. with a view to provide them equal opportunity and full participation in the examination. The
question paper for VH candidate including the question paper on Arithmetic are specially modeled
which have no components of map/graphs, statistical data, diagrams, geometrical problems and
figures etc. Assistance is also provided to orthopedically handicapped candidates.
Recommendation/observation
21. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken in this regard and recommends that
more innovative steps should be adopted to ensure cutting down on time and expenditure.
[Para 47.7]
Action Taken Reply
21.1 W ith a view to take further steps to reduce the time element and a number of separate
Examinations, the Commission is exploring the possibility of combining all the examinations where
the Essential Qualification (EQ) is Graduation and holding a combined Preliminary Examination. It
may be mentioned here that there are about eight such examinations where the EQ is Graduation
and one examination (Junior Hindi Translator exam) where EQ is Masters Degree. A Back Ground
Note was circulated to all the user Departments (Cadre Controlling Authorities). The basic structure
of the proposed Examination Schemes consists of two parts i.e., (i) Preliminary Examination
(ii) Main Examination.
21.2 The Preliminary Examination will be ‘Screening in Nature’ identifying target groups of
prospective candidates for different Main Examinations so that the number of candidates appearing
in the Main Exam is reduced. This will not only reduce the number of Examinations, man power
deployment, but also reduce time for processing results thereby effecting economy in time and
expenditure and also ensure availability of suitable candidates to user Departments in a shortest
possible time.
21.3 The main Examination will consist of conventional Exam, specially modeled for selecting
candidates keeping in view the EQ in specific field and requirement of posts. For example,
candidates qualified for Preliminary opting for the post of JE (Civil and Electrical/Mechanical) will
take the respective examination. A meeting to discuss the matter was taken by Chairperson, SSC
on 15.4.2008 in which user Departments (Cadre Authorities) including DOP&T participated and the
comments received are being examined on priority.
Recommendation/observation
22. The Committee is pleased to note that the SSC has taken steps to facilitate the
candidates and has undertaken IT initiatives and appreciates the same. [Para 47.15]
Action Taken Reply
22.1 The Commission places its thanks on record for the Committee for appreciating the steps
taken to facilitate candidates and undertaking IT initiatives. Further steps are being taken to make
available required information, issuing of duplicate Admission Certificates (in case, where candidates

11
do not receive Admission Certificate in time due to postal delay), information in respect of marks
obtained, etc. through internet. The Commission is also exploring the possibility of providing facility
of online application. However, candidates will be given choice of applying on conventional
application form also, keeping in view socio-economic conditions.
Committee’s further observation
22.2 The Committee appreciates the further steps taken by SSC.
LEVERAGING OF TECHNOLOGY FOR IMPROVING  VIGILANCE ADMINISTRATION
Recommendation/observation
23. The Committee is of the opinion that governance improves with greater trust
between people and the Government and that trust improves with greater transparency. It
is pleased to note the technological initiatives by CVC to improve transparency in
governance. [Para 49.1]
Action Taken Reply
23.1 Noted.
PROTECTION AGAINST VICTIMIZATION OF OFFICIALS ENGAGED IN INVESTIGATION/
VIGILANCE RELATED DUTIES
Recommendation/observation
24. The Committee is of the view that such steps ensure that those posted to the
Vigilance Organisations do not have the fear of returning to their parent cadre with the
possibility of facing the displeasure of those against whom they made inquiries. [Para 50.1]
Action Taken Reply
24.1 Noted.
CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
25. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by CIC to pursue the Ministers/
Departments to provide information to the public. It is of the opinion that such initiatives
are indeed commendable. [Para 52.7]
Action Taken Reply
25.1 No comments.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
Recommendation/observation
26. The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. [Para 31.1]
Action Taken Reply
26.1 In view of the Committee’s observation, no action taken report is felt necessary. The
observation has been noted.

12
12
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee desires that since this Ministry is responsible for implementation of
major schemes pertaining to training, capacity building, civil services reforms, improvement
and upgradation of facilities in CBI, modernization of offices, administrative reforms etc.,
adequate funds should be allocated to the Ministry, so that developmental activities do not
suffer due to lack of resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that at the RE
stage, the Ministry should conduct a stringent review of its expenditure and accordingly
make commensurate Estimate and that the schemes and projects should, in no way be
affected on account of insufficient funds. [Para 5.15]
Action Taken Reply
1.1. The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
Committee’s further observation
1.2 The Committee would like to review the expenditure of the Ministry when it considers the
Demands for Grants (2009-10).  However, the Committee desires that a note on the measures
taken at RE stage may be submitted in their ATN.
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Government to hasten the
services delivery system of the three Departments of the Ministry by way of doubling the
provision for Information Technology and equipping its offices with latest and fastest
computers and accessories. It, therefore, would appreciate to be apprised of the status of
computerization of these offices and utilization of the funds at the time of giving Action
Taken Replies. [Para 5.17]
Action Taken Reply
Statement on Information Technology Infrastructure in Department of Personnel and
Training
2.1 The work of the Department has increased voluminously and being the nodal Department,
requires its disposal with speed and accuracy. The Officers and staff willing to keep pace with the
present requirement of globalization find themselves handicapped due to non-availability of requisite
infrastructure. Being a model Department, this Department requires all the basic infrastructure
including computers with higher configuration which can meet the need of the latest technologies.

13
2.2 It may also be recalled that the Cabinet Secretariat had issued instructions to all Ministries/
Departments regarding implementation of minimum agenda of National e-governance in phased
manner wherein it stated that all the officers of the level of Section Officer and above must be
provided with computer system with all the necessary software/Local Area Network connectivity.
A 100% training to all officers and staff who have access to and need to use computers for their
official work should be ensured. This Ministry has also been identified by the Cabinet Secretariat
for implementation of the computerization for file history/trekking/archival system.
2.3 During the financial year 2007-08, 150 Computer systems, 70 Computer printers (Colour
and Mono) and Licensed copy of Microsoft Office 2007 software have been procured for use in
this Department. By providing the above computer hardware and software, the overall output of
the Department has undoubtedly increased. The officers have expressed their satisfaction with the
computer hardware/software provided to them. As regards Sections/Desks, the overall position of
the Section has also been improved. However, there are still large number of computers with old
configurations which are being used despite their incompatibility with latest technologies viz., the
centralized software for Anti-virus could not be installed with old PCs due to non-availability of
sufficient memory/processing speed of the computers, resulting in loss of data and increased threat
of computer viruses. Also, these computers have been found to be not upgradable to requisite
specification. Similarly, there are a number of Link/Deskjet printers which are not only very slow
but also their running cost works out to be more than that of the Laser printers.
2.4 As per the existing records, the total computer systems with P-IV/Core 2 Duo configuration
available are 459 as against of 625 employees. There is an urgent requirement of 166 more
computers with peripherals so that every dealing hand is provided with a computer to work in fully
computerized environment. This requirement becomes more imperative in view of the fact that
Diary System, File Movement System, Stationery/Consumable items requisitions, Online Leave
System, Online GPF System, e-Service Book etc. all are based on presumption that every individual
has easy access to computer, that too with an Internet Connectivity. A proposal of NIC is also
under consideration for upgradation of existing Local Area Network System using CAT6 cabling at
a total cost of about Rs. 1.5 crores. This high speed Network will be useful if only the computers
of higher/matching configuration are provided to employees/Officers of the Department.
2.5 In view of the above, it can safely be concluded that the fund provided during the financial
year 2007-08 for purchase of computer hardware were fully utilized for the purpose for which
these were allocated thereby meeting the requirement of this Department in respect of computer
hardware to some extent.
Department of AR & PG
2.6 At present 21 computers have been provided to the officers of the rank of Deputy
Secretary and above. At the level of Under Secretary and below, we have provided 57 computers.
Out of which about 50 computers need replacement and around 7 computers need upgradation. In
addition, we also need to buy 10 more computers in order to provide computers to all the staff.
Hence, 60 new computers need to be purchased.
2.7 This Department has been provided with an amount of Rs.5 lakh for IT during the year
2008-09. The budget for current year is inadequate to purchase 60 new computers. However this
will be fully utilized during the year 2008-09.
STABILITY OF TENURE OF THE ALL INDIA SERVICE OFFICERS
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee records its appreciation on this initiative of the Ministry and is of

14
the opinion that this would increase their self confidence and ensure that the officers get
sufficient time to master the situation at the workplace which in turn, would improve
efficiency in management rather than outdated administration. [Para 8.3]
Action Taken Reply
3.1 In addition to the States of J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, AGMUT,
Jharkhand, Sikkim, Nagaland and Orissa the notifications for fixing minimum tenures of cadre
posts of IAS for the States of Haryana, Chhattisgarh, Uttaranchal and Manipur-Tripura have been
issued. A meeting was also convened on 04.07.2008 at the level of Secretary, Department of
Personnel and Training to further discuss the issue with the Chief Secretaries (or their
representatives) of the remaining eleven States/Cadres, who have not agreed to the proposal of
providing fixed minimum tenure to the IAS cadre posts.
Committee’s further observation
3.2 The Committee desires that the Department of Personnel and Training continues its
efforts to convince the remaining States for providing fixed minimum tenure for IAS officers.
COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
Recommendation/observation
4. The Committee appreciates this policy of the Ministry and recommends that the
Ministry should ensure that the policy of compassionate appointment is implemented in all
Ministries/ Departments in letter and spirit, as recommended by this Committee in its 23rd
Report on Government’s Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground. [Para 12.1]
Action Taken Reply
4.1 Once the Policy on compassionate appointment is laid down by this Department, it is
binding on all Ministries/Departments to follow the policy guidelines. There has been no report that
any particular Ministry/Department is not following the policy of compassionate appointment as
promulgated by this Department.
Committee’s further observation
4.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Government. The Committee would however, consider
the reply in the light of action taken reply to the Committee’s recommendations in its 23rd Report.
THE PUBLIC SERVICES BILL
Recommendation/observation
5. The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry and hopes that the
confidence of the public at large upon the administration would be bolstered once the Bill
is enacted and its provisions are enforced. It is optimistic that such a legislation would
ensure better implementation of popular policies of Government. [Para 13.1]
Action Taken Reply
5.1 The Draft Public Services Bill was circulated to all State Governments and Ministries/
Departments of the Government of India. The feedback received from them and also from other
autonomous organizations like Union Public Service Commission, Central Vigilance Commission,

15
Central Information Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General of India etc. were discussed in
two meetings, one with the Cadre Controlling Authorities of the Central Services and the other with
the State Governments on 25th and 30th April, 2007 respectively. Based on the consensus emerging
in these meetings, the Draft Public Services Bill was revised which was again considered by a
Group of Senior Officers in the Department of Personnel and Training. The interim comments
received from the Administrative Reforms Commission were also considered by the Group and the
Bill was further revised.
5.2 The Revised Draft Public Service Bill, duly approved by the Minister of State for Personnel,
has been sent to the Administrative Reforms Commission for its final comments/views, which are
still awaited. The Department is continuously in touch with the Commission to get its comments/
views expedited.
Committee’s further observation
5.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Government. It appreciates the efforts made by the
Department and hopes that the law will be enacted without further delay.
OBC V ACANCIES
Recommendation/observation
6. The Committee is pleased to note the action taken with regard to filling up of
vacancies of OBCs and would like to impress upon the Ministry that concrete steps should
be taken to implement the recommendations in the report of GOM and inform this
Committee of the outcome thereof. [Para 18.1]
Action Taken Reply
6.1 The Government has decided and issued instructions to all Ministries/Departments to treat
the backlog reserved vacancies of OBCs as a separate and distinct group the same way as the
backlog reserved vacancies of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are treated. As a result
of it, the backlog reserved vacancies of OBCs would not be considered together with the reserved
vacancies of the year in which they are filled for determining the ceiling of 50% reservation on
total number of vacancies of that year. This Department vide OM No.36033/1/2008-Estt.(Res.)
dated 15.7.2008 has emphasised that “If sufficient number of suitable SC/ST/OBC candidates do
not become available to fill up the vacancies reserved for them in the first attempt of recruitment,
a second attempt should be made for recruiting suitable candidates belonging to the concerned
category in the same recruitment year or as early as possible before the next recruitment year so
that the backlog reserved vacancies are not created. If, even after making such efforts, the
reserved vacancies are not filled and backlog reserved vacancies are carried forward to the
subsequent recruitment year, concerted efforts should be made to fill up the backlog reserved
vacancies as soon as possible”.
Committee’s further observation
6.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Government and would like to impress upon the
Ministry that efforts to fill up vacancies should be continued earnestly.
CAPACITY BUILDING AND AWARENESS GENERATION FOR RIGHT TO INFORMATION
AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACT
Recommendation/observation
7. The Committee appreciates the initiatives and commitment of the Ministry in this

16
regard. It would like to recommend that adequate publicity should be given to the RTI Act
and the guidelines be issued in this regard in the electronic and print media and more so
in regional newspapers, periodicals also so as to create awareness amongst all sections of
the society, media and civil society organisations at the regional, grassroot and panchayat
level. The Committee hopes that such efforts will give an impetus to the campaign for
access to information and will ensure greater participatory governance. At the same time,
the Committee desires that appropriate steps will be taken to minimize, rather eradicate
the chances of misuse of the provisions of the RTI Act, both at the general public and
Governmental levels. [Para 26.4]
Action Taken Reply
7.1 In order to facilitate the exercise of the rights given by the RTI Act by persons who wish
to do so, a ‘Guide for the Information Seekers’ has been published by the Government. At the
same time Guides have been issued for the Central Public Information Officers, the First Appellate
Authorities and the Public Authorities so as to facilitate them to implement the provisions of the
Act effectively. The State Administrations have been requested to translate the guidelines into local
languages and give them wide publicity. State Governments have also been requested to involve
NGOs in the awareness generation. Besides, the Government has issued OMs clarifying the
following issues:
(i) All the Ministries/Departments have been requested for appointment of CAPIOs vide
DOPT OM 34012/13(S)/2005-Estt.(B) dated 6th October, 2005.
(ii) All the Ministries/Departments have been requested vide DOPT OM dated
23rd March, 2007 to post the details of CPIOs on the website etc.
(iii) Instructions have been issued vide OM dated the 9th July, 2007 clarifying that the
function of the first appellate authorities is quasi-judicial in nature and that the
appellate should see to it that the justice is not only done but it also appears to have
been done. The OM further clarifies that the AA should pass speaking order giving
justifications for the decision arrived at.
(iv) All the Ministries/ Departments have been requested to prepare an exhaustive list of
public authorities under them and to upload the same on the RTI portal and to keep
it updated (OM dated 31st July, 2007).
(v) A clarification regarding discloser of the ACRs of any employee has been issued vide
OM dated 21st September, 2007.
(vi) All the Ministries/Departments etc. have been requested to comply with the
provisions contained in Section 4 of the Act, which relates to suo-motu discloser of
information (OM dated 21st September, 2007).
(vii) It has been clarified vide OM dated 31st October, 2007 that sub-section (3) of
section 8 does not require retention of records indefinitely.
(viii) All the public authorities have been advised to update their records, improve their
infrastructure and bring out necessary manual (OM dated 14th November, 2007).
(ix) All the Organizations specified in the Second Schedule of the Act have been advised
to designate CPIOs and first appellate authorities and publish the details thereof (OM
dated 14th November, 2007).
(x) All the public authorities having more than one PIO have been requested to create
a Central Point within the organization where all the RTI application and

17
appeals addressed to the first appellate authority may be received (OM dated
14th November, 2007).
(xi) All the public authorities should designate the first appellate authorities and
publish their particulars along with the particulars of the PIOs (OM dated
14th November, 2007).
(xii) A letter has been written to all the States/UTs on 9th January, 2008 requesting them
to involve the Non-Government Organizations working in their States to spread
awareness about the Act.
(xiii) Guidelines for the officers designated as Central Public Information Officer have
been issued (OM dated 27th February, 2008).
(xiv) Guidelines for the first appellate authorities have been issued (OM dated 25th April, 2008).
(xv) Guidelines for the public authorities have been issued (OM dated 25th April, 2008).
(xvi) Clarification has been issued regarding transfer of RTI applications which are the
subject matter of more than one public authority (OM dated 12th June, 2008).
(xvii) All the Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs have been informed about the best
practices initiated by the Government of Andhra Pradesh for effective implementation
of the RTI Act, 2005 (Letter dated 23rd June, 2008).
(xviii) All the public authorities were requested again to ensure suo-motu disclosure as
provided in the RTI Act and to remain courteous with the information seekers (OM
dated 24th June, 2008).
7.2 All the above Guidelines/OMs/Clarifications have been posted on the DOPT website.
Committee’s further observation
7.3 The Committee notes the reply of the Government. The Committee however, does not offer
any comments right now as the implementation of Right to Information Act is being separately
examined and will like to make appropriate recommendations in its report on that subject.
MANPOWER ISSUES IN THE DEPARTMENT  OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND
PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
Recommendation/observation
8. However, the Committee has been apprised that the personnel for this Department
are selected and appointed in the similar manner as in the various Departments of the
Government of India and that the Central Staffing Scheme under which officers of the level
of Deputy Secretary and above level are appointed, does not provide any flexibility for
selection of officers with aptitude for reforms. The Committee feels that this could be a
hindrance to the Department’s ability to offer considered advice to client Ministries. Also,
there is an imperative need to provide training to staff from various cadres on subjects such
as computers, governance, public policy and other soft skills like communication, leadership
and personality development. [Para 37.1]
Action Taken Reply
8.1 The Centralised PGRAMS was introduced in the Government of India in June, 2007. The
training programme on CPGRAMS was organized in DAR&PG for all the 89 Ministries/Department

18
in Government of India on 14th, 17th and 18th September, 2007. The Joint Secretaries/Directors
of Public Grievances requested DARPG for organizing functional training for the officials who
were handling public grievances in Ministries/Departments. Accordingly, the functional training
programme was organized on 10th, 24th and 25th July, 2008 wherein 91 officials attended the
training programme including NIC officials so that they can organize the training for their
subordinate organizations. Training programme on CPGRAMS was also organized for the zonal
Railways, Regional Passport officers, Grievance officers of the BSNL, Banking and Insurance
Sector officials at their premises. The DARPG is in constant touch with the Directors of Public
Grievances for installation of CPGRAMS in all the offices of Government of India to ensure speedy
and effective handling of public grievances so that grievances are redressed promptly.
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Government and wishes that CPGRAMS should be
installed in all Ministries/Departments.
Recommendation/observation
9. Taking the above mentioned facts into consideration, the Committee is of the
considered view that since the permanent staff with the Government may not have the
requisite expertise to deal with an environment which is undergoing constant mutation, it
is inevitable that assistance of experts and expert organizations are made available to this
Department. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibilities
of appointing specialists/consultants/experts for specific assignments in this Department on
fixed tenures. It feels that such a step would help to tap the vast reservoir of talent that
exists in the country and which could be harnessed for the public good. [Para 37.2]
Action Taken Reply
9.1 The recommendation has been noted for compliance and it would be kept in mind as and
when the need for appointment of the consultants would arise. The Department is already alive to
the need of engaging specialists/consultants/experts for specific assignments on fixed tenures in
order to tap the vast reservoir of talent that exists in the country. e.g. The Department is presently
working with number of consultant organizations who are providing expert advice in various
initiatives. Centre for Good Governance, Hyderabad along with ORG-AC Nielsen are the consultants
for the initiative for creating a framework for State of Governance Report. National Institute of
Administrative Research which is attached with Lal Bahadur Shastri Academy of Administration is
assisting the Department in prescribing a Social Accountability model for various programmes.
M/s Ernst and Young have been appointed as consultants for suggesting an internal control
framework for Government organizations. Further, the Department has also engaged Indian Institute
of Public Administration/Tata Consultancy Services Ltd./Price Water House Coopers Pvt. Ltd. for
some other projects.
9.2 In addition to this, the Department has also engaged some more Consultants/institutes for
certain specific Programmes as per details given below:
Programme
Consultant/Institute
State of Governance Report
Centre for Good Governance, Hyderabad
Functional and Strategic Review
JPS Associates, New Delhi

19
Governance Knowledge Centre
Centre for Law and Governance, Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi
Collaboration with States National Institute for Administrative Research (NIAR), New Delhi
RTI
Pricewaterhouse Coopers (PwC)
Study Tours (Domestic)
(a) Administrative Training Institute (ATI), Mysore
(b) Dr. M.C.R.H.R.D. Institute of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad
(c) Academy of Development Administration (Y ASHADA), Pune
Study Tours (International)
(a) Public Administration International (PAI), London, U.K.
(b) Commonwealth Association for Public Administrati on and Management (CAPAM),
Canada
(c) Australian Public Service Commission (APSC), Australia e-office Mission Mode Project
National Institute for Smart Government (NISG)
Recommendation/observation
10. The Committee recommends that in the event of the vacancies not being filled up
due to non-availability of officers on deputation inspite of granting such incentives, steps
should be taken to fill up those vacancies by seeking recruitment from the permanent cadre
of CBI. [Para 39.6]
Action Taken Reply
10.1 As stated in the para 39.4 above the promotion quota has already been increased by
amending the respective RRs for the posts of Sr. P.P. and Addl. S.P.
Committee’s further observation
10.2 The Committee is constrained to note that the replies to para nos. 39.3, 39.4 and 39.6
do not address the concern the Committee expressed in its recommendation. The concern of the
Committee was that the vacancy position in CBI is considerable and the Ministry, the CBI and
the UPSC have not been able to fill up the vacancies expeditiously. There have been delays in
filling up the vacancies and the Committee’s sole intention was how soon these vacancies were
filled up. The Ministry, in their reply, has stated that they have decided to amend the
recruitment rules for the post of Senior PP , Additional SP and Deputy SP so as to increase the
promotion/DR quota, while decreasing the deputation quota correspondingly. But, it has not
come forward with the statement regarding how much time they will take in filling up those
vacancies. The Committee would like to have a detailed status note from the Ministry while
furnishing their Action Taken Note on this report.
BUDGETARY CONCERNS OF CBI
Recommendation/observation
11. The Committee also recommends that proper mechanism should be put in place to
ensure that 33% of the work force in CBI constitutes women. [Para 42.3]

20
Action Taken Reply
11.1 The Reservation Policy of the Government does not provide for any reservation of women
employees in appointments.
STRATEGY FOR TRAINING
Recommendation/observation
12. The Committee is of the view that the training curricula for the All India Services
Probationers should be designed in such a way that team building, responsive
administration, sensitisation to problems and need of the people; right and positive attitude
are inculcated in them and they are equipped to discharge their responsibilities in a humane
way by according top priority to the welfare of the people and to the sentiments of people’s
representatives. [Para 44.1]
Action Taken Reply
12.1 The training syllabus and programme content, both for the IAS Professional Course as well
as the Mid Career Training Programme, have a heavy focus on vulnerable groups including SC/
ST, women, physically challenged etc. This training is reinforced by field visits, conduct of
participatory learning and action research at the grassroots level in the villages. As an illustration,
in last 2-3 years the following issues have been covered in depth for the Foundation Course as
well as the IAS Professional Course;
1. Special Modules on rights of the Weaker Sections, minorities and the differently abled.
2. Special Module on Participatory Learning and action at the grass-root level in the
villages.
3. Environmental Impact and Global Warming Issues.
4. Issues related to National Security
5. Modern Management Practices
6. Team Building
7. Negotiation Skills etc.
12.2 In addition, there are special modules to deal with urban poverty and slum rehabilitation,
urban management and municipal issues, e-Governance etc. The Probationers are also encouraged
to provide leadership from the very beginning of the Career.
Recommendation/observation
13. The Committee strongly feels that the bureaucrats, and especially the Civil Servants
should be sensitized to the needs of the people in this era of transition from the level of
Government Servant to the people’s servant. They should be groomed in such a way that
they not only implement but also involve themselves in the formulation of the policies and
plans. Moreover, they should be able to respond to the aspirations and needs of the general
public and fulfill them by maximum utilization of resources at hand. [Para 44.2]
Action Taken Reply
13.1 Administrative accountability underpinning the need to be more accessable, accountable and
transparent is the focus area which is common to all the training programmes for civil servants

21
conducted at the Academy. In the course of district training also the officer trainees take
assignments which involve close interaction with the people enabling them to involve themselves
in policy appraisal and also understand the aspirations and expectations of people. The Academy
impresses upon them the need to see themselves as change agents and facilitators.
Committee’s further observation
13.2 It seems the field level training in villages for All India Services are reduced which has
to be reviewed and enhanced.
Recommendation/observation
14. The Committee is happy to note that the Academy has been transformed into a
Wi-Fi campus and that the Academy is uploading their training material onto a common site
so that the material is available to all the training institutes. It also acknowledges the steps
taken by the Academy to provide on-line administrative training through which the training
undergone by each trainee is monitored on-line. The Committee hopes that such initiatives
would create tremendous synergy among the institutes and ensure transparency. It
recommends that adequate funds and infrastructural support should be given to the
Academy to maintain international standards and to transform it into an international
centre of excellence. [Para 44.6]
Action Taken Reply
14.1 It is stated that two schemes for (i) setting up of a National Cenre for good governance
at an outlay of Rs. 43 crores and (ii) improvement of infrastructure and upgradation of essential
facilities for upgradation to a centre of excellence at a total outlay of Rs.108 crores, have been
approved by the Planning Commission under 11th Five Year Plan. In B.E. 2008-09 an amount of
Rs.6 crores and Rs.21 crores have been allocated for the above two schemes respectively.
Recommendation/observation
15. At the same time, the Committee recommends that a system of ascertaining the
results of the various training programmes should be devised in order to tab the impact of
the training. The Committee is of the opinion that training should concentrate on the
principles of transparency (RTI Act) and how to handle an irate citizen and how to discover
the real reason behind the complaint (by applying the Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism) and solve the problem, rather than to allow or pass on the buck to the Courts
and to understand that “time” is the essence of management of service and delivery
system. [Para 44.7]
Action Taken Reply
15.1 It is stated that the concurrent feedback, while the course is in progress, is now an
established practice at the Academy. Coupled with Training Needs Assessment, this enables the
Academy to understand the requirement of their trainee base and tailor the training programmes
accordingly.
15.2 Princip les of transparency with special reference to RTI Act already finds a prominent place
in the Academy’s curriculum.
15.3 The advice of the Committee to teach the application of Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism has been noted by the Academy for implementation in future programmes.

22
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
16. The Committee takes serious note of the enormous wastage of time between
advertising vacancies and declaring results, and recommends that the UPSC should consider
the viability of conducting examinations in the format adopted in Graduate Management
Admission Test (GMAT), IIT and IIM. The Committee is of the view that this would prevent
wastage of resources and time and would ensure transparency and instill greater confidence
of the candidates in the examination system. [Para 46.3]
Action Taken Reply
16.1 The UPSC is a constitutional body and clause (i) of Article 320 of the Constitution has
mandated that it shall be the duty of the UPSC to conduct examination for various appointments
to the services of the Union. The fathers of the Constitution realized that the democratic system
could be maintained only if the civil servants are appointed solely on the basis of merit by open
competition. The values of independence, impartiality and integrity are the basic determinants of the
constitutional conception of the UPSC. The UPSC has to keep in view the various provisions of
the Constitution in regard to the fundamental rights of the citizens for consideration to
appointments to the Public Services. Whereas the purpose of entrance examinations like GMAT/CAT
for management course and IIT for technical education is to assess the nature of the knowledge
held by the candidates on particular subjects and their aptitude for the intended academy courses,
in the case of recruitment to public services, the merit cannot be simply concluded on the basis
of the procedure adopted for the GMAT etc. The Commission has to test not only the academic
worth of a candidate on a subject but also his potential for Civil/Public Services and his personality
with reference to his familiarity with important national/international issues vis-a-vis natural
disposition in forming his opinion on such issues. However, the Commission after studying the
processes of induction of candidates like CAT, GMAT, JEE etc. has sent a proposal to the
Government for doing away with the optional subject papers in the scheme of Civil Services
Aptitude Test in line with the scheme of CAT, GMAT, JEE etc. which also do not have optional
subject paper. The test booklets would be printed in English and Hindi only as in the case of CAT,
GMAT, JEE etc. The proposal is under examination of the Government.
16.2 The UPSC has been trying to ensure maximum transparency in its working except in the
core areas of examination like preparing the test paper and the evaluation of the answer scripts.
Even the Central Information Commission has held that a citizen cannot seek disclosure of
evaluated answer sheet under RTI Act, 2005. The UPSC has been regularly studying its various
systems and procedures and making continuous efforts to reduce the time limit for the various
processes as far as feasible. Doing away with the optional subject paper and introduction of a
single objective type Civil Services Aptitude Test (CSAT) in the Preliminary Examination will also
cut down the time taken in the Civil Services Examination.
Committee’s further observation
16.3 The Committee is happy to note that the UPSC has sent a proposal to the Government,
in line with the scheme of CAT, GMAT, JEE etc. The Committee hopes that the UPSC will
continue its endeavour to cut down the time taken in the Civil Services Examination.
Recommendation/observation
17. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to consider this submission in the right
earnest and explore the possibilities of implementing the same, in a time bound manner.

23
The Committee is presently making an in-depth study on this aspect for separate Report.
[Para 46.5]
Action Taken Reply
17.1 It appears, the position has not been correctly recorded in the Report of the Committee.
The UPSC had written to the Secretary General, Rajya Sabha Secretariat in its letter No.8/6/2008-
S-II dated 9th May, 2008 that the Commission had duly corrected the record of the oral evidence
tendered by the Secretary, UPSC on 25.03.2008 as under:-
17.2 “Thirdly, Sir, if I may submit, in the UPSC also, there are to be 10 Members, but we are
having only 8. If there were two more Members, perhaps some fast action could have been taken
in selection.”
17.3 The two vacancies existing at that time have since been filled up by the Government.
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
18. In view of the above, the Committee desires that the Ministry should explore the
possibilities of holding the preliminary examinations in regional languages also, by setting
the question papers in regional languages. [Para 47.12]
Action Taken Reply
18.1 The Commission has already explored this possibility way back in 2005. However, due to
the difficulties involved in preparing objective multiple choice question (about 200 nos.) paper in
different component in different languages and its bulk printing and despatch and evaluation of
answer sheets that would further delay the selection process, it was considered at the highest level
in the Government (PMO), and was decided to set the Objective type question paper bilingually i.e.,
both Hindi and English and the Descriptive Paper in General Studies and Arithmetic in English or
any of the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution. No further change in
the examination system is possible at this stage.
18.2 A fter the introduction of revised scheme of examination with the approval DOPT and the
PMO, Commission has conducted only one examination i.e. , Combined Matric Level Main
Examination, 2006. The performance of the new system has to be evaluated for some time before
considering further changes.
SOME AREAS OF CONCERN HIGHLIGHTED IN THE ANNUAL REPORT OF CVC
Recommendation/observation
19. The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to consider these issues
which are very important for the effective working of the Commission in checking
corruption in Ministries/Departments and maintaining probity and integrity in
administration. [Para 51.8]
Action Taken Reply
19.1 As regards the Commission’s view that due to shortage of staff, it could not mount a media
campaign as a result of which the number of complaints under “Public Interest Disclosure and
Protection of Informers (PIDPI)” Resolution have come down, creation of 6 posts of officers
(Deputy Secretary/Director) has been recently approved.

24
Committee’s further observation
19.2 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry in this regard. It hopes
that approval of creation of 6 posts of officers shall ensure that the media campaign will not
suffer due to shortage of staff.
CERTAIN ISSUES HIGHLIGHTED IN THE ANNUAL REPORT OF CIC
Recommendation/observation
20. The Committee discussed about the interpretation of Section 2(h) of the RTI Act i.e.
definition of Public Authority wherein sub clause (a) is very clear that all the constitutional
authorities come under the definition of public authority. This Committee had examined in
detail every clause of RTI Bill, 2004 which was referred to it for consideration and report.
It is conscious of the fact that all the three wings of State—executive, legislature and
judiciary—are fully covered under this Act, since all organs of the State are accountable to
the citizens of India in a democratic State. It is more so since the judiciary is having dual
role as (i) administrative function; and (ii) judicial decision making. Except the judicial
decision making, all other activities of administration and the persons included in it are
subject to RTI Act. This is the pith and substance of this enactment. This Committee is also
conscious of all the amendments proposed by this Committee which were also accepted by
the executive and Parliament. [Para 53.1]
20.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should address the issues highlighted
above and take necessary steps to ensure that the fruits of the RTI Act, which is a historic
piece of legislation, are enjoyed by the public. [Para 53.2]
Action Taken Reply
20.2 As regards paras 53.1 and 53.2, it is stated that the Act itself makes it clear that the
executive, the legislature and the judiciary are covered by the Act.
Recommendation/observation
21. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. It notes that accurate data has not been
furnished by the Ministry. It wishes to be apprised of the latest data. It also recommends that
time bound steps should be taken to fill the vacancies so that the pending cases could be
cleared to avoid one another institution suffering due to backlog of cases. [Para 53.4]
Action Taken Reply
21.1 The number of posts in the Central Information Commission excluding the post of Central
Information Commissioner and the Information Commissioners are as under:—
Sl. No. Name of the post Pay scale No. of posts
12 3 4
1. Secretary Rs.26,000/- 1
2. Joint Secretary Rs.18400-500-22400/- 1
3. Registrar Rs.18400-500-22400/- 1
4. Director and Jt. Registrar Rs.14300-400-18300/- 3

25
12 3 4
5. Deputy Secretar y 12000-375-16500 1
6. Senior Principal Private 12000-375-16500 10
Secretary
7. Under Secretary Rs.10000-325-15200/- 5
8. Principal Private Secretary Rs.10000-325-15200/- 1
9. Court Master Rs.8000-13500/- 10
10. OSD Protocol Rs.8000-13500/- 1
11. Section Officer Rs.6500-200-105004 2
12. Private Secretary Rs.6500-200-10500 4
13. Personal Assistant Rs.6500-200-10500 14
14. Assistant Rs.6500-200-10500 14
15. Librarian Rs.6500-200-10500 1
16. Translator Rs.5500-175-9000/- 2
17. Stenographer Grade ‘D’ Rs.4000-100-6000/- 10
18. Upper Division Clerk/ Rs.4000-100-6000/- 2
Lower Division Clerk Rs.3050-75-3950-80-4590/-
19. Senior Peon Rs.2610-4000/- 1
20. Peon Rs.2550-3200/- 8
21. Driver Rs.3050-75-3950-80-4590/- 5
22. Data Entry Operator Rs.4000-100-6000/- 10
T
OTAL:1 0 7
21.2 While some of the above posts like that of Joint Secretary, Director, Deputy Secretary,
Under Secretary and Section Officer etc. have already been filled up, some of the others like
Registrar, Court Master, Data Entry Operator etc. are to be filled up by the Commission after
formulation of Recruitment Rules for these posts. It is also being considered to encadre the posts
listed at Sl. Nos. 7, 8, 10 to 18 above into CSS, CSSS and CSCS cadres.
Committee’s further observation
21.3 The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Recruitment Rules for the posts of
Registrar, Court Master, Data Entry Operator etc. should be formulated without delay and the
vacancies be filled up on an urgent basis.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
DEMAND NO. 78
Recommendation/observation
22 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Government to hasten the
services delivery system of the three Departments of the Ministry by way of doubling the

26
provision for Information Technology and equipping its officers with latest and fastest
computers and accessories. It, therefore, would appreciate to be apprised of the status of
computerization of these offices and utilization of the funds at the time of giving Action
Taken Replies. [Para 5.17]
Action Taken Reply
22.1. At present 21 computers have been provided to the officers of the rank of Deputy
Secretary and above. At the level of Under Secretary and below, we have provided 57 computers.
Out of which about 50 computers need replacement and around 7 computers need upgradation.
In addition, we also need to buy 10 more computers in order to provide computers to all the staff.
Hence, 60 new computers need to be purchased.
22.2. This Department has been provided with an amount of Rs.5 lakh for IT during the year
2008-09. The budget for current year is inadequate to purchase 60 new computers. However this
will be fully utilized during the year 2008-09.
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
23. The Committee recommends that the concerned Ministries/Departments should be
impressed upon to implement the accepted recommendations and the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances should monitor the progress made in this
regard. [Para 30.1]
Action Taken Reply
23.1 As recommended by the Committee, the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances is already monitoring the progress of the implementation of the recommendations of the
ARC accepted by the Group of Ministers (GoM). The implementation by Ministries/Departments in
this regard is being regularly monitored.
SEVOTTAM
Recommendation/observation
24. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry in this regard and
is of the opinion that it needs time bound implementation. [Para 33.1]
Action Taken Reply
24.1 Accepted.
24.2 Department is monitoring the progress of the implementation of Sevottam model in the ten
Ministries/Departments where it is being piloted. It is submitted that within the financial and
manpower constraints, the Ministries/Departments will make all efforts to introduce Sevottam in a
time bound manner.
MANPOWER ISSUES IN THE DEPARTMENT  OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
Recommendation/observation
25. However, the Committee has been apprised that the personnel for this Department
are selected and appointed in the similar manner as in the various Departments of the

27
Government of India and that the Central Staffing Scheme under which officers of the level
of Deputy Secretary and above level are appointed does not provide any flexibility for
selection of officers with aptitude for reforms. The Committee feels that this could be a
hindrance to the Department’s ability to offer considered advice to client Ministries. Also,
there is an imperative need to provide training to staff from various cadres on subjects such
as computers, governance, public policy and other soft skills like communication, leadership
and personality development. [Para 37.1]
Action Taken Reply
25.1 In so far as the appointment of “officers with aptitude for reforms” is concerned, this has
to be implemented by DoPT.
25.2 The Centralised PGRAMS was introduced in the Government of India in June, 2007. The
training programme on CPGRAMS was organized in DAR&PG for all the 89 Ministries/Department
in Government of India on 14th, 17th and 18th September, 2007. The Joint Secretaries/Directors
of public Grievances requested DARPG for organizing functional training for the officials who were
handling public grievances in Ministries/Departments. Accordingly, the functional training
programme was organized on 10th, 24th and 25th July, 2008 wherein 91 officials attended the
training programme including NIC officials so that they can organize the training for their
subordinate organizations. Training programme on CPGRAMS was also organized for the zonal
Railways, Regional Passport officers, Grievance officers of the BSNL, Banking and Insurance
Sector officials at their premises. The DARPG is in constant touch with the Directors of Public
Grievances for installation of CPGRAMS in all the offices of Government of India to ensure speedy
and effective handling of public grievances so that grievances are redressed promptly.
Recommendation/observation
26. Taking the above mentioned facts into consideration, the Committee is of the
considered view that since the permanent staff with the Government may not have the
requisite expertise to deal with an environment which is undergoing constant mutation, it
is inevitable that assistance of experts and expert organizations are made available to this
Department. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibilities
of appointing specialists/consultants/experts for specific assignments in this Department on
fixed tenures. It feels that such a step would help to tap the vast reservoir of talent that
exists in the country and which could be harnessed for the public good. [Para 37.2]
Action Taken Reply
26.1 The recommendation has been noted for compliance and it would be kept in mind as and
when the need for appointment of the consultants would arise. The Department is already alive to
the need of engaging specialists/consultants/experts for specific assignments on fixed tenures in
order to tap the vast reservoir of talent that exists in the country. e.g. The Department is presently
working with number of consultant organizations who are providing expert advice in various
initiatives. Centre for Good Governance, Hyderabad alongwith ORG-AC Nielsen are the consultants
for the initiative for creating a framework for State of Governance Report. National Institute of
Administrative Research which is attached with Lal Bahadur Shastri Academy of Administration is
assisting the Department in prescribing a Social Accountability model for various programmes.
M/s Ernst and Young have been appointed as consultants for suggesting an internal control
framework for Government organizations. Further, the Department has also engaged Indian Institute
of Public Administration/Tata Consultancy Services Ltd./Price Water House Coopers Pvt. Ltd. for
some other projects.

28
26.2 In addition to this, the Department has also engaged some more Consultants/institutes for
certain specific Programmes as per details given below:
Programme Consultant/Institute
State of Governance Report Centre for Good Governance, Hyderabad
Functional and Strategic Review JPS Associates, New Delhi.
Governance Knowledge Centre Centre for Law and Governance, Jawaharlal
Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi
Collaboration with States National Institute for Administrative Research
(NIAR), New Delhi
RTI pricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC)
Study Tours (Domestic) (a) Administrative Training Institute (ATI),
Mysore
(b) Dr. M.C.R.H.R.D. Institute of Andhra
Pradesh, Hyderabad
(c) Yashwant Rao Chahvan Academy of
Development Administration (Y ASHADA),
Pune.
Study Tours (International) (a) Public Administration International (PAI),
London, UK.
(b) Commonwealth Association for Public
Administration and Management (CAPAM),
Canada.
(c) Australian Public Service Commission
(APSC), Australia.
e-office Mission Mode Project National Institute for Smart Government (NISG).

29
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
DEMAND NO. 78
Recommendation/observation
1. As regards the proposed new Plan Outlay for the ‘Propagation of Right to
Information Act’, the Committee notes with disappointment that a meager amount of Rs.10
crore which is less than half expected of the annual liability of the Ministry of Rs.21 crore
has been approved by the Planning Commission. The Committee understands that the
beginning of every fresh Plan requires a greater chunk of the proposed expenditure.
Furthermore, the effective and immediate pr opagation of Right to Information Act is the
urgent need of the hour and the Government should take all out efforts to implement the
proposed scheme at the shortest time possible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
enhancement of this outlay may be proposed by the Ministry to enhance this allocation at
least upto 75% of the annual liability of the Ministry in the form of Supplementary Grant
in order to enable work in this direction in earnest. [Para 5.16]
Action Taken Reply
1.1 Allocations under the four initiatives namely, strengthening of SICs; Capacity Building of
SICs and RTI division DoPT, Training of Stakeholders, Awareness Generation, Educational
Programmes have been proposed in the centrally sponsored scheme on strengthening, capacity
building and awareness generation for effective implementation of the RTI Act, 2005.
Committee’s further observation
1.2 The Committee notes that in their reply, the Ministry has not agreed to enhance the
allocation as suggested by the Committee. The Ministry should have categorically stated as to what
they are doing with respect to enhancement of allocation. The Committee therefore, impresses
upon the Ministry to consider enhancement while finalizing the Demands for Grants (2009-10).
CADRE STRENGTH OF IAS
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee notes that as on 1st January, 2008 the authorized cadre strength of
IAS officers is 5460 whereas the number of officers in position is 4761. On the other hand,
the Committee understands that many IAS officers are either opting for voluntary retirement
or resigning, as a result of which there is crunch of IAS officers in many States. [Para 10]
2.1 The Committee is perturbed to note the vacancies prevailing in this cadre. Since civil
servants form the permanent structure and backbone of administration and are involved in
mooting innovative ideas and projects, vacancies in this cadre will certainly hamper
29

30
administrative efficiency. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that all
out efforts should be made by the Ministry to ensure that the vacancies in this cadre are
filled timely and show the nil report. Moreover, the principle of reduction of number of
officers/posts should not be applied in the present context. [Para 10.1]
Action Taken Reply
2.2 The size of intake for the CSE in the year 2007 is 111. Out of this, one is carry forward
vacancy. From the year 2008 onwards, there would be an increase of 10 vacancies on 110
(excluding 1 carry forward vacancy). The increase of 10 vacancies per year is for next five years,
2008 being the first year.
2.3 As per IAS (Recruitment) Rules, 1954, 33 % posts of the sanctioned posts comprising
Senior duty posts, Central Deputation Reserve, State Deputation Reserve and Transfer Reserve are
filled up by way of promotion/Selection of State Civil Service Officers/non-State Civil Service
Officers. The process starts with determination of number of vacancies in promotion quota by this
department in consultation with the respective State Governments. The State-wise vacancies for the
Select List Year 2008 have been determined and State Governments have been requested to send
requisite proposals to UPSC. The UPSC has been requested to convene Selection Committee
meetings for the purpose. Every possible step has been taken to ensure that the meetings for each
State/cadre are held every year and mostly the meetings are held. But in some States due to
litigation, proceedings are stayed by CAT/High Courts preventing holding of Selection Committee
meetings. In such cases, this Department has instructed the respective Central Government Counsel
to move the Courts for early hearing of cases pending before them.
Committee’s further observation
2.4 The Committee is constrained to note that if this trend continues, the positions
particularly those to be filled up by officers from State Civil Services are not likely to be filled
up in the near future. The Committee desires that the Department of Personnel and Training,
in consultation with UPSC, will take up the matter with the State Governments to find a way
out so that litigation is avoided and issues are settled out of Court.
SOCIAL CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY I.E., IMPLEMENT ATION OF RESERV ATION
POLICY AND SPECIAL RECRUITMENT DRIVE FOR SCs/STs/OBCs/PH
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee fails to understand why only 87.84% of vacancies could have been
filled up so far. The Committee observes that it is a Constitutional obligation and that
Ministries/Departments should take up the issue on top priority basis. The Committee holds
the view that unless the backlog is nil, the tall claims of benefits of reservation reaching
out to the beneficiaries will remain unfulfilled. It strongly feels that administrative lapses/
lackadaisical attitude should not be the reason for the closing doors of appointment on the
entitled classes. The Committee recommends that the Ministries/Departments should
comprehend the gravity of the situation and take affirmative action in this regard. The
Secretary, DoPT should supervise the filling up of backlog vacancies of SCs, STs, OBCs and
PH annually. If possible, he should take up the matter with his counterparts and report to
the Government. [Para 17.3]
Action Taken Reply
3.1 This Department has been trying to ensure that all the reserved vacancies are filled by the
reserved category candidates in the initial year of recruitment itself. This Department has been

31
emphasising that all out efforts should be made to ensure that backlog of vacancies are not created.
In this regard, instructions were issued to all the Ministries/Departments vide O.M. No.36033/2/
2006-Estt. (Res.) dated 12/10/2007 to the effect that earnest efforts should be made to fill up the
reserved vacancies in the initial year of recruitment itself so that there may not be any chance of
reserved vacancies remaining vacant and creation of backlog reserved vacancies. Instructions have
once again been issued vide this Department O.M. No.36033/1/2008-Estt. (Res.) dated 15.7.2008
emphasising the same point as follows:
3.2 “If sufficient number of suitable SC/ST/OBC candidates do not become available to fill up
the vacancies reserved for them in the first attempt of recruitment, second attempt should be made
for recruiting suitable candidates belonging to the concerned category in the same recruitment year
or as early as possible before the next recruitment year so that the backlog reserved vacancies are
not created. If, even after making such efforts, the reserved vacancies are not filled and backlog
reserved vacancies are carried forward to the subsequent recruitment year, concerted efforts should
be made to fill up the backlog reserved vacancies as soon as possible.
3.3 A Special Recruitment Drive was launched in August, 2004 to fill up the backlog reserved
vacancies of SCs and STs. As per information received from various Ministries/Departments, a total
of 62,642 backlog vacancies of SCs and STs which could be filled up were identified in the
Ministries/Departments and their attached offices and autonomous bodies. Out of these, 56,169
vacancies have been filled. Efforts are still on to fill up the remaining vacancies.
Recommendation/observation
4. The Committee feels that due to proper implementation of reservation policy in
education, large number of citizens in the reserved classes are eligible for Government jobs.
It is an irony that when they are well educated and competent for Government jobs, doors
are closed on them for unknown reasons. The Committee recommends that the road-blocks
in the proper implementation of reservation policy should be examined threadbare and
measures should be taken on war footing to remove the hurdles. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to take all possible steps to indulge co-operation of all Ministries/
Departments, in this regard, expeditiously. [Para 17.4]
Action Taken Reply
4.1 In order to ensure that posts reserved for SCs/STs/OBCs are filled by SC/ST/OBC candidates
only, various relaxations are given to candidates belonging to those categories. For example, relaxation
of 5 years in upper age limit, exemption from payment of examination/application fees, relaxation in
qualification of experience at the discretion of the UPSC/competent authority, relaxations in standard
of suitability etc. are given to SC/ST candidates in case of direct recruitment. OBCs get a relaxation
of three years in the upper age limit. There is a ban on dereservation of reserved posts in case of
direct recruitment. In case of promotion, zone of consideration is extended upto five times the
number of vacancies in case suitable SC/ST candidates are not available within the normal zone of
consideration for filling up reserved vacancies, minimum qualifying marks/standards of evaluations are
relaxable, upper age limit is relaxable by 5 years where upper age limit for promotion is prescribed
not more than 50 years. Ceiling of 50% on filling up of reserved vacancies does not apply to the
backlog reserved vacancies of earlier years which are treated as a separate and distinct group and
are not subject to any ceiling.
4.2 The Department of Personnel and Training by O.M. No.36038/1/2004-Ess.(Res.) dated
9.11.2004 re-emphasized that all the Ministries/Departments should make all out efforts to complete
the reservation quota while filling up the current vacancies so that there is no occasion for the
creation of backlog vacancies and reservation quota remains complete at all times.

32
4.3 In order to ensure that backlog vacancies are not created, the DoP&T had issued
instructions that where sufficient number of candidates belonging to SC/ST/OBC do not become
available to fill up the vacancies reserved for them in the first attempt of recruitment, a second
attempt should be made for recruiting suitable candidates belonging to the concerned categories in
the same recruitment year or as far as possible before the next recruitment year to fill up such
vacancies. These instructions have been reiterated by the DoP&T on 12.10.2007 and again on
15.7.2008.
Recommendation/observation
5. The Committee desires that it should be informed of the latest steps taken in this
regard, particularly the steps taken for monitoring the problem of backlog and clearing the
same by respective Ministries, Departments, Public Sector Enterprises and other
Organisations of the Central Government. [Para 17.5]
Action Taken Reply
5.1 The instructions issued by the DoP&T provide that the concerned authorities should initiate
action to fill up the existing as well as anticipated vacancies well in advance. The DoP&T by O.M.
No.22011/9/98-Estt.(D) dated 8.9.1998 has suggested a model calendar for filling up the existing
as well as anticipated vacancies.
5.2 A Special Recruitment Drive was launched in August, 2004 to fill up the backlog reserved
vacancies of SCs and STs. Various Ministries/Departments identified a total of 62,642 backlog
vacancies of SCs and STs which could be filled up. Out of these, 56,169 vacancies have been
filled up. The DoP&T issued instructions to all Ministries/Departments etc. by O.M. No.36033/2/
2006-Estt. (Res.) dated 12/10/2007 that earnest efforts should be made to fill up the reserved
vacancies in the initial year of recruitment itself so that there would hardly be any chance of
reserved vacancies remaining vacant and creation of backlog reserved vacancies. Similar
instructions have been issued on 15.7.2008 once again.
Committee’s further observation
5.3 The Committee takes note of the replies to para nos. 17.3 to 17.5 furnished by the
Department of Personnel and Training. The Committee, however feels that the existing
mechanism i.e. launching special drive time to time has not proved effective enough to clear
the backlog. The reply, also, does not mention about any new concrete mechanism which has
been/is proposed to be evolved for clearing the backlog in the light of Committee’s
recommendations.
5.4 While interacting with various Governmental organizations/banks and PSUs, the Committee
felt that much desires to be done to fill up the backlog of reserved vacancies. The Committee is
of the opinion that the DoPT should persuade Ministries/Departments/Organisations to take zealous
steps to fulfil this Constitutional obligation.
CAPACITY BUILDING AND AWARENESS GENERATION FOR RIGHT TO INFORMATION
AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACT
Recommendation/observation
6. The Committee opines that the application under RTI Act should not be rejected for
non payment of fee at the initial stage and then incur expenditure for defending cases in
High Courts. Instead the applications should be entertained and the fee may be added at
the time of receiving the information in such cases. [Para 26.5]

33
Action Taken Reply
6.1 The RTI Act does not put a bar on consideration of requests received from any
person otherwise than under the Act. Such requests are replied to by the Public Authorities
in normal course. However, if an application under the RTI Act, is not accompanied with
the requisite fee, it, accordingly to the provisions of the Act, is invalid application. It is felt
that for smooth functioning of a law, provisions of the law should not be allowed to be ignored
by any party.
Committee’s further observation
6.2 The Committee is not convinced by the reply given by the Department of Personnel and
Training to the Committee’s recommendation and feels that it is against the very spirit of the
Right to Information Act, 2005 itself which calls for proactive dissemination of information. The
Act does not provide for payment of fee at the initial stage. It provides for the cost of payment
towards the procurement of printed copies or information in electronic format. The provision of
Rs.l0/- as fee for first entertaining the application has been provided in the Rules made by the
Government. Therefore, in the opinion of the Committee, treating an application “invalid” on
the basis of Rules, is not justified.
6.3 The Committee’s recommendation is based on its experience/input received while
interacting with various Governmental bodies/PSUs/Banks. The Committee came across cases
where the application was rejected mainly for not paying Rs.l0/-. Later on, when such denial
was taken up at the level of Central Information Commission or High Court, considerable
money was spent by the organizations/Government Department to defend themselves. The
Committee feels that the wastage of money and time could have been avoided had the
information been duly supplied or the application not been rejected.
6.4 The Committee, therefore, takes strong exception to the reply of the Department of
Personnel and Training and feels that their reply appears to be based on the Rules and not the
Act. The Committee, therefore, observes that if a rule/instruction/order goes against the spirit of
the Act, it may accordingly be quashed or amended.
6.5 The Committee feels it important to clarify that in its recommendation, it is nowhere
suggested that the cost of printed and electronically formatted information may not be recovered
as it has been provided in the Act. The Committee is against the rejection of an application
under RTI merely on non-payment of Rs.10/-.
NOMINATION OF SC/ST  OFFICER IN SELECTION BOARD
Recommendation/observation
7. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should address this issue on priority
basis to ensure that whenever there is a Selection Board, there should be one person each
from SC/ST/OBC and from minority group. [Para 36.2]
Action Taken Reply
7.1 Instructions already exist that wherever a Selection Committee/ Board exists or has to be
constituted for making recruitment to 10 or more vacancies in Group C or D posts/services, the
Committee/Board should have one member belonging to SC/ST and one member belonging to
minority community.

34
Committee’s further observation
7.2 The reply of the Government does not refer to OBC representation. This may be clarified
in the ATN. If it is not already provided, the details of action taken in this regard may be
furnished.
V ACANCIES IN CBI
Recommendation/observation
8. The Committee recommends that the proposal should be considered expeditiously so
that the professional efficiency of CBI does not suffer due to vacancies not being filled up.
[Para 39.8]
Action Taken Reply
8.1 The proposal is under consideration of the Government.
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee notes that the proposal of CBI to exempt them from the request of prior
approval of Screening Committee for filling of direct vacancies, is under consideration of the
Government. The Committee further notes that the proposal is under consideration of the
Government for a considerably long time and the Committee, in its previous Reports on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions had
recommended that the proposal should be considered expeditiously. The Committee fails to
understand why the proposal is kept pending for so long. The Committee feels that it is one of
the major reasons for hampering the professional efficiency of CBI; it is but imperative that the
proposal should be given urgent consideration. The Committee wishes to be apprised of the
action taken in this regard in the ATN.
SEPARATE ENACTMENT FOR CBI
Recommendation/observation
9. The Committee, however, fails to agree and strongly feels that the absence of a
separate statute for CBI is a major hindrance for effective functioning of the organisation.
It observes that if we aspire CBI to transform into an organisation of international
standards, an effective statutory support is inevitable. The Committee, has time and again,
felt the necessity for a separate enactment for CBI. It is of the opinion that the
Constitution of India itself envisages the same, as has been observed by this Committee in
its 24th Report. [Para 41.2]
9.1 In view of the above, the Committee would appreciate the avoidance of such evasive
replies and recommends that this matter should instead be urgently examined at the
highest level. The Committee wishes to be apprised of the action taken in this regard at
the earliest. [Para 41.3]
Action Taken Reply
9.2 A separate and exclusive enactment for CBI is already in existence namely the DSPE Act,
1946. CBI derives its powers from the Delhi Special Police Establishment (DSPE) Act, 1946 as
amended by CVC Act, 2003. This mechanism viz. the CBI’s functioning under the DSPE Act has
allowed CBI to maintain its reputation of a premier investigating agency of the country functioning

35
with credibility and impartiality within the federal structure of our polity. As such, it has not been
considered necessary to have another statute for the same purpose.
Committee’s further observation
9.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation on the issue and desires that the
Government may earnestly consider the independent statutory provision in this regard. The
Committee is of the strong view that lack of a separate enactment for CBI is a major hindrance
in the effective and impartial functioning of the premier investigating agency in the country.
The Committee notes that the Ministry has not even apprised the Committee of the action taken
in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee again strongly
recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibilities of a separate enactment for CBI
and take concrete action in this direction.

36
36
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
CADRE REVIEW
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that the team of officers
constituted to look into the issues affecting cadre management of CSS should appreciate
the urgency of the issue and arrive at a logical conclusion at the earliest. It also
recommends that the terms of reference of the team should be finalized without further
delay. The Committee desires that it should be apprised of the outcome of the exercise.
[Para 11.3]
1.1 The Committee is of the opinion that in the modern democratic globalised
governance, ‘service and delivery systems’ are time based and that the colonial days of
delaying the process are irrelevant in this century. The issue of time can be a threat to a
service because a service in this fast changing world has ‘no shelf life’. [Para 11.4]
Action Taken Reply
1.2 A Committee with the following composition and terms of reference has been constituted
w.e.f. 16.6.2008 for cadre restructuring of CSS:
Composition:—
(i) Special Secretary-DoPT - Chairman
(ii) Joint Secretary (CS), DoPT- Member
(iii) Joint Secretary (Pers.), D/o Expenditure-Member
(iv) Deputy Secretary (CS.I), DoPT-Member-Secretary
Terms of reference:—
(a) To assess the magnitude of stagnation in various grades of CSS. While doing so, the
viewpoints of the associations and other stakeholders may be examined.
(b) To review the structure of the CSS, along with the feeder cadre, keeping in view the
findings of (a) above.
(c) To suggest remedial measures-both short-term and long-term-for career progression
of CSS officers, at various levels.
1.3 The Committee will submit its report within a period of three months.

37
Committee’s further observation
1.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Government and directs the Ministry to furnish the
recommendations of the Committee constituted on issues affecting the CSS alongwith action
taken thereon as soon as possible.
MINORITY WELFARE
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee takes note of the action taken in this regard and recommends that
proper Quarterly review mechanism should be chalked out to ensure that the
recommendations of the Sachar Committee are analysed in detail and are implemented in
letter and spirit. Moreover, the 15 point programme should be propagated in “minority
living habitats” and assembly places. [Para 15.1]
Action Taken Reply
2.1 Ministry of Minority Affairs is the nodal Ministry for implementation of the Prime Minister’s
New 15 point Programme for welfare of the minorities and the Sachar Committee’s
Recommendations. That Ministry is already getting the progress of the implementation reviewed by
itself as well as through the Committee of Secretaries and the Cabinet. The recommendation of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee is being conveyed to Ministry of Minority Affairs.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee desires that a feedback report from the Ministry of Minority Affairs may
be obtained with respect to compliance of the Committee’s Report. The said Report may be
furnished to this Committee at the earliest.
BACKLOG OF RESERVED V ACANCIES OF PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PEOPLE
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee is deeply concerned about such apathy to the rights of the
handicapped people. It takes strong exception to such insensitive tendencies. It is of the
strong view that in a welfare State like ours, such callous attitude is unpardonable. The
Committee strongly recommends that urgent steps should be taken to ensure that the
vacancies in the handicapped quota should be identified and filled up within a period of six
months, in all Ministries/Departments and their PSEs and Organisations. [Para 20.1]
Action Taken Reply
3.1 This Department has issued instructions from time to time to all Ministries/Departments
stressing upon them to implement the reservation policy for the persons with disabilities in the right
earnest. This Department is monitoring the progress by way of seeking yearly reports about
representation of persons with disabilities in posts/services.
Recommendation/observation
4. The Committee invites the attention of the Government to certain grievances of the
colour blind people, submitted to the Committee, in which they have highlighted the apathy
of the Government towards their employment opportunities. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should take note of such cases of persons with uncommon disabilities and

38
take necessary action urgently. It wishes to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
[Para 20.2]
Action Taken Reply
4.1 Reservation is provided only to such persons with disabilities who have 40% or more
disability. Such colour blind people who have more than 40% disability would be entitled to get the
benefit of reservation.
Committee’s further observation
4.2 The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s reply to para nos. 20.1 and 20.2 and desires
to review the implementation of its recommendations later. Meanwhile, it directs the Department of
Personnel and Training to furnish the Status Report about the steps  taken by them with respect to
reducing backlog of vacancies for Persons with Disabilities.
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL (CAT)
Recommendation/observation
5. The Committee could gather that many Ministries/Departments do not implement
judgments of CAT. It is of the view that non-implementation of judgements/decisions of
CAT defeat the very purpose for which they were established. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should ensure that the objective of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985
under which the CAT was created is realized through a monitoring mechanism in place
which will receive all the judgments/orders passed by CAT and then seek the status of
implementation from the respective Ministries/Departments etc. within a time frame and a
para thereof shall be given in the Annual Report of the Ministry so that a clear picture
emerges in this regard. [Para 25.2]
Action Taken Reply
5.1 All Ministries/Departments have been requested to monitor the progress of implementation
of the judgments/orders of the CAT and send progress/status report to the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Committee’s further observation
5.2 The Committee desires that the Department of Personnel and Training should impress upon
the Ministries/Departments to include a paragraph on the subject in their Annual Reports.
CENTRALISED PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES REDRESS AND MONITORING SYSTEM
(CPGRAMS)
Recommendation/observation
6. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has acted upon its
recommendation made in its 19th Report that the PGRAMS should be introduced in all
Ministries and Departments and that the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances may pursue the matter with those Ministries who have yet to install PGRAMS
and to take expeditious steps to install the same without further delay. It appreciates that
this has led to the birth of Centralized PGRAMS, the implementation of which started in
June, 2007. [Para No. 28.3]

39
6.1 The Committee is happy to note that the CPGRAMS has been benefited by many
user organizations such as Railways and that its benefits are utilized by even the Zonal
offices of the Railways. [Para 28.4]
Action Taken Reply
6.2 The old PGRAM  System was server based and required investment in servers in each
Ministry/Department where PGRAM System was to be installed leading to delay. However, with the
birth of the new centralized PGRAMS which is web based and does not require investment in
servers for installing it in Ministries/Departments, this process has been expedited. This system was
introduced in June, 2007 wherein each of the Nodal Officer of 89 Ministries/Departments have
been given a user name and password through which they can access the CPGRAMS software
from the Centralised Server. The Ministries/Departments could also open accounts of their
subordinate offices which in turn can access the CPGRAMS software from the same Centralised
server. This has facilitated the usage of CPGRAM software in all Ministries/Departments of Central
Government and also the field attached offices under them. However, to ensure implementation of
CPGRAM system in all Ministries/Departments its effective usage and in order to keep close vigil
on grievances an Action Plan has been drawn up. This plan includes organizing monthly meetings
of 20-25 Ministries under Chairmanship of Additional Secretary where grievances of these
Ministries/Departments are reviewed and progress of CPGRAM is monitored. Wherever necessary
trainings with the help of NIC is being organized for better utilization of this system. A list of 89
Ministries/Departments where CPGRAM System is functioning is enclosed.
Committee’s further observation
6.3 The Committee is happy to note that the CPGRAM software is being used by the
Ministries/Departments of Government of India. The Committee also welcomes the Action Plan
drawn to monitor the effective implementation of the system. The Committee is, however, keen
to know whether the system is effectively working as the Committee understands that CPGRAM
is a devise to redress the grievances and to what extent this objective is being achieved.
STATUTORY SUPPORT FOR PUBLIC GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL MECHANISM
Recommendation/observation
7. The Committee is not satisfied with this reply. It is of the opinion that the
Ministries/Departments should keep a close vigil on grievances and that they should be
redressed in a time bound manner. It could gather that Government is the major litigant
in Courts of law, resulting in vast expenditure of public money, Governmental resources and
time. It is of the view that the essence of good governance is defeated in the absence of
efficient and timely redressal of grievances. If the grievances are redressed timely at the
level at which they arise, the aggrieved will not approach Court of Law. This will save
resources and time, of both the aggrieved and the Government. [Para 29.2]
7.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should make a study
as to the nature of cases pending in Courts mainly because of non-application of in built
Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism and make the erring office accountable and
punished. This will reduce the cases in Courts due to non-application of mind and soul into
the dispute. [Para 29.3]
7.2. The Committee is of the view that public service delivery system is inefficient unless
it caters to the needs and issues of the common man. In order to assuage the concerns of
the people regarding the efficiency of the public services, it is pertinent that their
grievances are redressed promptly. [Para 29.4]

40
7.3 The Committee strongly feels that enacting a statute for PGRM will go a long way
in ensuring participatory governance and the Ministry should seriously examine this issue
and the Committee be apprised of the outcome therefrom. [Para 29.5]
Action Taken Reply
7.4 The Department is acting on the recommendation of the Committee and the issue of
envisaging Public Grievance Redress Mechanism (PGRAMS) in a statutory form is being examined
in consultation with Ministry of Law. Apart from providing statutory support to the Public
Grievance Redress mechanism which is being examined in consultation with Ministry of Law it was
also felt that the Redress and Monitoring System for Ministries should be strengthened to ensure
efficient and timely redressal of grievances. With the introduction of the CPGRAM systems, a
handy tool has been provided in the hands of Director of Public Grievances (Joint Secretary) level
officers in each Ministry/Department to monitor grievances sent for redress to their subordinate
offices. The system provides suggestive categories under which the Ministries/Departments can
categorise the grievances for making systemic improvements. The CPGRAMS has many facilities
for the citizens like lodging complaints online and getting a unique registration number for further
reference. Acknowledgement is provided by e-mail and citizens can send the grievances directly to
Ministries/Departments. Grievances received directly by post are registered on behalf of the citizen
by DARPG and complaint is scanned and forwarded to Ministry concerned for its timely redressal.
Since the grievances are organized at a decentralized manner, the usage of the system by all
Ministries/Departments up to their attached, field and subordinate officers will help in efficient and
timely redressal of grievances. The Department agrees that if the grievances are redressed timely
at the level at which they arise they will not approach Court of Law and resource and time of
both Government and aggrieved would be saved.
7.5 In the light of the recommendation of the Committee the Ministry of Law and Justice has
been requested to conduct a study as to the nature of cases pending in Courts simply because of
non-application of in-built Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism and make the erring office
accountable and punished.
7.6. The Department has noted the recommendation of the Committee and will continue to
endeavour to strengthen the Public Grievance Redress and monitoring Mechanism in all Ministries/
Departments of the Central Government.
7.7 The recommendation of the Committee was regarding enacting a statute for PGRAM on the
lines of RTI Act 2005, that could make it mandatory on all Departments/Ministries/Organisations to
pursue the grievance till their logical end. The Department has examined the above recommendation
and prepared a detailed concept paper for seeking the comments of Ministry of Law.
Committee’s further observation
7.8 The Committee endorses the view of the Government that Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism needs to be strengthened. The Committee appreciates the introduction of CPGRAM
system enabling the citizens to lodge their complaints online and forwarding the grievance to the
respective Department electronically for a timely redressal. It is just a beginning and the efficacy
of the system is yet to be established. The Committee feels that efficiency, fairness and timely
redressal of the grievance is the key to the whole issue and hopes that the Government
Ministries/Departments and the Organizations falling under their administrative control will be
able to meet this enshrined objective.
7.9 The Committee also welcomes the view of the DARPG that timely redressal at the level
where complaint arises will reduce the burden of the Courts and thereby, save the resources of
the Government as well as those of the aggrieved person. The Committee, however, awaits the

41
details of the study undertaken by the Ministry of Law and Justice as to the nature of cases
pending in the Courts because of non-application of inbuilt PGRM and making the erring office
accountable and punished. The Committee desires that the details may be made available by the
Ministry in their ATN.
7.10 The Committee notes that its suggestion regarding enacting a statute for PGRM in the
lines of the Right to Information Act is being considered by the Department in consultation with
the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Committee eagerly awaits the details of the Concept Paper
alongwith the comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Committee further urges the
DARPG to pursue the matter vigorously with that Ministry.
7.11 The Committee takes note of the communication dated 4th November, 2008 received
from the Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, in which it
was stated that there could not be single authority/Act to deal with all the issues that are raised
through public grievances pertaining to different Ministries/Departments.
7.12 In this regard, the Committee is of the strong view that enactment of a law for Public
Grievances Redressal Mechanism will ensure accountability and lend enforceability to the
inherent right of a citizen as a consumer of the services rendered by the Government. The
Committee would like to emphasize that the recommendation of the Committee was for an
inbuilt Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism for “customer satisfaction”, rather than an
external mechanism. The Committee recommends that the Government should examine the
recommendation in right earnest.
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
8. The Committee recommends that the concerned Ministries/Departments should be
impressed upon to implement the accepted recommendations and the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances should monitor the progress made in this
regard. [Para 30.1]
Action Taken Reply
8.1 As recommended by the Committee, the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances is already monitoring the progress of the implementation of the recommendations of the
ARC accepted by the Group of Ministers (GoM). The implementation by Ministries/Departments in
this regard is being regularly monitored.
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee has separately examined the Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism
existing in the Government in its 29th Report presented to Parliament on 23rd October, 2008.
The Committee may like to comment in the light of Action taken Replies by Government to the
recommendations contained in that Report.
CITIZENS’ CHARTER
Recommendation/observation
9. The Committee recommends that the Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances should encourage all Ministries/Departments to include Citizens’ Charter as
an item in their Annual Report and to implement the Citizens’ Charter for effective service

42
delivery. They should also provide adequate support to formulate Citizens’ Charter and
implement the same. Special emphasis should be given to formulate and implement the
Citizens’ Charter in newly created Ministries/Departments. The Department should encourage
other Departments, Organisations and Institutions to coin a “slogan” and to create a “logo”,
reflecting their role, functions and motto, in the pattern of private companies and corporate
houses, and which can be comprehended by the common man. [Para 32.1]
Action Taken Reply
9.1 The instructions regarding inclusion of Citizens’ Charter in the Annual Report has already
been included in Para No.157 of the Central Secretariat Manual of Office procedure (CSMOP)
which is the basis of functioning of all Government Ministries/Departments. In case of newly
created Ministries/Departments, instructions have been issued for formulating the Citizens’ Charter
within six months and instructions contained in Manual of Office Procedures Chapter 18 para 157,
regarding inclusion of Citizen Charters’ in their Annual Report have been reiterated. These newly
created Ministries have also been provided support for formulation of Citizen Charter. The
Department is providing regular support to the Ministries/Departments for formulation of Citizens’
Charter. The second ARC in its fourth report on “ethics in governance” has also recommended that
“Citizen Charters should be made effective by stipulating the service levels and also the remedy if
these service levels are not met”. In the light of these recommendations, instructions have been
issued to all Ministries/Departments regarding setting up a mechanism or system in each
Government Department/Organisation to ensure monitoring of Standards of services defined in the
Citizens’ Charter. The Citizen’s Charter should be reviewed periodically after taking the feedback
from users and stake holders and they should be involved in review of the Charter.
9.2 As regards the Committee’s recommendation regarding coining a “slogan” and create a
“logo” reflecting their role, functions and motto, this recommendation of the Committee has been
circulated to all Ministries/Departments.
Committee’s further observation
9.3 The Committee observes that the pace with which the Ministries/Departments of
Government of India are formulating their Citizens’ Charter is not encouraging. The Committee,
during its interactions with the Central Ministries/Departments and also with the Public Sector
Undertakings and other statutory bodies, noted that many of them were yet to formulate their
Citizens’ Charter. The Committee, therefore, directs the DARPG to impress upon the respective
Ministries to expedite the formulation of the Citizens’ Charter. The Committee also directs the
DARPG to submit the list of Ministries/ Departments and also the Organizations who have not
so far prepared their Citizens’ Charter.
9.4 The Committee has also been impressing upon the Public Sector Banks/Undertakings and
statutory bodies, which it interacted with in the course of its business, to mention the topic in
their Annual Reports. The Committee directs the DARPG to impress upon the Ministries to
ensure that their Organizations invariably include this as an item in their Annual Report.
9.5 The Committee desires that the recommendation of the Committee with respect to
“slogan” and “logo” should be implemented, in the benefit of the common man.
SEVOTTAM
Recommendation/observation
10. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry in this regard and
is of the opinion that it needs time bound implementation. [Para 33.1]

43
Action Taken Reply
10.1 Department is monitoring the progress of the implementation of Sevottam model in the ten
Ministries/Departments where it is being piloted. It is submitted that within the financial and
manpower constraints, the Ministries/Departments will make all efforts to introduce Sevottam in a
time bound manner.
Committee’s further observation
10.2 The Committee would like to impress upon the Government to continue its efforts for
implementation of Sevottam model in all the Ministries/Departments and apprise the Committee
of the updated status in its ATN.
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PUBL IC ADMINISTRATION (IIPA)
Recommendation/observation
11. The Committee is of the opinion that IIPA has greater role in training the officials
in modern administration. But the Committee feels that the works and programmes of IIPA
do not meet the required benchmark of appreciation. The Committee is of the view that
since the IIPA was unable to fully utilize the earlier Plan Grant, the setting apart of Rs.5
crore in this financial year is not justified. Further, the Committee wishes to be apprised
of the details of the proposed utilization of this amount. [Para 34.2]
Action Taken Reply
11.1 The observation of the Committee on IIPA is appreciated. IIPA has been advised to prepare
a strategic plan and detailed project report for utilization of Plan Grant approved by the Planning
Commission for the Eleventh Plan. The IIPA has also been encouraged to increase generation of
internal resources. For the current financial year the IIPA has proposed utilization of Rs.5.00 crore
which includes 1.70 crore for faculty and academic staff development, up gradation of
library, design and development of Public Policy and Public system Management programme and
Rs.3.30 crore for upgradation of infrastructure facility. The IIPA has assured the Ministry that the
institute has seriously undertaken implementing the development works and the plan funds would
be utilized.
11.2 The restructuring proposal of IIPA is under examination and the Ministry may resort to
suitable rationalization in the allocation for the current financial year if need be, based on the
progress made by IIPA.
Committee’s further observation
11.3 The Committee would like to offer its comments at the time of examination Demands
for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry. The Committee, however, desires to be apprised of the
restructuring proposal, when it is approved.
V ACANCIES IN CBI
Recommendation/observation
12. The Committee is of the view that the number of vacancies existing in CBI is
alarming. It recommends that the causes/reasons for the vacancies should be thoroughly
examined and should be addressed immediately. It is of the opinion that such large number
of vacancies will affect the operational efficiency of the organisation and the existing staff

44
will be hard pressed to deliver results. The vacancies of 30.8%, 66.2%, 58.8% in the ranks
of Prosecution, Technical and Deputy Superintendent of Police are alarming. It strongly
observes that when we aspire CBI to evolve into an organisation of international standards,
there is no scope for such vacancies which will adversely affect the pace of investigation and
trial. [Para 39.1]
Action Taken Reply
12.1 Continuous efforts are being made to fill up the vacancies in all ranks, especially at
investigating officer level. Occurrence and filling up of vacancies is a continuous process. The
number keeps on varying depending on the induction, promotion, retirement and repatriation of the
officers. The CBI has to remain a deputation-based organization in the interest of quality of work
and experience of the officers coming on deputation.
12.2 The following steps are being taken to ensure speedy filling up of vacancies in different ranks:
• A number of vacancies falling under deputation quota in various ranks remained unfilled
due to poor response. It has therefore, been decided to amend the Recruitment Rules
for the posts of Sr. PP, Addl. SP and Dy. SP in order to increase promotion/DR quota
and to reduce deputation quota correspondingly.
• Efforts are on to fill up vacant posts by fine-tuning the recruitment rules so that all
the posts to be filled up by direct recruitment/ promotion are filled up.
• The induction at the level of Inspectors has been decentralized by the CBI for speedy
induction.
12.3 An i ncentive allowance to the executive cadres of CBI @ 25% upto Sr. SP level and
@ 15% for officers above that rank has been approved.
Committee’s further observation
12.4 The Committee is pleased to note that certain steps have been taken by the Ministry to
ensure speedy filling up of vacancies in different ranks. However, it is of the opinion that a close
watch has to be kept on the process of filling up the vacancies and swift effective measures
should be taken to remove the stumbling bocks as and when they arise. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the success rate of the steps taken to fill up the vacancies and the outcome
as regards the reduction in vacancies.
PROSECUTION
Recommendation/observation
13. The Committee appreciates such efforts and is of the opinion that this would
maximize the conviction rate and minimize expending of resources and time. [Para 40.1]
13.1 The Committee is concerned about the pendency of cases under trial especially those
which are pending for 10 years and more. It observes that pendency is one of the major
concerns, which should be addressed urgently and recommends that concrete steps should
be taken in a time bound manner to minimize the backlog of cases. [Para 40.2.]
Action Taken Reply
13.2 CBI’s performance is being monitored on a monthly basis and they have been advised to
pay special attention to reduce pendency to minimize the backlog of cases.

45
Committee’s further observation
13.3 The Committee is not satisfied by the reply of the Ministry in as much as it does not spell
out the steps/measures taken/being taken by them to reduce the pendency. Nor did they explain
the strategy i.e. how this pendency is going to be reduced in time bound manner. The Committee
therefore, impresses upon the Ministry to furnish a detailed note while furnishing the ATN.
BUDGETARY CONCERNS OF CBI
Recommendation/observation
14. The Committee strongly feels that such shortfall will adversely affect the welfare of
the subordinate staff, foreign investigations, special incentives to public prosecutors, IT
initiatives etc. It recommends that adequate funds should be provided under these heads so
that investigation/prosecution do not suffer for want of technological resources and the
morale of the officers and staff are kept high. [Para 42.1]
Action Taken Reply
14.1 Bud get grants are approved depending upon actual utilization and requirement for the future
on realistic estimates. Budget proposals from CBI too are addressed accordingly and keeping in
view the relevant instructions of the Finance Ministry.
Recommendation/observation
15. The Committee is of the opinion that a premier investigating agency such as CBI on
whom the public, Courts and Governments have immense faith, should not suffer on
account of shortage of funds. It is of the view that if prosecutors in CBI are not paid
reasonably, or if inadequacy of funds turns out to be a reason for inability to engage a
foreign lawyer in cases having international ramifications, the merit of prosecution will
suffer drastically. It is of the opinion that in order to attract best talent to its fold,
attractive incentives and emoluments should be granted to the officers and staff of CBI.
Therefore, austerity measures should not be a road block to ensuring highest professional
acumen and operational efficiency in the organisation. [Para 42.2]
Action Taken Reply
15.1 The proposals of the CBI in this regard are given due importance keeping in view the
general instructions of the Ministry of Finance.
Committee’s further observation
15.2 With regard to para nos. 42.1  and 42.2, the Committee is of the opinion that due
consideration should be given to the budgetary requisites of the premier investigating agency.
The Committee is  concerned about the shortfall in the budgetary grant, especially under the
heads ‘Public Prosecutors’ (36.47%)  and ‘Information Technology’ (66.01%). The Committee
would like to impress upon the Ministry that emoluments to be granted to the staff in CBI and
availability of updated technological resources should not suffer for want of funds.
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
16. The Committee notes that the results of matric level Main-2006 exam are yet to be
declared. It feels that such inordinate delays should not take place and that the entire

46
examination system should be reviewed and concrete steps should be taken to minimize
such delays. [Para 47.8]
Action Taken Reply
16.1 It is stated that the Matric Level Examination prior to 2006 did not have the facility to the
candidates, of writing the answers in any of the languages listed in the Eighth Schedule of the
Constitution. This facility has been introduced for the Matric Level (Main) Examination, 2006 the
preliminary Exam for which was conducted on 04.02.2007. The results are expected to be declared
in the very near future. In order to further cut-down the delay in recruitment, the SSC is exploring
the possibility of combining all the examinations for which essential qualification is Graduation by
holding a Combined (Preliminary) Examination.
Committee’s further observation
16.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Government. The Committee would, however, like
to express its deep concern over the huge time gap between the date of examination and
declaration of results, as stated above in the case of Matric Level (Main) Examination, 2006.
The Committee strongly desires that urgent proactive steps should be taken to address this
problem. The Committee wishes to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard, in detail.
Recommendation/observation
17. The Committee feels that such delays are uncalled for in the present era of
technological advancements and recommends that the Ministry should explore steps to
tackle this delay effectively. [Para 47.10]
Action Taken Reply
17.1 The Staff Selection Commission is taking up the matter with DA VP and Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting to reduce the time gap in publication of notices of examinations in
Employment News as well as brief notices in leading local newspapers.
Committee’s further observation
17.2 The Committee notes the action taken in this regard and wishes to be apprised of the
outcome of the consultation with DAVP and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The
Committee would like to impress upon the SSC that innovative methods should be evolved to
reduce the delay in the examination process.
SOME AREAS OF CONCERN HIGHLIGHTED IN THE ANNUAL REPORT OF CVC
Recommendation/observation
18. The Committee recommends that the issues/concerns raised by CVC and reflected in
its Annual Report (2006) should be addressed urgently in order to ensure independence,
impartiality and credibility of the Apex Body. [Para 51.5]
Action Taken Reply
18.1 The proposal of the CVC to appoint full time CVO’s in Ministries/Departments was
examined by this Department in consultation with Major Ministries/Departments and the CVC. The
proposal has evoked mixed response as indicated by the comments received so far from various

47
Ministries/Departments. Meanwhile, the CVC has been requested to provide some empirical data (on
the quantum of cases pending handled in these Ministries) in support of its proposal.
18.2 The proposal of the Commission for appointment of ‘outsiders’ as CVO in Departments
like Railways, Telecom, CPWD, P&T, CBDT and CBEC was examined in consultation with
the concerned Ministries/Departments. It was decided to refer the matter first to the Committee
of Secretaries (CoS) for its recommendations. After deliberations in its meeting held on
19th October, 2007, the following decisions were taken by the CoS:—
(i) CVC may consider vigilance audit in the four departments viz., Railways, Posts, CBDT
and CBEC. Appropriate action can be initiated based on the findings.
(ii) The long-term objective should be posting of outsiders as CVOs as per the proposal
of CVC.
18.3 The CVC has been requested to take further action accordingly.
18.4 As regards the Commission’s recommendations that the selection of the successor CVO
should be completed in time, some posts for which eligible officers are not available remain
unfilled. However, the concerned Ministries/Departments with the concurrence of CVC entrust
additional charge of these posts to some other CVO under their administrative control.
18.5 The recommendation of the CVC for incorporating a clause in the CSS (CCA) Rules
mandating consultation with the CVC in cases involving ‘vigilance angle’ is under consideration.
18.6 As regards making the Commission’s First Stage Advice mandatory for all Government of
India organizations under the purview of the CVC, the issue would require further examination.
18.7 As regards doing away with the consultation mechanism with UPSC regarding the quantum
of punishment to be imposed on the Government officials and overlapping of authority with the
UPSC, it is submitted that the Constitution has envisaged specific role to the UPSC and disciplinary
matters affecting the persons serving under the Government of India in a civil capacity is one
among them. Consultation with the UPSC in specific matters mandated by the provisions of
Article 320(3) of the Constitution and the relevant provisions to the effect have been incorporated
in the CCS (CCA) Rules and the CCS (Pension) Rules and corresponding Rules applicable to
Railway employees. However, the UPSC’s function is purely advisory. Not only is its advice not
binding upon the Government, the Government cannot act mechanically upon such advice also
without applying its mind on the matter in question. The expression “disciplinary matters” is wide
enough to include any kind of disciplinary action proposed to be taken under the disciplinary rule
except where such consultation is specifically exempted by the UPSC (Exemption from
Constitution) Regulations. The fathers of the Indian Constitution realized that democratic system
could be maintained only if the civil servants could carry on administration without fear and favour
and values of independence, impartiality and integrity are the basic determinants of the
Constitutional conception of the Public Service Commission. In view of this, the existing provision
relating to consultation with the UPSC as envisaged in the Constitution may continue.
18.8 As regard the pr oposal of the Commission for strengthening of its resources, it is submitted
that the Commission on the basis of an internal work-study had proposed creation of 51 additional
posts in the Commission. The proposal was examined in consultation with the Ministry of Finance
and creation of 6 posts of officers in the grade of Deputy Secretary/Director has been approved.
Committee’s further observation
18.9 The Committee is of the opinion that appointment of full time CVOs in Ministries/
Departments is a pre-requisite to ensure a robust vigilance mechanism. Therefore, it would like

48
to impress upon the Ministry that the proposal of CVC to appoint full time CVOs should be
implemented without further delay. The Committee desires that the Ministry should examine the
reasons due to which eligible officers are not available as CVOs and make an effort to address
the issues involved urgently. The Committee further desires that the recommendation of the CVC
for incorporating a clause in the CSS (CCA) Rules mandating consultation with the CVC in cases
involving ‘vigilance angle’ should be given urgent consideration and should be duly implemented.
Recommendation/observation
19. The Committee feels that the prevailing tendency of delaying sanction of prosecution
is deplorable and recommends that urgent effective steps should be taken to punish the
guilty at the earliest and to clear the innocent of charges/allegations raised against them.
[Para 51.10]
Action Taken Reply
19.1 In order to check delay in grant of sanction for prosecution, this Department has already
issued detailed guidelines vide O.M. No.399/33/2006-A VD-III dated 6th November, 2006.
Committee’s further observation
19.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Government.
Recommendation/observation
20. The Committee deplores occurrence of delay/ indifferent attitude of Departments/
Ministries in implementation of the advice of CVC and recommends that once the CVC
renders advice, it should be implemented without undue delay. The Ministry should,
therefore, issue guidelines to all Departments/Ministries to that effect. [Para 51.12]
Action Taken Reply
20.1 This Department has been monitoring the progress in disciplinary cases through Quarterly
Reports on Action Plan on Anti-Corruption Measures and wherever there is significant pendency or
the pendency is increasing, the concerned Ministry/Department is requested to regularly monitor the
progress in order to minimize the pendency of such cases.
Committee’s further observation
20.2 The Committee notes the replies of the Government to para nos. 51.10 and 51.12 above
and gathers that Government has issued the guidelines in November, 2006 and thereafter no
other step seems to have been taken by them. The Committee is constrained to note that the
pendency is still on higher side. The Committee desires to be furnished the status of pendency
in last three years, year wise while furnishing their Action Taken Note.
Recommendation/observation
21. Some Members of the Committee expressed the view that a study should be
conducted regarding the effectiveness of CVC in curbing corruption in India. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should consider this and take necessary action in
this regard. [Para 51.13]
Action Taken Reply
21.1 The recommendation of the Committee is under consideration in consultation with CVC.

49
Committee’s further observation
21.2 The Committee wishes to be apprised of the final outcome of the consultation of the
Ministry with CVC regarding the recommendation of the Committee.
CERTAIN ISSUES HIGHLIGHTED IN THE ANNUAL REPORT OF CIC
Recommendation/observation
22. The CIC, in its Annual Report, has highlighted certain issues which need to be
tackled by the stakeholders concerned:—
(i) Setting up a citizens’ council of RTI User Groups/Sector Panels to oversee the
implementation of the Act and act as a bridge between the public and
Government.
(ii) Public authorities engaging in dialogue with applicants can be a constructive
process to strengthen the freedom of access to information. Every Ministry
could consider setting up a mechanism within public authorities under its
jurisdiction to address this.
(iii) In keeping with the above suggestion, each Ministry may suo moto  develop a
mechanism in consultation with the Commission to deal with RTI matters in
any Government Department.
(iv) Suo moto disclosure by public authority.
(v) Expand the modes of depositing the fee for making an RTI application.
(vi) Seeking information using e-mail.
(vii) All Head Post Offices should be designated as Assistant Public Information
Officers to receive RTI applications for public authorities.
(viii) Government and public authorities must set aside a specific budget for
dissemination of knowledge amongst citizens so that the provisions of the Act
can be utilized at all levels of society, through heightened public awareness.
(ix) All public authorities may include a chapter titled “Implementation of RTI
Act, 2005” in their Annual Reports.
(x) Strengthening the grievance redressal mechanism of public authorities so that
citizens/employees do not have to resort to the RTI Act.
(xi) Monetary remuneration to the Public Information Officers.
(xii) Financial and administrative autonomy of the Commission.
(xiii) Contempt powers should be given to the Commission.
(xiv) T raining of Public Information Officers.
(xv) The Government may set up a Centre for Accountability and Transparency for
undertaking activities relating to research in best practices in creating an open
access regime and other such related activities that would effectively strengthen
the Commission in pursuing its mandate. [Para 53]
Action Taken Reply
22.1 The RTI Act, 2005 has created 28 establishments in the country, one Central Information
Commission and 27 State Information Commissions, which, in fact are the bridges between the
appropriate Governments and the Citizens. The Commissions have power to receive and enquire

50
into complaints, receive and decide appeals and impose penalties on the CPIOs etc. As regards
setting up of Citizens’ Council of RTI Users etc., it is felt that such a role can effectively be played
by the NGOs. In this regard this Department has requested all the States/UTs to involve the Non-
Government Or ganizations working in their States to spread awareness about the Act vide letter
No.F.1/26/2007-IR, dated 9th January, 2008. The Government has taken following steps to ensure
smooth implementation of the provisions of the Act which cover the points raised by the
Commission as well:
(i) All the Ministries/Departments have been requested for appointment of CAPIOs vide
DOPT OM 34012/13(S)/2005-Estt.(B) dated 6th October, 2005.
(ii) All the Ministries/Departments have been requested vide  DOPT OM dated
23rd March, 2007 to post the details of CPIOs on the website etc.
(iii) Instructions have been issued vide OM dated the 9th July, 2007 clarifying that the
function of the first appellate authorities is quasi-judicial in nature and that the
appellate authority should see to it that justice is not only done but it also appears to
have been done. The OM further clarifies that the AA should pass speaking order
giving justifications for the decision arrived at.
(iv) All the Ministries/Departments have been requested to prepare an exhaustive list of
public authorities under them and to upload the same on the RTI portal and to keep
it updated (OM dated 31st July, 2007).
(v) A clarification regarding disclosures of the ACRs of any employee has been issued
vide OM dated 21st September, 2007.
(vi) All the Ministries/Departments etc. have been requested to comply with the provisions
contained in Section 4 of the Act, which relates to  suo-motu discloser of information
(OM dated 21st September, 2007).
(vii) It has been clarified vide OM dated 31st October, 2007 that sub-section (3) of section
8 does not require retention of records indefinitely.
(viii) All the public authorities have been advised to update their records, improve their
infrastructure and bring out necessary manual (OM dated 14th November, 2007).
(ix) All the Or ganizations specified in the Second Schedule of the Act have been advised
to designate CPIOs and first appellate authorities and publish the details thereof (OM
dated 14th November, 2007)
(x) All the public authorities having more than one PIO have been requested to create a
Central Point within the organization where all the RTI application and appeals addressed
to the first appellate authority may be received (OM dated 14th November, 2007).
(xi) All the public authorities should designate the first appellate authorities and publish their
particulars along with the particulars of the PIOs (OM dated 14th November, 2007)
(xii) A letter has been written to all the States/UTs on 9th January, 2008 requesting them
to involve the Non-Government Organizations working in their States to spread
awareness about the Act.
(xiii) Guidelines for the officers designated as Central Public Information Officer have been
issued (OM dated 27th February, 2008).
(xiv) Guidelines for the first appellate authorities have been issued (OM dated 25th April, 2008).
(xv) Guidelines for the public authorities have been issued (OM dated 25th April, 2008).

51
(xvi) Clarification has been issued regarding transfer of RTI applications which are the
subject matter of more than one public authority. (OM dated 12th June, 2008).
(xvii) All the Ch ief Secretaries of the States/UTs have been informed about the best
practices initiated by the Government of Andhra Pradesh for effective implementation
of the RTI Act, 2005 (Letter dated 23rd June, 2008).
(xviii) All the public authorities were requested again to ensure suo-moto  disclosure
as provided in the RTI Act and to remain courteous with the information seekers
(OM dated 24th June, 2008).
22.2 The Act enables the citizens to send application through e-mail. The Government, in due
course of time, may consider developing a system of accepting fee through e-mode etc.
22.3 The Government already has a public grievance redressal system. The RTI Act, however,
supplements the redressal system in as much as citizens have now a statutory right to get
information.
22.4 Regarding imparting training, it may be stated that the Training Division of this Department
has been continuously conducting training programmes for CPIOs with updated training modules.
22.5 The CIC or the SICs are not courts of records and don’t have contempt power.
22.6 The PIOs are performing their role as PIOs as a part of their duty. Though it is an
additional responsibility, it is not proposed to pay for this work separately.
Committee’s further observation
22.7 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. It feels that though the
Ministry has taken some steps on certain issues, proactive steps need to be taken on matters
given in para nos (viii), (ix), (xii) and (xv). The Committee, therefore, desires that these matters
should be given due consideration for effective implementation of the RTI Act.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
Recommendation/observation
23. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has acted upon its
recommendation made in its 19th Report that the PGRAMS should be introduced in all
Ministries and Departments and that the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances may pursue the matter with those Ministries who have yet to install PGRAMS
and to take expeditious steps to install the same without further delay. It appreciates that
this has led to the birth of Centralized PGRAMS, the implementation of which started in
June, 2007. [Para No. 28.3]
23.1 The Committee is happy to note that the CPGRAMS has been benefited by many
user organizations such as Railways and that its benefits are utilized by even the Zonal
officers of the Railways. [Para 28.3 and 28.4]
Action Taken Reply
23.2 The old PGRAM System was server based and required investment in servers in each
Ministry/Department where PGRAM System was to be installed leading to delay. However, with the
birth of the new centralized PGRAMS which is web based and does not require investment in
servers for installing it in Ministries/Departments, this process has been expedited. This system was
introduced in June, 2007, wherein each of the Nodal Officer of 89 Ministries/Departments have
been given a user name and password through which they can access the CPGRAMS software

52
from the Centralised Server. The Ministries/Departments could also open accounts of their
subordinate offices which in turn can access the CPGRAMS software from the same Centralised
server. This has facilitated the usage of CPGRAM software in all Ministries/Departments of Central
Government and also the field attached offices under them. However, to ensure implementation of
CPGRAM system in all Ministries/Departments its effective usage and in order to keep close vigil
on grievances an Action Plan has been drawn up. This plan includes organizing monthly meetings
of 20-25 Ministries under Chairmanship of Additional Secretary where grievances of these
Ministries/Departments are reviewed and progress of CPGRAM is monitored. Wherever necessary
trainings with the help of NIC is being organized for better utilization of this system. A list of 89
Ministries/Departments were CPGRAM System is functioning is enclosed.
Committee’s further observation
23.3 The Committee is happy to note that the CPGRAM software is being used by the
Ministries/Departments of Government of India. The Committee also welcomes the Action Plan
drawn to monitor the effective implementation of the system. The Committee is, however, keen
to know whether the system is effectively working as the Committee understands that CPGRAM
is a devise to redress the grievances and to what extent this objective is being achieved.
STATUTORY SUPPORT FOR PUBLIC GRIEVANCES  REDRESSAL MECHANISM
Recommendation/observation
24. The Committee is not satisfied with this reply. It is of the opinion that the
Ministries/Departments should keep a close vigil on grievances and that they should be
redressed in a time bound manner. It could gather that Government is the major litigant
in Courts of law, resulting in vast expenditure of public money, Governmental resources and
time. It is of the view that the essence of good governance is defeated in the absence of
efficient and timely redressal of grievances. If the grievances are redressed timely at the
level at which they arise, the aggrieved will not approach Court of Law. This will save
resources and time, of both the aggrieved and the Government. [Para No. 29.2]
24.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should make a study
as to the nature of cases pending in Courts mainly because of non-application of in-built
Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism and make the erring office accountable and
punished. This will reduce the cases in Courts due to non-application of mind and soul into
the dispute. [Para No. 29.3]
24.2 The Committee is of the view that public service delivery system is inefficient unless
it caters to the needs and issues of the common man. In order to assuage the concerns of
the people regarding the efficiency of the public services, it is pertinent that their
grievances are redressed promptly. [Para No. 29.4]
24.3 The Committee strongly feels that enacting a statute for PGRM will go a long way
in ensuring participatory governance and the Ministry should seriously examine this issue
and the Committee be apprised of the outcome therefrom. [Para No. 29.5]
Action Taken Reply
24.4 The Department is acting on the recommendation of the Committee and the issue of
envisaging Public Grievance Redress Mechanism (PGRAMS) in a statutory form is being examined
in consultation with Ministry of Law. Apart from providing statutory support to the Public
Grievance Redress mechanism which is being examined in consultation with ‘Ministry of Law it
was also felt that the Redress and Monitoring System for Ministries should be strengthened to

53
ensure efficient and timely redressal of grievances. With the introduction of the CPGRAM systems,
a handy tool has been provided in the hands of Director of Public Grievances (Joint Secretary)
level officers in each Ministry/Department to monitor grievances sent for redressal to their
subordinate offices. The system provides suggestive categories under which the Ministries/
Departments can categorise the grievances for making systemic improvements. The CPGRAMS has
many facilities for the citizens like lodging complaints online and getting a unique registration
number for further reference. Acknowledgement is provided bye-mail and citizens can send the
grievances directly to Ministries/Departments. Grievances received directly by post are registered
on behalf of the citizen by DARPG and complaint is scanned and forwarded to Ministry concerned
for its timely redressal. Since the grievances are organized in a decentralized manner, the usage of
the system by all Ministries/Departments up to their attached, field and subordinate officers will
help in efficient and timely redressal of grievances. The Department, agrees that if the grievances
are redressed timely at the level at which they arise they will not approach Court of Law and
resource and time of both Government and aggrieved would be saved.
24.5 In the light of the recommendation of the Committee the Ministry of Law and Justice has
been requested to conduct a study as to the nature of cases pending in Courts simply because of
non-application of in built Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism and make the erring office
accountable and punished.
24.6 The Department has noted the recommendation of the Committee and will continue to
endeavour to strengthen the Public Grievance Redress and monitoring Mechanism in all Ministries/
Departments of the Central Government.
24.7 The recommendation of the Committee was regarding enacting a statute for PGRAM on the
lines of RTI Act 2005, that could make it mandatory on all Departments/Ministries/Organisations to
pursue the grievance till their logical end. The Department has examined the above recommendation
and prepared a detailed concept paper for seeking the comments of Ministry of Law.
Committee’s further observation
24.8 The Committee endorses the view of the Government that Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism needs to be strengthened. The Committee appreciates the introduction of CPGRAM
system enabling the citizens to lodge their complaints online and forwarding the grievance to the
respective department electronically for a timely redressal. It is just a beginning and the efficacy
of the system is yet to be established. The Committee feels that efficiency, fairness and timely
redressal of the grievance is the key to the whole issue and hopes that the Government
Ministries/Departments and the Organizations falling under their administrative control will be
able to meet this enshrined objective.
24.9 The Committee also welcomes the view of the DARPG that timely redressal at the level
where complaint arises will reduce the burden of the Courts and thereby, save the resources of
the Government as well as those of the aggrieved person. The Committee, however, awaits the
details of the study undertaken by the Ministry of Law and Justice as to the nature of cases
pending in the Courts because of non-application of inbuilt PGRM and making the erring office
accountable and punished. The Committee desires that the details may be made available by the
Ministry in their ATN.
24.10 The Committee notes that its suggestion regarding enacting a statute for PGRM in the
lines of the Right to Information Act is being considered by the Department in consultation with
the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Committee eagerly awaits the details of the Concept Paper
alongwith the comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Committee further urges the
DARPG to pursue the matter vigorously with that Ministry.

54
24.11 The Committee takes note of the communication dated 4th November, 2008 received
from the Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, in which it
was stated that there could not be a single authority/Act to deal with all the issues that are raised
through public grievances pertaining to different Ministries/Departments.
24.12 In this regard, the Committee is of the strong view that enactment of a law for Public
Grievances Redressal Mechanism will ensure accountability and lend enforceability to the
inherent right of a citizen as a consumer of the services rendered by the Government. The
Committee would like to emphasize that the recommendation of the Committee was for an
inbuilt Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism for “customer satisfaction”, rather than an
external mechanism. The Committee recommends that the Government should examine the
recommendation in right earnest.
CITIZENS’ CHARTER
Recommendation/observation
25. The Committee recommends that the Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances should encourage all Ministries/Departments to include Citizens’ Charter as
an item in their Annual Report and to implement the Citizens’ Charter for effective service
delivery. They should also provide adequate support to formulate Citizens’ Charter and
implement the same. Special emphasis should be given to formulate and implement the
Citizens’ Charter in newly created Ministries/Departments. The Department should encourage
other Departments, Organizations and Institutions to coin a “slogan” and to create a “logo”
reflecting their role, functions and motto, in the pattern of private companies and corporate
houses, and which can be comprehended by the common man. [Para 32.1]
Action Taken Reply
25.1 The instructions regarding inclusion of Citizens’ Charter in the Annual Report has already
been included in Para No. 157 of the Central Secretariat Manual of Office Procedure (CSMOP)
which is the basis of functioning of all Government Ministry/Department. In case of newly created
Ministries/Departments instructions have been issued for formulating the Citizens’ Charter within
six months and instructions contained in Manual of Office Procedures Chapter 18 para 157,
regarding inclusion of Citizen Charters’ in their Annual Report have been reiterated (copy enclosed).
These newly created Ministries have also been provided support for formulation of Citizen Charters.
25.2 The Department is providing regular support to the Ministries/Departments for formulation
of Citizens’ Charter. The second ARC in its fourth report on “ethics in governance” has also
recommended that “Citizen Charters’ should be made effective by stipulating the service levels and
also the remedy if these service levels are not met”. In the light of these recommendations
instructions have been issued to all Ministries/Departments regarding setting of a mechanism or
system in each Government Department/Organisation to ensure monitoring of Standards of services
defined in the Citizens’ Charter. The Citizen’s Charter should be reviewed periodically after taking
the feedback from users and stake holders and they should be involved in review of the Charter.
25.3 As regards the Committee’s recommendation regarding coining a “slogan” and create a
“logo” reflecting their role, functions and motto, this recommendation of the Committee has been
circulated to all Ministries/Departments.
Committee’s further observation
25.4 The Committee observes that the pace with which the Ministries/Departments of
Government of India are formulating their Citizens’ Charter is not encouraging. The Committee,

55
during its interactions with the Central Ministries/Departments and also with the Public Sector
Undertakings and other statutory bodies, noted that many of them were yet to formulate their
Citizens’ Charter. The Committee, therefore, directs the DARPG to impress upon the respective
Ministries to expedite the formulation of the Citizens’ Charter. The Committee also directs the
DARPG to submit the list of Ministries/Departments and also the Organizations who have not
so far prepared their Citizens’ Charter.
25.5 The Committee has also been impressing upon the Public Sector Banks/ Undertakings
and statutory bodies, which it interacted with in the course of its business, to mention the topic
in their Annual Reports. The Committee directs the DARPG to impress upon the Ministries to
ensure that their Organizations invariably include this as an item in their Annual Report.
25.6 The Committee desires that the recommendation of the Committee with respect to
“slogan” and “logo” should be implemented, in the benefit of the common man.
DEPARTMENT OF PENSIONS AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE
WELFARE OF PENSIONERS
Recommendation/observation
26. The Committee commends the excellent work done by the Department in this aspect
to help the pensioners. The Committee is happy to note that the Department is seeking a
security audit for this system and envisaging an impact assessment for its evaluation. The
Committee would like to suggest that the Service Register of each Government employee
should be opened in an electronic form and that it should be updated electronically. Also,
the concerned employee should be allotted a unique registration code for assessing
information in his electronic service register. [Para 27.3]
Action Taken Reply
26.1 The matter regarding Impact Assessment Study for evaluation of ‘Pensioners’ Portal’ has
been taken up with Department of Information Technology who is the nodal Department for all
Mission Mode Projects. They have been requested to set up a Team for undertaking the Impact
Assessment Study of the Project early.
26.2 Security audit for the ‘Pensioners’ Portal’ is an ongoing activity for implementation of the
Project and the same is being taken care of by the National Informatics Centre on continuous basis.
26.3 As regards the matter relating to opening of Service Register for each Government
employee in electronic form, the same seems to be the concern of Department of Personnel and
Training (DoPT), Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. That Department has
been requested to take further necessary action on the suggestion of the August Committee.
Reply of the Government
26.4 Accepted partially; The suggestion of the August Committee relating to opening of Service
Register for each Government employee in electronic form, is the concern of DoPT and the same
has since been referred to them.
Committee’s further observation
26.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Government and desires that the DoPT may initiate
steps in the matter of opening Service Register for each Government employee in electronic form.

56
CHAPTER-V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE MINISTRY HAS NOT FURNISHED REPLIES
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
OTHER ISSUES RAISED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Department of Personnel and Training is
the nerve centre of the entire administration of all the Ministries/Departments of the
country, and that whatever vibrance and dynamism is imparted by the Department, is
reflected on other Ministries/Departments of the Government. Further, the Committee is of
the opinion that since the mandate of formulation of polices and programmes are given to
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, it should invariably be given
powers to implement, monitor and review them and to undertake necessary follow-up
action. In view of the above, the Committee observes that the DOPT should be given more
powers as regards ensuring implementation of the schemes/ policies envisaged by the
Ministry and approved by the Cabinet. [Para 35.1]
Action Taken Reply
1.1 Action Taken Report is awaited from the Cabinet Secretariat. The same will be submitted
separately, as soon as it is received from them.
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee is of the considered view that the Secretary, DOPT should be
empowered to such an extent so as to get replies from all Secretaries of Departments
immediately. The Committee is of the opinion that the data collection regarding the
reservation policy shows the lack of respect to the Department. The Committee is of the
view that the Secretary, DOPT should be treated as Cabinet Secretary manning all the
Departments in respect of the schemes/policies envisaged by the Ministry and approved by
the Cabinet. [Para 35.2]
Action Taken Reply
2.1 Action Taken Report is awaited from the Cabinet Secretariat. The same will be submitted
separately, as soon as it is received from them.
Committee’s further observation
2.2. The Committee takes serious view of the Ministry’s not furnishing the action taken reply
in respect of para nos. 35.1 and 35.2. The Committee directs the Department of Personnel and
Training to apprise it of the status of implementation of the recommendation, which is presently
pending consideration before the Cabinet Secretariat.

MINUTES

58

59
59
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16th December, 2008, in
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Virendra Bhatia
3. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Shri S. K. Kharventhan
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
10. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
11. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.S. Rana, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. * * *
V. * * *
*** Relates to some other matter.

60
A. ** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
B. ** *
4. * * *
5. * * *
C. Consideration and adoption of drafts 31st and 32nd Report
6. The Committee considered the drafts 31st and 32nd Reports of the Committee on the Action
Taken Replies on 25th and 26th Reports of the Committee, respectively. After a brief discussion,
the drafts 31st and 32nd Reports were adopted. The Committee authorized Chairman, and in his
absence, Shrimati Brinda Karat to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. C. Krishnan, and in
his absence, Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda to lay the same in Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008.
D. ** *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 4.15 
P.M. to meet again on 29th December, 2008.
*** Relates to some other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.