Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON PERSONNEL PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO.
97
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th July, )19 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th July, )19 2018
Draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and
Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets for
Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017
NINETY-SEVENTH REPORT
July, 2018/Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

34
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES LAW AND JUSTICE
NINETY-SEVENTH REPORT
Draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and
Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets for
Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th July, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th July, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2018/Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 193

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (v)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-4
4. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 5-17
5. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 19-32
I. Draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and Minimum
Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017 ............................. 21-26
II. Draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and Minimum
Value of Assets) Rules, 2018 ................................................................................ 27-32

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted on 1st September, 2016)
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Prabhat Jha
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
8. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
*9. Vacant
*10. V acant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Idris Ali
13. Shri Sharad Bansode
14. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary
15.  Adv. Joice George
16. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
17. Shri Santosh Kumar
18. Shri Bhagwant Mann
19. Shri B.V . Nayak
20. Shri Vincent H. Pala
21. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
22. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
23. Dr. A. Sampath
24. Shri M. Udhayakumar
25. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
26. Dr. Anshul Verma
@27. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
(i)
* Consequent upon the retirement of Shri Dilipbhai Pandya, MP, Rajya Sabha and Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy,
MP Rajya Sabha on 18 th August, 2017.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 29 th November, 2016.

@28. Shri Pralhad V . Joshi
@29. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
30. Vacant
31. V acant
@ Nominated w.e.f. 29 th November, 2016.
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted on 1st September, 2017)
^1. Shri Bhupender Yadav    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri Prabhat Jha
4. Shri Majeed Memon
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
*8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
#9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
$10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
13. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
14. Shri Sharadkumar Maruti Bansode
15. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhury
16. Adv. Joice George
17. Shri Radadiya Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai
18. Shri Pralhad Joshi
19. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
20. Adv. M. Udhaya Kumar
21. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
22. Shri Bhagwant Mann
23. Shri B.V. Naik
24. Shri Vincent H. Pala
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah
28. Shri V . Panner Selvam
(iii)
^ Re-appointed as the Chairman w.e.f. 2nd June, 2018.
* Nominated w.e.f. 30th November, 2017 vice Shri Anand Sharma who resigned w.e.f. 10th November, 2017.
# Nominated w.e.f. 7th March, 2018 vice change of nomination of Shri Tiruchi Siva w.e.f. 21st February, 2018.
$ Consequent upon the retirement of Shrimati Rajani Patil, MP, Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2018.

29. Adv. Anshul Verma
@30. Vacant
%31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Dr. P .P .K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
@ Vacancy caused due to change in the nomination of Shri Santosh Kumar w.e.f. 3rd November, 2017.
% Consequent upon the resignation of Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli, MP, Lok Sabha w.e.f. 20th June, 2018.
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the
Ninety-seventh Report of the Committee on the Draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities
and Minimum Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017.
2. Pursuant to the assurance given by the Minister of State (MoS), Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pension during the debate on the Lokpal and Lokayuktas (Amendment) Bill, 2016 to the Rajya Sabha on 28th
July, 2016, the draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets for
Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017, prescribing forms and manner for declaration of Assets and Liabilities
as per the amended provisions of Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 were referred by the
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) to this Committee for its consideration/views, before the
rules are formally notified in the Gazette of India.
3. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, DoPT on various aspects of the draft Rules in
its meeting held on 11th July, 2017. The Committee after its reconstitution again heard views of the DoPT,
Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department in its meetings held on 30th October, 2017, 6th
December, 2017 and 11th January, 2018. Finally, the Committee again heard the Secretary, DoPT on the
revised draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets) Rules,
2018 on 27th June, 2018.
4. While considering the draft Rules, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:-
(i) Background note on the draft Rules submitted by the DoPT, Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances & Pensions;
(ii) Seventy-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and Other Related
Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014;
(iii) The Public Servants (Furnishing of Information and Annual Return of Assets and Liabilities and
the Limits for Exemption of Assets in Filing Returns) Rules, 2014;
(iv) The Lokpal and Lokayuktas (Amendment) Act, 2016; and
(v) Advice of the Department of Legal Affairs on certain issues.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 6th July, 2018.
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
BHUPENDER YADAV
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
6th July, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Ashadha 15, 1940 (Saka) Committee on Personnel Public Grievances
Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha.
(v)

1
REPORT
Draft Lokpal Rules, 2017
1. Before formally notifying the Rules, the draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities
and Minimum Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017 (hereinafter referred to as ‘draft
Lokpal Rules, 2017’) ( Annexure – I ) were referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice (hereinafter referred to as ‘Committee’) by
the Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) for its consideration/views on 29th May, 2017. The rules
were forwarded to the Committee pursuant to the assurance given by the Minister of State (MoS), Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pension during the debate on the Lokpal and Lokayuktas (Amendment) Bill, 2016 in
Rajya Sabha on the 28th July, 2016.
2. These rules prescribing forms and manner for declaration of Assets and Liabilities were a sequel to the
amendments effected to Sections 44 and 59 in the year 2016 to the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. The
amendments were necessitated due to litigations on the issue and concern expressed by various categories
of public servants and in line with recommendations of this Committee contained in its Seventy-Seventh
Report on the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2014.
3. The Government derives the power to formulate these rules from the provisions of Section 59(2)(k)
and (l) read with provisions of Sections 44 and 45 of the Act, i.e. to prescribe the form and manner of
declaration of assets and liabilities and minimum value for which the competent authority may exempt a
public servant from furnishing information under proviso to Section 45 of the Act.
4. The draft Lokpal Rules, 2017 superseded the Public Servants (Furnishing of Information and Annual
Return of Assets and Liabilities and the Limits for Exemption of Assets in Filing Returns) Rules, 2014
(hereinafter referred to as Lokpal Rules, 2014) framed under the pre-amended Section 44 of the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
5. Following are the salient aspects of the draft Lokpal Rules, 2017 –
(a) The terms  “assets”  and  “liabilities”  were defined in these rules.
(b) The returns filed by public servants during years 2014, 2015 and 2016 under Rules of 2014,
were deemed to be returns filed under the Lokpal Act and public servants who have not made
any such declarations under the aforesaid Rules were required to make declarations for the years
2014, 2015 and 2016 under these Rules. The draft Rules were proposed to come into effect
retrospectively i.e. with effect from 16th January, 2014.
(c) The Rules vested additional powers to the Competent Authority to seek further information on
the property acquired.
(d) Rules make provision for inclusion of a  ‘Prescribed Authority’ before whom declarations were
to be made. As per rules Prescribed Authority would be:
(i) The Chairman of Rajya Sabha for Members of Rajya Sabha and the Speaker for Members
of Lok Sabha.
(ii) For Govern ment officials and those belonging to Central Public Sector Enterprises, the
prescribed authority would be the authority as prescribed under the regulating conduct
rules.

2
(iii) For others (not falling in the above categories), the competent authorities (in Ministries/
Departments) may designate Nodal Officers of appropriate level as prescribed authorities
for receiving such information.
(e) Compared to the Lokpal Rules, 2014, in these rules, number of prescribed forms was reduced
from four to three. Minimum value of assets to be condoned and exempted by the Competent
Authority from furnishing of information was also prescribed under these rules.
Deliberations of the Committee
6. During the course of deliberations on the draft Lokpal Rules, 2017, the Committee heard the Secretaries
of DoPT, Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department. The Committee examined the draft Rules
and went through the set of Forms proposed in the draft Rules. The Committee noted that the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Act, 2013 does not define the terms  ‘Assets’ and  ‘Liabilities’ nor does Section 59 or any other
provisions of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, empower the Central Government to define the terms -
‘Assets’ and  ‘Liabilities’ under the draft Rules. On a further perusal of the definition of the terms  ‘Assets’
and  ‘Liabilities’ given in the draft Rules, it was pointed out that the said definitions are essentially in the
nature of inclusion/exclusion clause whereby certain types of Assets/Liabilities are said to be included or
excluded. The DoPT was then asked to clarify as to whether defining ‘Assets’ and ‘Liabilities’ in the manner
done in the draft Rules, would be legally sustainable in the absence of any mandate apparently given by the
Parent Act to do so. The Secretary, DoPT assured the Committee that he would revert back after getting
clarification from the Department of Legal Affairs.
7. The Committee then felt it necessary to seek the opinion of the Department of Legal Affairs and
accordingly directed the Department to send its views. The Department of Legal Affairs after examining the
issue raised by the Committee advised that terms  ‘Assets’ and  ‘Liabilities’ are neither defined in Section 44
of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, which deals with the assets and liabilities nor in Section 2 of the
Act, which defines the terms used in the Act. As per the amended Act, 2016, prescription for rule framing
is limited to the extent of forms and manner of the declaration of  ‘Assets’ and ‘Liabilities’. Value and volume
of  ‘Assets’ and  ‘Liabilities’ are not defined in the Act under the substituted Section 44. A bare perusal of the,
provisions of Sections 44 and 59 of the Act, indicates that the framing of rules is not prescribed for the
purpose of definition of the  ‘Assets’ and  ‘Liabilities’. In view of aforesaid, Department of Legal Affairs has
opined that the proposed definition of the terms ‘Assets’ and  ‘Liabilities’ in the draft Rules may not withstand
judicial scrutiny on the ground of excessive delegation.
8. Following issues also emerged during the course of its deliberations on the draft Lokpal Rules, 2017:
(a) whether a separate formulation of rules defining comprehensively the terms  ‘assets’  and  ‘liabilities’
will be required to overcome the deficiency in the draft rules or the parent Act needs to be
amended;
(b) inclusion of an intermediate level of a  “prescribed authority”  before whom the declarations may
be made;
(c) seeking information as regards assets of members of family of public servant notwithstanding
they are having independent sources of income;
(d) what constitutes a family of the public servant;

3
(e) vesting power in Competent Authority to call for further information from the public servant and
whether vesting such powers which was not mandated in the parent Act, will also amount to
excessive delegation;
(f) difficulty in achieving uniformity in form and manner of reporting as public servants defined in
the Act encompass heterogeneous group;
(g) multiplicity of returns filed by public servants under different Acts/Rules;
(h) likely difficulties in reporting for the years 2014 to 2017 as the amended provision of Section 44
of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 mandates that every public servant shall make a declaration
of his assets and liabilities “on and from the date of commencement of the Act” i.e. with effect
from 16-01-2014.
9. These issues were taken up with the DoPT in the meeting of the Committee held on 11th January,
2018 and the Committee specifically and expressly directed the DoPT, Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department to collectively address the issues mentioned in the preceding paras and to convey the
common views of the Government.
10. The DoPT on 19th February, 2018 informed the Committee that the DoPT, Department of Legal
Affairs and Legislative Department have arrived at a consensus view on the issues raised on the draft Lokpal
Rules, 2017 by the Committee and have accordingly revised the draft Rules. A complete set of revised draft
Rules i.e. Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets) Rules, 2018
(hereinafter referred to as draft Lokpal Rules, 2018) (Annexure – II) prepared by the DoPT in consultation
with the Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department were forwarded to the Committee for
examination.
Draft Lokpal Rules, 2018
11. From the perusal it appears that the revised draft rules forwarded to the Committee have been simplified
and comprise only three rules with a single common form for all categories of public servants. The form has
been split into three parts with Part A requiring furnishing of personal information of the public servant;
Part B requires furnishing of details of immoveable and moveable assets (without specifying as to what
items may constitute moveable assets); and Part C to reflect liabilities.
12. The revised rules have been modified in the following manner to overcome the lacunae that have crept
in the previous version of the rules:–
(a) The definition clause inter alia defining the terms “assets”, “liabilities” and “prescribed authority”
has been omitted;
(b) The provision whereby power was proposed to be vested in the Competent Authority to seek
additional information has been excluded;
(c) A deeming provision has been added in the Rules that makes declaration of assets and liabilities
under any other law for the time being in force, or has been in force from the time of coming
into force deemed to be declaration under the Lokpal Rules;
(d) Attempt has been made to minimize duplication of filing of such declarations under multiple
rules/provisions of law and harmonization with such rules/laws; and

4
(e) The onus to prescribe minimum value of declarable assets has now been vested with the Competent
Authority.
13. The Committee at its meeting held on 27th June, 2018 considered the revised draft Lokpal Rules, 2018
and also heard the Secretary, DoPT in the matter.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
14. The Committee broadly agrees with the provisions of the revised draft rules prepared by the
DoPT in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice, as the suggestions of the Committee
have been incorporated and the lacunae pointed out in the previous draft have been addressed. The
Committee, however, is not in agreement with the second proviso to Rule 2(1) of the revised draft
rules.
15. As per the revised draft, now a public servant has to make a declaration of his assets and
liabilities within a period of six months from the date of becoming a public servant and for those
who are already public servants have to file such declaration on or before 31st July, 2018. Further,
a public servant has to subsequently file revised declarations whenever there is any change in the
details of declaration made earlier, within a period of six months from the date of such change.
Thus, the earlier provision for periodically submitting the declaration has been done away with. In
Committee’s opinion this may create practical difficulties in submission of declarations. Especially
for those elected public servants who may have alternate source of earning, other than their salary.
In such a situation they may have to furnish declarations several times. In view of this, the Committee
recommends that the declarations should be filed periodically i.e. every year. This will allow a public
servant to file a single return in a year which may include several transactions. This will make the
process of submission of declarations easy, and will also save time and efforts of both, the public
servant as well as of the Competent Authority. In case there is no change in the declared assets and
liabilities of a public servant, he/she should not be required to file any return for that year and the
earlier return filed would be reckoned.
16. Under the revised rules, the onus to determine the minimum value of assets and liabilities
which will not be included in the declaration of assets and liabilities, has been vested on the Competent
Authority. The Competent Authority has to determine this minimum value by having regard to the
nature of public servants and the public office. In this regard the Committee wishes to add that the
threshold value of assets below which the public servant need not to file return of such assets
should be reasonable and should be revised on regular intervals.

MINUTES

7
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11 th July, 2017 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma   —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
3. Shri D. Raja
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri Idris Ali
7. Adv. Joice George
8. Shri Bhagwant Mann
9. Shri Vincent H. Pala
10. Dr. A. Sampath
11. Shri M. Udhayakumar
12. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Addl. Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT)
1. Shri Ajay Mittal, Secretary; and
2. Shri Jishnu Barua, Joint Secretary.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and informed that * * *”. He
further informed that Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training have also been invited to apprise the
Committee of the salient features of the draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and
Minimum Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017 framed by DoPT under the amended
provisions of Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
3. * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

8
4. * * *
5. * * *
(* * *)
6. The Chairman thereafter invited and welcomed the new Secretary of the Department of Personnel and
extended his best wishes on assumption of change by him assignment. Thereafter, the Secretary was
requested to appraise the Committee about the salient features of the draft Public Servants (Declaration of
Assets and Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017 framed by
DoPT under the amended provisions of Section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
7. The Secretary, DoPT informed that Sections 44 and 59(2)(k) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013
were amended by the Parliament in the year 2016. The amended Section 44 provides for submission of
declaration of assets and liabilities by public servants under the Act and the amended Section 59(2)(k) gave
the Government power to make rules regarding submission of those returns having retrospective effect.
8. Thereafter, the Secretary briefly explained the three forms provided under the new rules and how
those were different from the earlier ones. He also informed that under the new rules definition of ‘assets’
and ‘liabilities’ does not include the assets acquired by the spouse or any other family members through their
independent source of income or liabilities incurred independently.
9. The Chairman and some Members raised the issue of contradiction between the draft rules and
declaration of property filed by the persons while filing nomination for election, under the Representation of
People Act, 1951. In that case the persons contesting elections need to file returns of property in respect of
their spouses and other family members, even if that was earned through their own independent means.
10. In the end the Chairman sought clarification on definition of ‘assets’ and ‘liabilities’ defined under
clause 2 of the draft Rules, without having them defined in the Parent Act. He then requested the DoPT to
clarify as to whether by defining ‘assets’ and ‘liabilities’ in the manner done in the draft rules, could be in
consonance with the Parent Act. The Secretary, DoPT agreed that the scope could be expanded but not
created and assured the Committee that he would revert back after getting the cogent clarification from the
Law Ministry.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
12. The meeting adjourned at 12.50 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

9
I
FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 30 th October, 2017 in Committee Room No.- 4, Block - ‘A ’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 110001.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav   —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK  SABHA
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
10. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
11. Adv. Joice George
12. Shri Pralhad Joshi
13. Shri Santosh Kumar
14. Shri B.V. Naik
15. Dr. A Sampath
16. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
I. Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT)
1. Shri Srinivas Katikithala, Joint Secretary; and
2. Ms. Khushboo Goel Chowdhary, Deputy Secretary
II. Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Secretary; and
2. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Secretary

10
III. Department of Legal Affairs (DoLA)
1. Shri Suresh Chandra, Secretary; and
2. Shri R.S. Verma, JS 
& LA
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to all Members of the Committee and sought
their active participation and cooperation in the deliberations of the Committee. He then briefly enumerated
the subjects presently under the consideration of the Committee. * * *.
3. * * *
4. The Chairman then briefed the Members about the draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and
Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017 which is under the
consideration of the Committee and informed that for the benefit of the new Members of the Committee,
including himself, representatives of the Department of Personnel and
 Training (DoPT), Department of
Legal Affairs (DoLA) and Legislative Department had been called to clarify any doubts on the draft rules,
before proceeding further on the subject.
(After arrival of the witnesses)
5. The Chairman welcomed Joint Secretary, DoPT; Secretary, DoLA; and Secretary, Legislative Department
and informed that while examining the draft Lokpal Rules, the Committee had sought some clarification on
the proposed definitions of terms ‘Assets’ and ‘Liabilities’ in the draft Rules and on this the DoPT after
consultation with DoLA opined that the definitions as proposed in the draft rules may not withstand judicial
scrutiny on the grounds of excessive delegation. Then, he asked them to give their views on the issue and to
also suggest remedies for the said anomaly in the draft Rules.
6. The Joint Secretary, DoPT, informed the Committee that their stand on the issue is based on the
advice they received from the DoLA and requested the other Departments viz. DoLA and Legislative Department
to further brief the Committee on this issue.
7. Thereafter, the Secretary, DoLA briefed the Committee about how they have arrived at their opinion
and informed that rights and obligations cannot be conferred in any other manner but only by the laws made
by the Parliament. Thus, he was of the opinion that amendments should be made to the parent Act to define
the terms like ‘Assets’ and ‘Liabilities’ .
8. Members of the Committee then raised queries on various aspects of the draft Rules and the Chairman
directed the Secretariat to prepare a questionnaire and seek replies to the queries of Members from the
Government.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 12.44 
P.M. to meet again on Wednesday, the 7th November, 2017.
***Relate to other matters.

11
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 6th December, 2017 in Committee Room No.-2, Block - ‘A’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 110001.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray  -  In the chair
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
6. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Shri Pralhad Joshi
11. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
12. Adv. M. Udhaya Kumar
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
15. Dr. A. Sampath
16. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray was voted to chair the meeting. At the
outset, he extended a warm welcome to all the Members of the Committee, especially to the newly elected
Member of the Committee, Shri Vivek K. Tankha. He, then, informed the Members that the Committee
would deliberate further on the draft Public Servants (Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and Minimum
Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017 and Secretary, Department of Personnel and
Training has been invited to seek clarification on the Department’s reply to the questionnaire and on other
issues related to the draft Rules.
3. Shri Ray pointed out that based on the previous deliberations on the draft rules, some key issues have
emerged, such as (i) how to remove the lacunae that have crept in the draft rules due to the manner in which
the terms ‘Assets’ and ‘Liablities’ have been defined; (ii) whether a separate formulation of rules defining

12
comprehensively these terms will overcome the deficiency or the parent Act needs to be amended;
(iii) repercussions of giving the power to the Competent Authority to seek further details of the source of the
property held/acquired by the public servants; (iv) Government’s view that uniformity in form and manner
of reporting may be difficult to achieve as public servants defined in the Act encompass heterogeneous
group; (v) multiplicity of returns filed by public servants under different Acts/Rules; (vi) the Rules not
making distinction between income derived by a person as a public servant or any income from other
sources and difficulty in partitioning income from different sources utilized by a person to generate an asset,
etc. He, then, invited the Secretary, DoPT to share his views on the above/issues.
4. The Secretary, DoPT explained that the reason behind using the phrase ‘any other person’ in the
definition clause of the draft rules is to make it more explicit, so that nobody is left out. He further stated that
the terms ‘assets’ and ‘liabilities’ go to the very root of the Lokpal concept and are so crucial to the Act that
defining it in the Act itself, merits consideration.
5. During the deliberations, some Members raised objection on giving the Competent Authority powers
to seek further details about the source of property held or acquired by the public servant under clause 3(2)
of the proposed draft rules, as it goes beyond the scope of the parent statute and such powers to the
Competent Authority cannot be given through rules.
6. At the end, the Secretary, DoPT stated that the rules are still at the draft stage. He admitted that there
are a lot of gaps/deficiencies in the proposed draft rules and to overcome them, he sought the guidance of
the Committee.
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 4.12 
P.M.

13
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 11th January, 2018 in Committee Room No.- 4, Block . ‘A’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 110001.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav   —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
8. Adv. Joice George
9. Shri Pralhad Joshi
10. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
11. Shri Bhagwant Mann
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
13. Dr. A. Sampath
14. Adv. Anshul V erma
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to all Members of the Committee. Thereafter,
he stated that the Committee would be deliberating further on the draft Public Servants (Declaration of
Assets and Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017 and Secretaries
of DoPT, Legal Affairs and Legislative Department have been invited to offer clarification on various issues
that have emerged during the deliberations of the Committee. * * *.
3. * * *
4. * * *
(* * *)
5. The Chairman welcomed the Secretaries of the DoPT, Legal Affairs and Legislative Department and
other officers accompanying them to the meeting of the Committee. The Chairman pointed out that certain
*** Relate to other matters.

14
key issues that had emerged during the previous deliberations of the Committee on the Rules viz. (i) how to
remove the lacunae that have crept in the draft rules due to the manner in which the terms ‘Assets’ and
‘Liablities’ have been defined; (ii) repercussions of giving the power to the Competent Authority to seek
further details of the source of the’ property held/acquired by the public servants; (iii) Government’s view
that uniformity in form and manner of reporting may be difficult to achieve as public servants defined in the
Act encompass heterogeneous group; (iv) multiplicity of returns filed by public servants under different
Acts/Rules; (v) the Rules not making distinction between income derived by a person as a public servant or
any income from other sources and difficulty in partitioning income from different sources utilized by a
person to generate asset, etc. He, then, invited the Secretary, DoPT to share his views on the above issues.
6. The Secretary, DoPT informed the Committee that he had consulted the Secretaries of the Department
of Legal Affairs and the Legislative Department on the issues raised by the Committee on the draft rules. He
sought extension of time to submit views of the Department in comprehensive manner on those issues. The
Committee acceded to the request of the Secretary, DoPT and granted four weeks’ time to that Department
to finalize their views and respond to the various issues raised by the Committee on the draft rules.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 12.03 
P.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, 22nd January, 2018.

15
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 27th June, 2018 in Committee Room No.4, Parliament House
Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 11000l.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav   —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri D. Raja
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
7. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
8. Adv. Joice George
9. Shri Vincent H. Pala
10. Dr. A. Sampath
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Addl. Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. The Chairman informed the
Committee that the DoPT, Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department have arrived at a consensus
view on the issues raised by the Committee on the draft Lokpal Rules, 2017 and the revised draft Lokpal
Rules, 2018 has been forwarded to the Committee for examination. He then added that the DoPT Secretary
has been invited to explain the features of revised draft Rules, 2018.
(On arrival of the witness)
3. On arrival of the Secretary, DoPT, the Chairman welcomed and invited him to make a presentation on
the revised draft rules and answer the queries of the Members thereon. The Secretary, DoPT in his opening
remarks informed that the revised rules have been drafted keeping in mind the issues and objections raised
by the Committee on the previous draft and suggestions of the Committee have been incorporated in these
rules. He then highlighted the salient aspects of the revised rules by comparing the revised draft vis-a-vis the
old draft.
4. The Chairman and Members of the Committee broadly agreed with the provisions of the revised draft
rules. The Members of the Committee were, however, not in agreement with the second proviso to Rule
2(1) of the revised draft rules. As per the revised draft, a public servant need to file revised declarations
whenever there is any change in the details of declaration made, to which the Committee opined that it might
create practical difficulties in submission of declarations, especially for those elected public servants who

16
may have alternate source of earning. In such a situation they may have to furnish declarations several
times. In view of this, it was suggested that the declarations should be filed periodically every year. The
Secretary, DoPT agreed to the suggestions of the Committee and assured that the draft rules would be
suitably revised before notifying them.
5. * * *
(The witness then withdrew)
6. Verbatim record of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 11.58 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

17
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 03.00 P.M. on Friday, 6 th July, 2018 in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav   —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri D. Raja
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
5. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
8. Adv. Joice George
9. Shri Pralhad Joshi
10. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
11. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
12. Shri Vincent H. Pala
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Addl. Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed Members present in the meeting. Thereafter,
the Committee took up for consideration draft 97
th Report on the Draft Public Servants (Declaration of
Assets and Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017. Members
deliberated on the issues contained in the draft Report, and thereafter, the Report was adopted with some
modifications.
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to both Houses of Parliament on the 19 th July, 2018. The
Committee authorized Shri Majeed Memon, and in his absence, Shri D. Raja to present the Report to the
Rajya Sabha and Shri Pralhad Joshi and in his absence, Shri Kalyan Banerjee to lay the same in the Lok
Sabha.
4. The meeting adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.

ANNEXURES

21
ANNEXURE - I
[TO BE PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA, EXTRAORDINARY, PART II,
SECTION 3, SUB-SECTION (i)]
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
(DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING)
Notification
New Delhi, ............. , 2017.
G .S.R._______(E).––In exercise of the powers conferred by sections 44 and 45 read with sub-section (1)
and clause (k) and (l) of sub-section (2) of section 59 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014),
and in supersession of the Public Servants (Furnishing of Information and Annual Return of Assets and
Liabilities and the Limits for Exemption of Assets in Filing Returns) Rules, 2014, except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before such supersession, the Central Government hereby makes the following
rules to provide for declaration of assets and liabilities by public servants and to provide for minimum value
of the assets to condone or exempt from furnishing the information by a public servant, namely:-
1. Short title and commencement.–– (1) These rules may be called the Public Servants (Declaration
of Assets and Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets for Condonation or Exemption) Rules, 2017.
(2) They shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th January, 2014.
2. Definitions. –– (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a)  Act  means the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013;
(b) assets  means and includes the assets acquired in any manner by the public servant from
his known sources of income, either in his own name or in the name of any member of
his family or in the name of any other person and it does not include the assets acquired
by his spouse or any other family member by means of their independent source of
income.
(c) declaration  means the declaration of assets and liabilities made by a public servant under
section 44 of the Act;
(d) Form  means Form I, II and III of these rules;
(e) “liabilities”  mean the liabilities incurred by the public servants either in his own name or
in the name of any member of his family or in name of any person and it does not include
the liabilities incurred by his spouse or any other family member incurred independently.
(f) “prescribed authority” means the authority for the purposes of ,-
(i) clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Act , -
(A) the Chairman of the Council, in the case of a member of the Council of States;
and
(B) the Speaker of the House, in the case of a member of the House of the People;

22
(ii) clauses (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Act shall be the concerned
authorities as specified under the All India Services Act, 1951(61 of 1951) and the
rules and regulations made there under or the rules made under the provisions of
article 148 or article 309 of the Constitution, as the case may be;
(iii) clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Act shall be the concerned authorities
as prescribed under the relevant Acts and the rules and regulations respectively
applicable to them;
(iv) clauses (g) and (h) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Act shall be the nodal
officer designated by the competent authorities specified by notification issued or as
may be issued by the Central Government under provisions of sub-clause (vii) of
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Act;
(g) “section”  means the section of the Act.
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Act, shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.
3. Manner of submission of declaration––  (1) Every public servant shall make a declaration of
his assets and liabilities, before the prescribed authority as on the 31st day of March every year
in the format as specified in the Forms I to III on or before 31st day of July of that year:
Provided that, the declarations of the public servants, in form or manner as made before the
competent authority under the Public Servants (Furnishing of Information and Annual Return of
Assets and Liabilities and the Limits for Exemption of Assets in Filing Returns), Rules, 2014 ,
during the years 2014, 2015 and 2016 shall be deemed to be declarations made under these
rules:
Provided further that such public servants who have not made any such declarations, for any of
the years 2014, 2015 or 2016, under the aforesaid rules shall be required to make declarations
for the years 2014, 2015 and 2016 in the form and manner, as provided under these rules:
Provided also that such public servants who have made such declarations for the years 2014,
2015 and 2016 under the aforesaid rules may revise the declarations for the years 2014, 2015
and 2016 by filing fresh declarations for the said years in the form and manner as provided
under these rules.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-rule (1), there shall be no bar on the competent
authority, by general or special order, to seek from any public servant or a class of public
servants, to furnish within a period specified in the order, a full and complete statement of such
movable or immovable property held or acquired by him or on his behalf by any member of his
family as may be specified in the order and such statement shall include the details of the means
by which, or the source from which, such property was acquired.
4. Minimum value of assets to condone and exempt for exemption from furnishing of
information.–– The competent authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt a
public servant from filing the information in respect of any asset, if the value of such asset does
not exceed four months basic pay of the public servant or rupees five lakhs, whichever is
higher.

FORM-I
Declaration of Assets and Liabilities as on 31st March, 20…...*
[as per sub-rule(1) of rule 3]
1. Name of the Public servant in full…………………………………………
(in block letters)
2. (a) Present public position held …………………………………………
(Designation, name and address ……………………………………
of organisation) ………………………………………… ……………
 (b) Service to which belongs ……………………………………………
(if applicable)
Declaration:
I hereby declare that the return enclosed namely, Forms I to III are complete, true and correct to the best of
my knowledge and belief, in respect of information due to be furnished by me under the provisions of
section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
Date…………………. Signature…………………………
 ———————————————————————————————————————
Note 1. This declaration shall contain particulars of all assets and liabilities of the public servant owned by
him, or inherited or acquired by him or held by him on lease or mortgage, either his own name or in the name
of any member of his family or in the name of any other person and it does not include the assets acquired
by his spouse or any other family member by means of their independent source of income.
Note 2. If a public servant is a member of Hindu Undivided Family with co-parcenary rights in the properties
of the family either as a  Karta‘ or as a member, he should indicate in the return in Form No. III the value of
his share in such property and where it is not possible to indicate the exact value of such share, its approximate
value. Suitable explanatory notes may be added wherever necessary.
23

FORM NO. II
Statement of movable property (Assets and Debts and other Liabilities) as on the
31st March, 20…
[as per sub-rule(1) of rule 3]
(Use separate sheet for self or any other person.)
Name of Public Servant/ any other person: _________________________________
Description V alue Remarks, if any
(in Rs.)/
in weight
where so
indicated
Assets
1.* Cash and bank balance (in saving bank accounts)
2.** Fixed/Recurring Deposit(s)
3.** Shares/Bonds/Mutual Fund(s)
4.** Pension Scheme (other than CGEGIS) /GPF/other
Provident Funds
5.** Antiqu es/Paintings, etc.
6.** Personal loans/advances given to any person or entity
7.*** Any other movable assets not covered in (1) to (6) above
(including Furniture, Fixtures, Electronic equipment/
appliances, etc.)
8. a) Jewellery, including gold, silver (in gms.)
[please b) Consolidated approximate current value of Precious
provide metals, stones and composite items (in Rs.):
either (a) c) Total current value of Jewellery including gold,
and (b) silver, precious metals & precious stones and composite
OR (c)] items (in Rs.):
9. Motor Vehicle(s):
[Indicate the Make, year, Registration number and
purchase value]
24

25
Debts and other Liabilities
Sl. No. Name and address of Creditor Amount Nature of debt/
liability and
remarks if any
1.
2.
3.
Place of Posting : Name :
Designation:
Organisation :
Date ……………… Signature……………………….
Notes :
1. Assets
* Consolidated deposits in the Bank(s) abroad to be given separately.
** Indicate consolidated amount only if the value in any category (2) to (6) exceeds two months basic
pay of the public servant or rupees one lakh, whichever is more.
*** Indicate the details of an asset, only if the current value of any particular asset exceeds two months
basic pay or Rs. 1.00 lakh, whichever is higher, as the case may be.
2. Debts and other Liabilities
The statement should include various loans and advances taken from banks, financial institutions, companies,
Central/State Governments or from any individual/entity. Consolidated items of loans not exceeding two
months basic pay of the public servant or Rs. 1.00 lakh, whichever is more, need not be included.

FORM NO. III
Statement of immovable property as on 31st March, 20…..….
(e.g. Lands, House, Shops, Other Buildings, etc.)
[as per sub-rule(1) of rule 3]
[Held by Public Servant or any other person]
Sl. Description Precise Area of land Nature of Extent of If not in Date of How acquired Present T otal Rem arks
No. of property location (in case of land in case interest name of acquisition (whether value of annual
(Land/ (Name of land and of landed public by purchase, the income, if
House/Flat/ District, buildings) property servant, state mortgage, lease, property any, from
Shop/ Division, in whose inheritance, (If exact the
Industrial Taluk and name held gift or value not property
etc.) V illage in and his/her otherwise) and known,
which the relationship, name with approx.
property is if any to the details of value may
situated and public person/persons be
also its servant from whom indicated)
distinctive acquired (address
number, etc.) and connection of
the Government
servant, if any,
with the person/
persons concerned)
(Please see
Note 1 below) and
cost of acquisition
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2
Date…………………….. Signature………………….
Note (1) For purpose of Column 9, the term “lease” would mean a lease of immovable property from year to year or for any term exceeding one year or reserving
a yearly rent. Where, however, the lease of immovable property is obtained from a person having official dealings with the Gove rnment servant, such a lease
should be shown in this Column irrespective of the term of the lease, whether it is short-term or long-term, and the periodicity of the payment of rent.
[ F.No.407/20/2016-AVD-IV(LP) ]
[JISHNU BARUA]
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
26

ANNEXURE - II
[TO BE PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA, EXTRAORDINARY, PART II,
SECTION 3, SUB-SECTION (i) OF DATED THE ———, FEBRUARY, 2018]
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
(DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING)
Notification
New Delhi, the February, 2018
G.S.R._______(E).–– In exercise of the powers conferred by clauses (k) and (l) of sub-section (2) of
section 59, read with section 44 and 45, of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014), and in
supersession of the Public Servants (Furnishing of Information and Annual Return of Assets and Liabilities
and the Limits for Exemption of Assets in Filing Returns) Rules, 2014, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before such supersession, the Central Government hereby makes the following rules to
provide for declaration of assets and liabilities by public servants and to provide for minimum value of the
assets for the purpose of furnishing the information by a public servant, namely:—
1. Short title and commencement.–– (1) These rules may be called the Public Servants
(Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and Minimum Value of Assets) Rules, 2018.
(2) These rules shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th January, 2014.
2. Declaration of assets and liabilities by public servants.––  (1) A person who becomes a
public servant referred to in clauses (a) to (h) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2013 (1 of 2014) shall, within a period of six months from the date of becoming such public servant,
make a declaration of his assets and liabilities, held or incurred by him, whether in his own name or any
other person’s name, in the Form appended to these rules to the competent authority or such officer as may
be authorised, in writing, by the competent authority in this regard:
Provided that a person who is or has been a public servant, on the commencement of these rules or on
or before the date of publication of these rules in the Official Gazette, shall make a declaration of his assets
and liabilities on or before the 31st day of July, 2018:
Provided further that a public servant shall, whenever there is any change in the details of declaration
of his assets and liabilities made under this sub-rule, make a revised declaration of his assets and liabilities
within a period of six months from the date of such change.
(2) Where a public servant, who is required to make a declaration of his assets and liabilities under any
other law for the time being in force, or has been in force from the time of coming into force of these rules,
makes a declaration of his assets and liabilities under such law, then, the declaration so made shall,
notwithstanding anything in sub-rule (1), be deemed to be the declaration of his assets and liabilities for the
purposes of these rules.
(3) The competent authority or the officer authorised by him under sub-rule (1) shall acknowledge in
writing the receipt of the declaration of assets and liabilities made under these rules.
27

28
3. Minimum value of assets and liabilities required to be declared.––  The competent authority
may, having regard to the nature of public servants and the public office, determine the minimum value or
values in respect of assets and liabilities which shall not be required to be included in the declaration of assets
and liabilities under these rules.

FORM
[See rule 2(1)]
DECLARATION OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES BY PUBLIC SERV ANT
As on the ——— day of —————, ———— (year)
under section 44 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014)
PART A – PERSONAL  INFORMATION
1. (a) Name and designation of the Public Servant in full: .............................................................
(in block letters)
(b) Name and address of office/organisation: ..........................................................................
2. Date of Birth: .............................................................................................................. ...........
3. Place of Domicile: .......................................................................................................... ........
4. (a) Date of assumption of post or office as Public Servant: ......................................................
(b) Period during which the aforesaid post or office was held: ..................................................
(c) Nature of public servant [Please see section 14(1) of the Act]: ............................................
5. Whether being a public servant has filed a declaration of his/her assets and liabilities under any other
law for the time being force. If yes, please give details thereof:
............................................................................................................................... ..................
6. Name and address of the Competent Authority ...........................................................................
[Please see section 2(1)(c) of the Act]
29

30
PART B – DETAILS OF ASSETS
(i) Immovable Assets
[having the monetary value of or above as determined by the Competent Authority under rule 3]
Sl. Ownership Details Nature of property Property Details Acquisition Details
No.
If not in name of Percentage of Description of Nature of Precise location (Name Area of land Date of How acquired (whether by Acquisition
public servant, respective property land in case of District, Division, (in case of acquisition purchase, mortgage, lease or value of
state in whose share of all (Land/ House/ of landed Taluk and Village in land and otherwise) and name with the
name held and owners Flat/ Shop/ property which the property is buildings) details of person/persons property
his/her Industrial etc.) situated and also its from whom acquired
relationship, if distinctive number, (address and connection of
any to the public etc.) the public servant, if any,
servant with the person/persons
concerned)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1.
2.
3.
4.
NOTE.— For purpose of column 9, the term “lease” would mean a lease of immovable property from year to year or for any term exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent.

(ii) Movable Assets
[having the monetary value of or above as determined by the Competent Authority under rule 3]
Sl. Nature of Description Mode of V alue Name and percentage of share of all owners
No. asset of assets acquisition (in Rs.) in case the asset is held jointly or not in the
and/or own name of the public servant
share
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)                         (6)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Note 1.— In case of assets in the joint name, if the value of the asset could not be assessed, indicate his or her share
in the asset.
Note 2.— The intangible assets may include any intellectual property rights, rights to use trademarks, goodwill,
computer software, copyright and the like, which generate a monetary value.
31

PART C: DETAILS OF LIABILITIES
[having the monetary value of or above as determined by the Competent Authority under rule 3]
Amount
(in Rupees)
Sl. No. Description and T otal E xtent of which the Name and address
nature of liability  amount of liability remains to be of creditor
liability discharged
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 1.
 2.
 3. …
UNDERTAKING
I, ……………………………………….……… hereby declare that the above information is correct
and accurately reflected for the purpose of making declarations of my assets and liabilities, under the Lokpal
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.
Name and signature of the public servant
Place:
Date:
[F.No.407/20/2016-AVD-IV(LP)]
[K. Srinivas]
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
32