PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
NINETY THIRD REPORT
Action Taken on Ninetieth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2017-18)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)
93
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 177
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
NINETY THIRD REPORT
Action Taken on Ninetieth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2017-18) Pertaining to
the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ ( i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-27
(i) Chapter I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Ministry................................................................................... 2-10
(ii) Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry ..... 11-15
(iii) Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Committee
has not accepted replies of the Ministry.................................... 16-27
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE .................................................... 28-30
5. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 31-35
6. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................... 37-44

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted on 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri Prabhat Jha
4. Shri Majeed Memon
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva
*10. Shri Anand Sharma
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Dr. Sanjeev Balyan
13. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
14. Shri Sharadkumar Maruti Bansode
15. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhury
16. Adv. Joice George
17. Shri Radadiya Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai
18. Shri Pralhad Joshi
19. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
20. Adv. M. Udhaya Kumar
21. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
22. Shri Bhagwant Mann
23. Shri B.V . Naik
24. Shri Vincent H. Pala
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 10.11.2017 consequent on his resignation from the Committee.

(ii)
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah
28. Shri V. Panner Selvam
29. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
30. Adv. Anshul Verma
†31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
† Due change of nomination of Shri Santosh Kumar from the Committee w.e.f. 03.11.2017.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-third Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Ninetieth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
15th March, 2017.
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action Taken Replies on
the Ninetieth Report of the Committee on 30th June, 2017. The Committee considered the draft Report
and adopted the same at its meeting held on 14th November, 2017.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report.
N
EW D ELHI; BHUPENDER YADA V
14th November, 2017 Chairman,
Kartik 23, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha.

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its Ninetieth
Report on the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 15th March, 2017.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned Report on the 30th
June, 2017. These replies have been categorized as follows:
CHAPTER-I : The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry,
i.e. in respect of paras 2.51, 3.18, 3.34, 3.46, 3.47, 3.48, 3.61, 3.62, 3.68, 3.77,
3.78, 3.90, 3.91 and 3.92 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that
the Ministry has accepted these recommendations.
CHAPTER-II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies given by the Ministry, i.e. in respect of paras 2.50, 3.25,
3.39, 3.79 and 3.80 of the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the explanations
advanced by the Ministry and does not wish to pursue them as of now.
CHAPTER-III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee is not satisfied
with the replies given by the Ministry, i.e. with regard to paras 3.4, 3.7, 3.8, 3.15,
3.16, 3.17, 3.19, 3.26, 3.27, 3.38, 3.54 and 3.76 of the Report. The Committee
does not accept the reasons given for not accepting the recommendations of the
Committee and reiterates its recommendations.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
Schemes for improving HR potential of personnel working under the Government
Recommendation/Observation
1.0. The Department of Personnel and Training and bodies/organizations under its administrative control
play a very important role in the personnel management under Government of India and in the governance
of the Country. The Ministry was allocated for FY 2016-17 under plan schemes ` 250.00 crores at BE
stage and ` 258.00 crores at RE stage. Even for the BE (2017-18) only ` 340.00 crores has been
allocated under the head scheme. The allocations under scheme head are very modest compared to the
task entrusted with the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should devise
innovative schemes/programmes aimed at improving HR potential and productivity and seek allocations
for them in order to improve quality and standards of personnel working under the Government. The
organizations under the Department of Personnel and Training play very important role in their respective
fields of Governance. The Committee also recommends that these organizations should also frame
Schemes/programmes aimed at bringing improvements in their systems, procedures and personnel and seek
allocations for such schemes. (Para 2.51)
Action Taken
1.1. Budgetary allocations to all the Schemes and establishment related expenditure of the Ministry and
its various attached/ subordinate offices are made on the basis of budgetary ceilings approved by M/o
Finance on the basis of projections made by the line Ministry to the Ministry of Finance and on the basis
of the discussions in the pre-Budget meeting taken by Secretary (Expenditure) with the representatives
of the Ministry.
1.2. Any additionality on account of increased requirement of funds are proposed to M/o Finance at the
various Supplementary stages and the Revised Estimate stage during the Financial year. A constant
endeavor is made to implement existing schemes/ programmes of the Ministry in a way to achieve the
desired objectives and results.
1.3. A T oken provision of ` 1.00 Lakh under Non-Scheme has been kept for implementation of the
"Human Resource Management System (HRMS)" which was recommended by the Expenditure Management
Commission (EMC). The online HRMS portal would comprehensively cover all service matters from
entry to exit including leave, transfer, promotion, performance appraisal, travel, LTC, pay, pensions,
advances, etc. DOPT has finalised e-service book module for implementation and on a pilot basis, it is
being implemented in DOPT itself for all of its employees. Since the concerned Division is in the process
of taking necessary approvals for HRMS, a token provision of Rs 1.00 Lakh has been made in BE 2017-
18. Additional requirement of funds under the HRMS would be taken up with M/o Finance at the
Supplementary/ RE 2017-18 stage.
2

3
1.4. The committee's recommendation for framing schemes/programmes aimed at bringing improvements
in systems, procedures and personnel have been noted for future compliance.
Further Observation
1.5. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI) CAPACITY BUILDING AND SKILL
DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation/Observation
2.0. The Committee endorses the need for capacity enhancement and skill development of the CBI and
commends the proposal of projects like Centralized Technology Vertical (CTV) - CBI, setting up of
International Centre of Excellence in Investigation (ICEI-CBI) and International Centre of Excellence
in Forensic Science. The Committee recommends that approval and establishment of these projects may
be expedited. (Para 3.18)
Action Taken
2.1. The project for setting of Centralized Technology Vertical (CTV)-CBI, and engagement of National
Institute of Smart Governance (NISG) as consultant has already been sanctioned.
2.2. The International Center of Excellence in Investigation (ICEI-CBI) is under consideration.
2.3. Proposal for setting up of ICEIS-CBI is under consideration of MHA.
Further Observation
2.4. The Committee takes note of the reply.
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR GOOD GOVERNANCE (NCGG)
Recommendation/Observation
3.0. The Committee recommends that building of NCGC should be constructed at an early date and
necessary infrastructure created for the Centre to perform its activities in an efficient manner. The
Government should also evolve a mechanism to ensure that the Centre evolves into a result oriented
organization of global excellence which is self sustaining and does not remain dependent on Government
funds. (Para 3.34)
Action Taken
3.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted by the National Center for Good Governance
(NCGG). With regard to construction of building, budget allocation has already been made during this
financial year. NCGG will work with the Government to implement the vision envisaged in the report
so that it evolves into an organization of global excellence that can sustain itself financially.
Further Observation
3.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.

4
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION (SSC)
Computer-based Examinations
Recommendation/Observation
4.0. The Staff Selection Commission (SSC) is mandated for recruitment of Group B and C employees
of Government of India, who form bulk of its strength. In the year 2016-17, the Commission has
examined more than 2.3 crores candidates (for about 70,000 posts), which is phenomenal in terms of
numbers. The Commission has informed that it recently conducted one of its largest examinations, i.e.
the Combined Higher Secondary Level Examination (Tier-I), 2016 for approximately 65 Lakhs candidates
flawlessly, without any glitch or untoward incident. This has become possible by shifting of the examination
mode from OMR based to computer based. The Committee appreciates shift to computer-based examinations
by the Commission. (Para 3.46)
Action Taken
4.1. The department takes note of this Observation of the Committee.
Further Observation
4.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
5.0. The Secretary, DoPT and the Chairman, SSC in their deposition before the Committee have informed
that with the shift to Computer Based examination the cost of conducting examination per candidate has
gone up from 
` 100 per candidate to ` 200 per candidate and ` 135 crores liability of examinations
conducted during FY 2016-17 would be booked during the financial year 2017-18. Thus, the Commission
would be requiring about 
` 251 crores additional funds during the financial year 2017-18, as the present
allocation Professional Services is inadequate. The Committee therefore, recommends that SSC be provided
with the required additional funds in the financial year 2017-18 at RE stage, so that its work doesn't
suffer due to lack of funds. (Para 3.47)
Action Taken
5.1. In the financial year 2017-18 the Commission proposes to conduct all its examinations viz (1) All
India Open Competitive Examinations except the Multi Tasking Staff Examination, 2016; (2) Examinations
for Selection Posts and (3) Limited Departmental Competitive Examinations for a total candidature of
approximately 2.50 crore candidates in the Computer based mode.
5.2. The Multi Tasking Staff Examination, 2016 (in which 69 lakh candidates have registered to take the
examination) would be the only examination to be conducted in the OMR based mode in 2017 i.e.
(between 30.4.2017 and 11.6.2017). However, from the next year, this examination would also be
conducted in the computer based mode.
5.3. The unit cost of examination per candidate is much higher in the Computer Based Examination mode
i.e. approximately ` 200/- per candidate as compared to ` 100/- per candidate in the OMR based mode.
The total fund requirement by the Commission during the Financial Year 2017-18 for the said purpose
is projected at ` 279 crore.
5.4. Besides, it may be pertinent to mention that in the Financial Year 2017-18, an additional amount of
` 135.00 crore comprising an anticipated expenditure of ` 127.00 crore towards the Combined Higher

5
Secondary Level Examination, 2016 conducted during January-February, 2017 and `8.00 crore for the
Junior Engineer Examination, 2016 conducted by the Commission from 1st to 4th March, 2017 would
be booked during the Financial Year 2017-18.
5.5. The total requirement of funds under the Head "Professional Services" by the Commission during
the Financial Year 2017-18 is therefore projected at `414 crore (i.e. `279 crore + `135 crore) against
which the Government has already provided the Commission `163.00 crore under the 'Professional
Services' Head.
5.6. In the given context, the Commission would require an additional budgetary provision of `251 crore
at the RE stage for the financial year 2017-18.
5.7. Additional funds required to meet SSC's requirement under the head "Professional Services" will be
taken up with Ministry of Finance at appropriate stages i.e. Supplementary/ Revised Estimates 2017-18.
Further Observation
5.8. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
6.0. As examinations have gone online, the Committee recommends that the SSC must ensure that
software, hardware and other facilities at examination venues are audited and made to conforms to
global standards. Also, problems like server crashing, computer hanging, login failure, abrupt shutting
down of computers during examinations which are real time problems, being faced in a computer based
examination should be adequately taken care of so that no candidate suffer because of this.
(Para 3.48)
Action Taken
6.1.  To ensure a seamless conduct of its examinations, in the Computer Based Mode, SSC undertakes
a comprehensive pre-examination preparedness review along with its service provider.
6.2. All examination venues are pre-audited through joint inspections conducted by the officers of the
SSC and the representatives of the service provider. During the audit, all venues are screened for proper
functioning and mock tests are conducted in the auto pilot mode to simulate near real time examination
scenarios to check the functioning of equipment on full load as also the preparedness of the manpower
to be deployed at the examination venues. The supervisory and technical manpower components of the
service provider engaged on examination duty are subjected to an intensive training programme before
being deployed on examination duty.
6.3. During the course of the examination, the service provider deploys his supervisory staff and
technical team at all the examination venues to ensure the smooth conduct of the examination. Back up
machines are checked in standby mode to take over the examination in case of any unforeseen event
of server crash or hardware failure. Adequate number of buffer exam terminals are tested and kept ready
to manage abrupt shutting down of exam terminals or systems hang issues. Inspecting Officers from
SSC are also deputed by the Commission to oversee the conduct of the examinations at different venues.
All examination related activities are logged in the computer for monitoring, and any remedial or curative
action required, is promptly taken.

6
6.4. The Commission embarked on the computer based mode of examination with the prior approval of
the Government in June 2016 and has in the past ten months conducted seven examinations in the
Computer Based Mode. Based on the experience in successive examinations, the Commission has been
taking progressive measures to make the examination process more robust and secure and is committed
to upscale processes further to achieve a regime of zero tolerance to error.
Further Observation
6.5. The Committee takes note of the reply.
LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ADMINISTRATION (LBSNAA)
Shortage of Faculty
Recommendation/Observation
7.0. The Committee in its previous report on Demands for Grants 2016-17 has highlighted the problem
of shortage of faculty positions in the Academy and recommended that other feasible options of handling
this problem may be explored. However, no progress is visible in this respect and the Committee expresses
its anguish over it. The Committee again recommends that the DoPT should explore all possible options
for augmenting and expanding its existing training capacity at the LBSNAA and ISTM and ensure
availability of full strength of faculty and other supporting staff for efficient functioning of these
training Institutes. (Para 3.61)
Action Taken
7.1. The Department and the Academy have been making sincere efforts to attract both serving officers
(under Central Staffing Scheme) as well as academic faculty to serve at the Academy. However, given
the shortfall, there may be a case for providing additional incentives to attract officers and academicians
to come and serve the Academy.
7.2. W ith the existing infrastructural facilities as well as the available faculty/supporting staff, ISTM has
been meeting the target of executing the Cadre Training Plan for Central Secretariat Service and Central
Secretariat Stenographers Service as set forth, besides conducting other calendared programmes on a
regular basis. During 2016-17, 6608 participants have been trained by ISTM inclusive of 2230 personnel
belonging to CSS and CSSS cadre.
Further Observation
7.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
UNDER-UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation/Observation
8.0. The Committee also observes that the Academy has been slow on spending on scheme/plan side in
the FY 2016-17. Out of 
` 13.70 crores allocated under Capital head, only ` 9.21 crores have been spent
and out of 14 crores allotted under Revenue head only 8.74 crores have been spent. In view of under-
utilization of fund sought on scheme/plan side, the Committee observes that every spending unit should
make a prudent assessment of its requirement of funds under plan schemes it proposes to undertake and

7
seek of budgetary allocations to the extent it can utilize. Non-utilisation of allocated funds put unnecessary
financial burden on the Government and, therefore, it should be avoided. Also, strategies should be
drawn for the utilization of full funds made available to spending units and utilization should be closely
monitored to ensure efficient utilization of funds. (Para 3.62)
Action Taken
8.1 Plan expenditure of Lal Bhadur Shastri National Academy of Administration and other Training
Institutions (LBSNNA) was low during first three quarters of the financial year 2016-17 due to delay
in environment clearance from MOEF/forest department and heavy rainfall during the months of May,
June and July which adversely affected the work.
8.2. Budgetary allocation for the year 2016-17 under Plan head was sought by the Academy after
thorough scrutiny of the Plan Schemes to be undertaken during 2016-17. However, due to the reasons
as stated above, the pace of expenditure was adversely affected.
8.3. Ac ademy has fully utilized allocation of ` 13.70 crore under Capital head and ` 14 crore under
Revenue Head as per RE 2016-17 up to March 2017, thus achieving 100% expenditure against the
allocation.
8.4. The Observation and recommendation of the committee regarding projection of funds and monitoring
to ensure efficient utilization of funds has been noted for compliance in future and is being followed in
letter and spirit.
Further Observation
8.5. The Committee takes note of the reply.
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (IIPA)
Recommendation/Observation
9.0. IIPA is a premier institution on Public Administration in India under the patronship of the Hon'ble
Vice-President of India. The Committee is pained to observe that such an institution of national importance
is not able to raise adequate funds for its maintenance and performance of its functions. Institutions like
IIP A needs to be protected, nurtured and nourished, but side by side such premier Institution should
become self-sustaining and should be able to raise themselves the resources needed by them and not
depend on public funds. The Committee recommends that Government should render all possible help to
this Institute to make it a self-sustaining Institute of global excellence and for that if public funds are
to be provided for some time, it should be done. (Para 3.68)
Action Taken
9.1 IIPA has achieved robust physical and financial milestones in capacity building and conducting
research in most areas of governance, IIPA interacted with about 4500 officers of the Central and State
Governments each year and renders research and hand holding services to leading-edge sector like Urban
Development, Consumer welfare, Information and Communication Technology and Environment. It has
also established institutional linkages with Niti Aayog, ATIs and Universities through India. In the past
few years, the Institute has taken effective measures to promote and disseminate on the flagship

8
programmes of the Government. IIPA has been trying to attain self-sustenance and is now earning
around 2/3 of its budget on its own. Government is also providing financial support to IIPA by way of
scheme and non-scheme grants for meeting the expenditures an account of salary, maintenance, etc.
During the current financial year IIPA has been earmarked a budget of ` 6.42 crore for non-scheme grant
and ` 5.92 crore towards scheme grant.
Further Observation
9.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
Recommendation/Observation
10.0.  The Committee feels that the spirit of Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism is primarily to
resolve the grievances in a professional and satisfactory manner. The relief and remedial mechanism need
to fix the accountability on the decision making authorities. As in the event of unsatisfactory redressal
of their grievances, the public usually approach courts for redressal of their grievances which increases
burden of courts, every endeavour should be made that grievances are resolved in a professional and
satisfactory manner. (Para 3.77)
Action Taken
10.1. Grievances are required to be redressed in a decentralized manner by the Ministries/Departments/
Organizations concerned. Guidelines have been issued that unwarranted delays in disposal of grievances
may be viewed seriously. For disposal of grievances in a professional and satisfactory manner, guidelines
have been issued that while closing a grievance a well reasoned speaking reply along with uploading of
relevant documents may be provided on CPGRAMS. Officers of the rank of JS and above have also been
requested to review closed cases on sample basis so that quality of disposal is monitored. To motivate
Ministries/Departments to redress grievances not only within time limit but also qualitatively, an Award
Scheme has been launched for recognizing outstanding performance for disposal of grievances by
Ministries/Departments. The performance is evaluated duly giving weightage to the feedback of the
petitioners whose grievances have been closed. Wherever any negligence in taking action on grievance
takes place, the concerned Ministry/Department can take action against the erring official based on
conduct rules.
Further Observation
10.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
11.0.  In order to make grievance redressal system (CPGRAMS) more effective, it is recommended that
Government may also consider making a provision for appeal in the existing system. (Para 3.78)
Action Taken
11.1.  Each Ministry/Department/Organization is required to nominate a Director of Public Grievances of
sufficiently senior level who can be contacted by petitioners who is not satisfied with the action taken

9
on his grievance. Every working Wednesday of the week has been earmarked for the Director of Public
Grievance to hear the grievances in person.
Further Observation
11.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEPARTMENT OF PENSIONS AND PENSIONERS' WELFARE
Centralized Pension Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPENGRAMS)
Recommendation/Observation
12.0. The Committee appreciates the role of the Department in addressing the grievances of pensioners.
The initiatives like 'Bhavishya', 'Sankalp' and 'Anubhav' are good measures and the Committee hopes
that maximum number of pensioners will be benefited by these services. The Committee, at the same time
would like the Department to make more efforts to reach out to its primary stakeholders i.e. pensioners
and especially family pensioners about the latest developments and changes brought about in entitlements
including the additional facility of submission of Aadhaar based Digital Life Certificate. As more funds
have been allocated to the Department for BE (2017-18) towards publicity and advertisement, the
Committee hopes that Department would ensure that its schemes reach to the target groups i.e. pensioners
staying in every nook and corner of the country. (Para 3.90)
Action Taken
12.1. A provision of ` 4.00 crore has been made in BE for 2017-18 for creating awareness on their
entitlement and various pension rule among pensioners. Electronic/Print media will be used extensively
for purposes of creating awareness. In the first Qtr. ` 1.20 crore (approx.) will be utilized for the
purpose.
Further Observation
12.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
13.0.  The Committee also notes that pensions are generally disbursed through Public Sector Banks and
many a time the banks do not disburse pension timely and correctly. Pensioners are at times harassed
by these banks and their grievances with them remain unresolved. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that Department should also take up the matter with these banks, so that the pensioners' grievances
pertaining to the disbursing banks, are also satisfactorily resolved. (Para 3.91)
Action Taken
13.1. Department of Financial Services (DFS) has been requested to advise all public sector Banks to
redress the grievances of pensioners on priority and also adhere to the guidelines issued by this Department
for timely disposal of grievances vide OM No. dt. 17.05.2017 (copy enclosed)-Annexure-I.

10
Further Observation
13.2. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee however wishes that Department
of Pensions and Pensioners Welfare keep pursuing with the DFS so that the pensioners are not
harassed on this account.
Recommendation/Observation
14.0. The Committee feels that filling of pension forms and pension procedures still remain complicated,
even though some welcome steps have been taken by the Department in this regard. The Committee
recommends that number of pension forms should be further rationalized/reduced and simplified. For
this, the Department may consider taking the services of National Centre for Good Governance (NCGG).
The Department may also provide option of filling online application for pension and other pensionary
benefits. (Para 3.92)
Action Taken
14.1. National Centre for Good Governance (NCGG) has been requested to examine whether there is
any further scope for simplification vide letter No.2(II)/2/2017PandPW(Coord) dated 14.06.2017 (copy
enclosed)-Annexure-II. Further, it is also stated that through BHA VISHYA software -on-line Pension
Sanction and Payment Tracking System, the pension process has been digitized. Use of BHAVISHYA has
rendered the use of pension forms redundant. Information such as names of nominees and members of
family, bank details for receiving pension, photographs etc., is filled in by the pensioner in an information
sheet. This information is used by the system and all required forms are generated and auto-filled in by
the BHA VISHYA software. Similarly, information to be filled in the Office is picked by the software from
the salary details of the employee and all forms to be filled by the Office are auto-generated by the
software. Therefore, in effect there is no additional burden on the pensioner for filling up forms. Once
the process of generation of e-PPO is in place there would be no further need to generate manual copies
of forms for various authorities.
Further Observation
14.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.

11
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
Under-utilization of funds
Recommendation/Observation
1.0. The Committee after analyzing the trend of expenditure in the 2016-17 in the Departments of this
Ministry and their organizations observes that as on 31st January, 2017 the Ministry has been able to
spend only about 70% of the funds under plan schemes. Thus, performance of the Departments in terms
of utilization of funds under plan schemes leaves much to be desired. The reasons cited by the Ministry
for under-utilization of funds are administrative and procedural which could have been avoided. This
also shows that a focused planning and close monitoring of utilization of funds, is required on part of
the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should identify the bottlenecks
responsible for not being able to utilize optimally the funds at its disposal and take remedial measures
so as to improve its performance in utilization of plan funds in the future. (Para 2.50)
Action Taken
1.1. Expenditure incurred in the financial year 2016-17 is ` 248.43 Crores against the Final Grant
2016-17 of Plan allocation of ` 248.76 Crores which is 99.87 % of the Final Grant allocations. The funds
are released to the executing agencies by the Budget Controlling authorities as per the demands raised
by the agencies.
1.2. It is also submitted that the expenditure incurred in the Ministry is reviewed weekly in the Senior
Officers Meeting chaired by Secretary (P) and suitable instructions and advisories are issued throughout
the year to avoid savings/excess of expenditure and maintain a balanced pace of expenditure.
1.3. A consistent effort is being made to utilize the allocated funds in most efficient way, as advised by
the Standing Committee.
Further Observation
1.4. The Committee takes note of the reply. However, every Department should ensure early
commencement of its schemes/projects to ensure that 50% of the funds are utilized before
September of each year so as to avoid fund reduction by the Ministry of Finance at RE stage.
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL (CAT)
Recommendation/Observation
2.0. CAT has been envisaged to provide cheaper and faster adjudication of employees' grievances
against the Government. This, on other hand, was also to help in reducing the burden of Higher Courts
of the Country who were already under tremendous pressure due to their twin problems of pendency and
vacancy. Even after thirty years of its establishment, CAT lacks physical as well as human infrastructure.
11

12
Nine Benches are not having their own building and more than 30% of Members have not been
appointed. The Committee in its previous report on Demands for Grants 2016-17 had also given
recommendations for strengthening CAT in terms of infrastructure and human resource. The Committee
once again reiterates that proper infrastructure in terms of physical as well as human, should be provided
to CAT, to achieve the desired level of performance. Going by the present pace of efforts, the situation
is unlikely to improve as is evident from the fact that there are about 30% vacant positions and only
about 12 crores has been earmarked for infrastructure development.
The Committee feels that more concerted efforts are required to make CAT effective and to serve
the purpose for which it was established. (Para 3.25)
Action Taken
2.1. CAT has informed that there are 17 Benches and 21 Circuit Benches in the Central Administrative
Tribunal all over India. In addition to the Ministries and Departments of Central Government, the
Government of India has notified about 208 organizations under section 14(2) of the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985 to bring them within the jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal, from time
to time.
2.2. There are 66 sanctioned posts of Hon'ble Chairman/ Members (33-Judicial and 33-Administrative).
As on date, 24 number of posts of Hon'ble Members are vacant in various Benches (13-Judicial and 11-
Administrative). 18 more vacancies will fall vacant during rest of the months of the year 2017. Process
for filling up of vacancies of Hon'ble Members pertaining to the vacancies of 2016 is under active
consideration with the Government and vacancies for the year 2017 have also been circulated with last
date of inviting application is 03.05.2017.
2.3. During the financial year i.e. 2017-18, total ` 11.78 crores has been sanctioned to this office for
construction work at Guwahati, Lucknow, Jabalpur and its Circuit Bench at Bilaspur for which construction
is to begin.
Lucknow Bench:- Proposal will be sent after plan approval by the Hon'ble Chairman.
Guwahati Bench:- Proposal will be sent after receipt of fresh estimate from CPWD.
Jabalpur Bench:- Proposal will be sent after receipt of clarification from CPWD on the Observation
of IFD.
2.4. Besides, works related to annexe Building of CAT, PB and construction of boundary wall for Circuit
Sitting of CAT, Jabalpur Bench at Bilaspur is under progress and likely to be completed during this
Financial Year.
Further Observation
2.5. The Committee takes note of the reply.
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (UPSC)
Recommendation/Observation
3.0. The Committee also recommends that the recruiting agencies like UPSC, SSC should shorten their
recruitment process to the extent possible so that the time between requisition of vacancies and sending

13
of recommendations of the recruitment agency is reduced to the minimal possible time. This would ensure
that even the recruitment against the vacancies which are not anticipated in advance is also not delayed
unduly. (Para 3.39)
Action Taken
3.1. To expedite the process of examination of DPC/Deputation proposals in general for appointment on
promotion/ deputation basis, UPSC accepts the proposal under Single Window after scrutiny and discussions
with the representatives of the respective Departments. Considering the administrative exigencies and the
need for augmenting the officers/staff strength of the Departments/ Organizations and especially sensitive
establishments, the UPSC endeavors on a continuous basis to reduce the time taken in processing of the
proposals, convening of DPCs/Selection Committee Meetings and conveying of the recommendations.
3.2. Similarly, constant efforts are made by UPSC to speed up the recruitment process and to finalize
the recommendations at the earliest. The Commission has resorted to the Single Window system for
receipt of recruitment requisition from July 2012 onwards, wherein all the indenting Ministries/ Departments
are required to bring the recruitment proposals in person to the Communication's Office with all the
relevant documents/records for on the spot scrutiny. Further, clarifications on vague terms and clauses
mentioned in the requisitions are obtained from the indenting Ministries/ Departments at the time of
acceptance of requisition itself so as to obviate the scope of protracted communications seeking clarifications.
In addition, the Commission has also resorted to Online Recruitment Application system to facilitate
mechanized processing of recruitment applications with a view to compress the time taken in finalization
of recruitment process. These measures have contributed in bringing down the average time taken in
finalization of recruitment cases. Whereas for the year 2011-12, the average time taken in finalization of
recruitment cases from the date of receipt of requisition was 10.3 months, the same has come down
to 8.7 for the year 2014-15 and further to 7.5 months for the year 2015-16.
3.3. The Staff Selection Commission is entrusted with the task of making recruitment to Group 'B'
(Non-Gazetted) and Group 'C' (Non-Technical) posts in various Ministries/ Departments/Organisations of
Government of India. To achieve this mandate, the Commission conducts eight mandated All India Open
Competitive Examinations. Besides, it also conducts two non-mandated examinations for making
recruitments to the posts of Constable (GD) in Central Armed Police Forces and Constable (Executive)
in Delhi Police. In addition, the Commission also makes recruitment to isolated Selection Posts (where
the number of vacancies is small, and the essential qualifications vary from Matriculation to Post
Graduation degree specific to the job requirements in different Ministries/ Departments/ Organisations).
Further the Commission, on the specific direction of the Government of India, also undertakes the
recruitment process for specific Group 'B' (Non-Gazetted) and Group „C' (Non-Technical) posts in
different organizations. Recently, the Commission has signed an MoU with the Indian Meteorological
Department to conduct recruitments for 1102 posts of Scientific Assistant in that organisation.
3.4. SSC is com mitted to the objectives of merit based selection, and has undertaken a number of
initiatives to streamline processes so as to ensure timely filling of vacancies, with due emphasis on quality
considerations. The recent significant initiatives taken by the Commission in this regard inter-alia include:
(i) Online submission of vacancies by User Departments to ensure accurate and timely submission
of vacancies;

14
(ii) All applications are received online, resulting in faster processing of applications, on the basis
of which examinations are conducted within two to three months from the date of receipt of
applications.
(iii) SSC has made a swift and comprehensive transition in the conduct of its examinations from
the OMR based Mode to the Computer based mode for the conduct of its examinations. This
transition to the automated mode ensures a high level of transparency in its examination
processes besides, the timely processing and delivery of results.
(iv) The Commission also conducts 'documents verification' and 'skill tests' of candidates in the
automated mode.
3.5. Because of th ese initiatives, the Commission has been able to efficiently handle about 2.35 crore
applications in the year 2016-17 as against approx. 10 lakh applications in 2008-09 and also to declare
the results and nominate selected candidates to various Ministries/Departments/Organisation in a rationalised
time-frame. In the year 2016-17, the Commission has recommended approximately 68,500 candidates to
various posts in the Government of India through the modality of All India Open Competitive Examinations/
Non-mandated Examinations and candidates for 384 vacancies in Selection Posts.
3.6. The Commission (SSC) which is committed to the objective of Merit based selection, has by
adopting the Computer Based Mode of Examination, ensured a faster delivery of results with equal
emphasis on quality considerations, thereby compressing the recruitment process.
Further Observation
3.7. The Committee takes note of the reply. It also appreciates the steps taken by UPSC and
SSC to speed up the recruitment process and hopes that these agencies will continue with their
endeavor to further streamline the recruitment process.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
Recommendation/Observation
4.0. The Committee also takes note of the fact that over the time there has been a substantial increase
in the number of public grievances received by the Department. The Committee desires that all those
areas where large number of grievances are received, are examined and in those common areas of
grievances, after analyzing the root cause, systemic changes should be brought in to reduce the volume
of grievances pertaining to them. Also, suo-motu information relating to those areas should be largely
publicized on the Department's website, news papers and other such media. (Para 3.79)
Action Taken
4.1. A Grievance Analysis Study in r/o top 20 Ministries/ Departments Organizations listed on CPGRAMS
in terms of number of grievances received have been conducted for identifying focus areas where large
number of grievances are received, identifying the root cause of such grievances and for recommending
systemic reforms. The reports have been duly circulated for appropriate action for bringing systemic
changes to address the issues. A Project Management Unit (PMU) is now working in the Department
for monitoring reforms in the departments studied. A number of reforms have already taken place. Some

15
of them are automatic refunds on cancellation of confirmed rail tickets, mechanized cleaning of coaches,
installation of bio-toilets in selected trains, expeditious IT refunds, online delivery of CGHS cards,
creation of unified web portal mylpg.in and mobile app for online booking of new LPG connections,
introduction of e-Sewa by CPWD for redress of grievances, creation of universal account number by
the EPFO etc.
4.2. A Grievance Analysis Study for the next 20 Ministries/Departments receiving maximum grievances
on CPGRAMS with focus on systemic reforms is now at the final stage. The reports will be shortly
circulated to all concerned for further action on systemic reforms.
Further Observation
4.3. The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the continual efforts of the Department
for not only disposing of grievances but assessing and analyzing the quality of grievance redressal
in the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. The data thus collected from various
Ministries/Departments should be uploaded on the website of the Department.
Recommendation/Observation
5.0. Further, as of now, 21 States/UTs have enacted statute for time bound delivery of services. The
Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redress of their Grievances Bill,
2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2011. However, it could not be passed and
lapsed with the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha. The Committee feels that Delivery of Government
Services and Grievance Redressal should have statutory backing. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Government should consider re-introduction of the said Bill in the year 2017-18.
(Para 3.80)
Action Taken
5.1. As per the directions of competent authority, initially before the re-introduction of the Bill, a Scheme
has been prepared for delivery of services and redress of grievances. The matter is under process for
obtaining the views of Committee of Secretaries.
Further Observation
5.2. The Committee takes note of the reply and reiterates that the Government should consider
re-introduction of the said Bill in the year 2017-18.

16
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
Vacancies in the Indian Administrative Service (IAS)
Recommendation/Observation
1.0. On a perusal of Annual Report 2016-17 of the Ministr y, the Committee observes that shortage of
IAS officers in this Country has been a perennial problem since 1951. But now the vacancy position has
increased to an alarming level. With the present rate of recruitment it will require decades to fill the
existing vacancies. The Committee notes that almost all the key and strategic positions under the Union
as well as the States are being manned by the IAS and persistent shortage in the IAS officers ultimately
affects governance in the country. The Committee expresses its serious concern over persistent shortage
of IAS officers and strongly recommends that all efforts be made to fill these vacancies. The Committee
further notes that the Director, LBSNAA has informed it that Academy has the capacity to train more
than 180 officers, it, therefore, fails to understand as to why lack of training capacity has been cited
as one of the reasons for not filling the vacancies of IAS officers. The Committee feels lack of training
capacity should not become a reason for non-filling of vacancies of IAS officers and if we are actually
short of capacity in this regard, efforts should be made to enhance our capacity to train more IAS officers
and that should not be a difficult to achieve. (Para 3.4)
Action Taken
1.1. In this regard information regarding training conducted at the Academy, its training capacity as well
as infrastructure and various facilities are detailed at Annexure-III and IV .
Further Observation
1.2. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply as it is limited to only training capacity and
infrastructure of LBSNAA, whereas the Committee had observed that lack of training capacity
should not become a reason for non filling of vacancies of IAS. It hopes that the Department
would take proactive measures to ensure that there is no deficit in either of the cadres, so that
governance of the country is not adversely affected.
Vacancies in various organizations/institutions under the DoPT
Recommendation/Observation
2.0. As is seen from the above figures, almost all organizations/institutions under the Ministry are facing
acute staff shortage. These organizations are institutions of national importance and play crucial role
in personnel management and governance of the country. If these organizations are under staffed, they
cannot be expected to impart their responsibilities efficiently. The Committee observes that vacancies in
16

17
these organizations are a persistent problem and the DoPT cannot escape its responsibility of ensuring
adequate staffing in these institutions. (Para 3.7)
Action Taken
2.1. In so far as CS Division of DoPT is concerned, the following is the sanctioned strength (S.S.) vis-
a-vis in-position in respect of organizations shown as under:
Sl. Organization/ S.S In-position V acancies
No. Institution
1 UPSC 595 546 49
2 CVC 4 3 1
3C A T - - -
4 CIC 8 7 1
5 CBI - - -
6 SSC 178 166 12
7 PESB Part of DoPT
8 ISTM 6 6 0
9 LBSNAA - - -
2.2. A considerate and a constant effort is being made by the Cadre Controlling Authorities to anticipate
the personnel requirements in their respective organizations before time and in filling up of the vacancies/
posts in the organizations. In certain cases the posts are lying vacant due to pending litigation, which
is being closely monitored and is being dealt effectively to clear these litigations in time. The department
takes note of the Observation of the Committee for future compliance.
Further Observation
2.3. The data provided in the Action Taken Replies does not give a true picture of the acute
staff shortage being faced by all organizations/ institutions under the Ministry. The organizations
under the DoPT play crucial role in personnel management and governance of the country and
if these are under staffed, they cannot be expected to discharge their responsibilities efficiently.
The Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the Government to take proactive steps to fill up
the existing vacancies in a time-bound manner.
Recommendation/Observation
3.0. The Committee expresses its displeasure over the persistent shortage of manpower in these institutions
over last many decades and impresses upon the DoPT to devise a potent mechanism to ensure filling of
all vacancies at the earliest, so that the performance of these institutions does not suffer. Some institutional
mechanism must be put in place to ensure that staff strength of these organizations always remains
adequate and responsibilities is fixed in case timely action is not taken in filling these vacancies.
(Para 3.8)

18
Action Taken
3.1. The vacancies in various grades of CSS i.e. Section Officer and above are due to delay in promotion
on account of litigation like SO-LDCE-2015 in Delhi High Court and 'own merit' case in Supreme Court.
3.2. Recruitment to various vacant posts is an ongoing process to be undertaken in conformity with the
relevant Recruitment Rules. Hence, there is possibility of some posts remaining unfilled at any point of
time due to transfer on promotion / deputation / voluntary retirement / unforeseen death of the employees.
3.3. The recommendation of the Committee that some institutional mechanism must be put in place to
ensure that staff strength of organizations like UPSC, CVC etc. always remain adequate has, however,
been taken note of and as and when suitable officers are available, the vacancies in these organizations
will be filled up.
Further Observation
3.4. Most organizations under the DoPT had more than 20% vacancy as on 01.02.2017. The
Committee infers from the reply that the DoPT has done everything so as to deal with the
vacancy position and it has to manage with the existing strength. DoPT has itself stated that
relevant rules also contribute. The Committee suggests that, if necessary, those rules/regulations
be rationalized so as to ease the situation. The Committee further suggests that the Department
should proactively pursue the court cases for early decisions. The Committee may be appraised
of the action taken in this regard.
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI)
Recommendation/Observation
4.0. In its previous report on Demands for Grants for the FY 2016-17, the Committee had recommended
that adequate funds should be made available to the CBI to enable it to implement its Plan schemes
to the ideal stipulation. The Committee observes that during the year 2016-17 CBI has lagged behind
in utilizing its fund on its plan schemes. In many schemes, expenditure has remained below 50% of the
outlay. The Committee apprehends that such a low pace of fund utilization may lead to reduction of funds
at RE stage for which CBI itself would be responsible. (Para 3.15)
Action Taken
4.1. It is submitted that Funds of ` 75 Cr. were allocated in Budget Estimates (BE) of 2016-17 for all
6 Plan Schemes of CBI.
4.2. In Revised Estimates (RE)/Final Grant of 2016-17, it was reduced to ` 66.7717 Cr. which were
fully utilized as per detail given below.
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme RE/FG 2016-17 Exp. 2016-17
1 e-Governance 6.0000 6.0000
2 TAFSU (including CTV-CBI) 2.0000 2.0000
3 Comprehensive Modernization of CBI 10.5617 10.5049
Branches/ Offices

19
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme RE/FG 2016-17 Exp. 2016-17
4 Modernization of CBI Training Centre 4.21 4.21
(including ICEI-CBI)
5 CMPLCORB 28.7000 28.4134
6 Construction of office at BKC Mumbai 15.3000 15.3016
(completed)
Total 66.7717 66.4299
(99.49%)
4.3. It can be seen from the above that the overall expenditure is 99.49% with reference to Revised
Estimates/Final Grant of 2016-17.
Further Observation
4.4. The Committee notes that ````` 75 Cr. were allocated in Budget Estimates of 2016-17 for all
six Plan Schemes of CBI, which was reduced to ````` 73.21 Cr. at RE stage and further reduced to
````` 66.7717 Cr. in Final Grant of 2016-17. Further, as per figures provided by the CBI only ````` 46.61
Cr. (about 63.66% of the funds earmarked under plan scheme at RE stage was utilized by 14th
February, 2017 and rest of the amount was spent only in the last six weeks of the Financial Year.
CBI should, therefore, streamline and scrupulously monitor the pace of implementation of its
schemes and pace of expenditure to ensure their timely completion, thereby avoiding fund
reduction by the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation/Observation
5.0. The CBI has undertaken schemes with the aim to improve its functioning and to make it a 21st
Century premier investigative agency. To achieve this aim, the Committee feels that the CBI needs to
beef up the pace of the implementation of its proposed schemes and monitor pace of expenditure to ensure
their timely completion. The Ministry in their action taken replies therefore should explain the reasons
for such slow pace of expenditure on plan schemes of the CBI and measures proposed to be taken so
that allotted funds are fully and efficiently utilized by it in future. (Para 3.16)
Action Taken
5.1. As brought out in para 3.15, almost entire allocation made i.e. 99.49% has been spent under various
schemes. CBI and various executing agencies engaged by it are responsible for meeting expenditure on
the projects. To ensure timely implementation of various projects, Project Monitoring Committees have
been constituted for various ongoing projects and address issues if any, in implementation. The progress
of implementation/expenditure is also monitored in DoPT on regular basis to timely help resolve issues,
if any.
Further Observation
5.2. The Committee notes that in CBI allocations are reduced at RE stage and the expenditure
steeply goes high in the last leg of financial year. However, the reply does not entail any reason

20
for this reduction. The Committee wishes to know the reasons and difficulties, if any, being faced
by the organization and how this could be resolved. The Committee also notices that Project
Monitoring Committees and further monitoring by DoPT have also not brought desired result.
The Committee wishes that both the DoPT & CBI ensure that this trend be checked in any case.
VACANCY POSITION IN CBI
Recommendation/Observation
6.0. The Committee expresses its deep concern on the state of affairs relating to the vacancy position
in the CBI. This issue was also highlighted in the previous report of the Committee on the Demands for
Grants for the year 2016-17. The Committee is apprehensive that unless the substantial improvement in
vacancy position is achieved immediately, its adverse impact on performance of agency would become
visible sooner than later. The nation is facing problems on many fronts like internal security, transnational
terrorism, cyber-crimes, corruption and many others and we cannot afford to have such a premier agency
understaffed and struggling with resource crunch. The Committee expresses its dismay over the existing
state of affairs in the C.B.I. To overcome the perennial problem of vacancies in the CBI, the Committee
recommends that the Government may consider making direct recruitment (in some proportion) at Group
'A' level in the agency through UPSC Civil Services Examination. Government may also consider making
terms of deputation to CBI more attractive so that officers from the State Police Forces, Central Para
Military Forces, Intelligence Bureau, etc. are tempted to join CBI on deputation.
(Para 3.17)
Action Taken
6.1. The earlier provision of direct recruitment of Dy. SP (Group ' A') through UPSC has been done
away on the recommendations of the Committee constituted in this regard after due consultations with
UPSC. Keeping in view the functional requirements of CBI, a Limited Departmental Competitive Examination
(LDCE) has been introduced to appoint officers at Dy. SP level.
6.2. New RRs have been notified for the Sr. Police Post in CBI in 2013 to ensure not only professionalism
in CBI but also to improve career progression of the departmental officers who are inducted at the level
of SI as direct recruit officers.
For the better career progression of the direct recruits SIs as well as to infuse fresh dynamic personnel
in the grade of Dy. SP, 10% quota has been provided for LDCE in the RRs.
6.3. SIs and Inspector are eligible to become Dy. SP through the LDCE route after putting in only five
years of service. Thus, the more meritorious among them would become Dy. SP.
6.4. This also ensures sufficient eligible officers are available in the feeder grade for promotion to the
rank of Dy. SP in CBI against the 80% quota for promotion prescribed in RR of Dy. SP.
6.5. If direct recruitment at the level of Dy. SP (Group 'A') is to be done through UPSC, it will not only
affect career progression of these officers but also bring frustration amongst them. Moreover, it will
affect promotion of eligible officers due to limited number of posts earmarked to direct recruitment at
the level of Dy. SP.

21
6.6. Hence, direct recruitment in CBI is kept only at the level of SI who would have sufficient experience
as IO before becoming eligible to hold supervisory ranks and keeping in view their career progression.
6.7. Efforts are also made to induct officers from other services i.e. Central Government organized
Group „A' Services, including services namely Indian Economic Services; Directorate of Enforcement;
Serious Fraud Investigation Office; Narcotics Control Bureau; Indian Revenue Service; Indian Customs
and Central Excise Services other than IPS, having specialization in different fields as per provision in
Rs.
Further Observation
6.8. The Committee is of the view that the CBI must ensure adequate staffing in order to deal
with the rising burden of investigations. However, the Government was not forthcoming regarding
measures it has taken for filling up of vacant positions. The Committee accordingly recommends
that proactive steps must be undertaken to fill up the existing vacancies in a time bound manner.
Recommendation/Observation
7.0. The CBI in its submission before the Committee stated that one of the major reasons why investigators
do not come on deputation to CBI is the lack of available housing. The overall housing satisfaction is
very low at pan India level and especially in Delhi where the Head Quarter is situated. As informed by
the Agency itself, even after proposed construction/acquisition of new quarters the satisfaction level
would remain substantially low in future also. Accordingly, the Committee recommends enhancing
significantly the allocation for acquiring land and building staff quarters of CBI at Delhi and other
locations, to bring the satisfaction level up to somewhere near to the level prescribed by the Ministry
of Urban Development. The Committee also expresses its dissatisfaction over failure of CBI to utilize
fully funds earmarked for housing for its personnel and desires that CBI should ensure that funds
allocated for the purpose are fully utilized by it. (Para 3.19)
Action Taken
7.1. To improve the housing satisfaction level, a proposal to build 586 quarters at Maidangarhi has been
sanctioned at a cost of ` 261.16 Crores by the Government on 29.03.2017. This will improve the housing
satisfaction from present 13% to 36%.
7.2. Construction of residential quarters will be completed in Tiruvananthapuram, Shillong, Goa in this
financial year.
Further Observation
7.3. The Committee observes that even with the construction of additional quarters, a huge gap
would still remain between the actual satisfaction level and that prescribed under the Ministry
of Urban Development norms. Therefore, the Committee reiterates that the fund allocation for
acquiring land and building staff quarters of CBI at Delhi and other locations should be significantly
enhanced, to bring the satisfaction level up to somewhere near to the level prescribed by the
Ministry of Urban Development. Further, CBI should also ensure that funds allocated for the
purpose are fully utilized.

22
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL (CAT)
Recommendation/Observation
8.0. The Committee notes from the submission made by CAT that it has a requirement of additional
Benches at four places viz. Jabalpur, Cuttack, Jaipur and Lucknow, as only one Divisional Bench is
sanctioned at these places. Absence of any of the two members viz. Judicial and Administration hampers
the work of the Tribunal. There have been PILs filed in the concerned High Courts at these places where
a Bench could not be made functional for want of either of Members due to various reasons. The
Committee is of the view that if need for additional Bench exists at these places, these need to be set
up early so that Central Government employees get quick justice at these places. (Para 3.26)
Action Taken
8.1. CA T's proposal for creation of additional benches was examined earlier by DoPT and was not
agreed to after considering it on the ground of functional requirement and financial implications involved
in creation of Additional Benches. The yearly institution of cases during the last five years at these four
Benches were not justifying the creation of an additional Bench as the same were almost equal to or less
than the number of cases supposed to be disposed of yearly by a Division Bench as per the norms
stipulated by CAT itself. As per the norms stipulated by CAT, a Division Bench has to dispose of 5 cases
per day and 7 cases per day by Single Member Bench i.e. during 215 working days of a year, this comes
out to 1075 to 1505 cases yearly.
8.2. The court cases/PILs filed in the concerned High Courts at these places where a Bench could not
be made functional is due to delay in finalization in selection process for the year 2016. For the time
being it can be redressed by posting Members from other Benches by CAT. Creation of additional Bench
is not a solution when there is no Member therein. The situation will improve once the selection process
for the year 2016 is completed.
Further Observation
8.3. The Committee takes note of the reply. It, however, reiterates that proper infrastructure
in terms of physical as well as human should be provided to the CAT, to achieve the desired level
of performance. Present pace of efforts to fill up vacancies is inadequate and an effective
mechanism should be evolved for timely filling of vacancies. Further, the Committee may be
informed about the timelines for filling up of vacancies in the CAT.
Recommendation/Observation
9.0. The Committee has been informed that about 41,849 cases (as on 31/01/2017) are pending before
various benches of CAT. Out of which about 3,823 are pending for more than five years and about
10,007 are pending for 3-5 years. This is a substantial number. The Committee feels that it is imperative
upon the CAT to make concerted efforts so as to reduce the pendency substantially. In addition, the
Government should also make sustained efforts to streamline the service rules so that there is minimum
litigation; the internal grievance redressal mechanism within the respective Departments needs to be made

23
more robust to command the faith of the employees; and a mechanism be evolved so that many of the
cases in service matters can be settled within the system itself so that minimal number of cases go to
Tribunal. (Para 3.27)
Action Taken
9.1. Since 1985 about 7,42,036 cases have been instituted till February, 2017 and approximately 7,00,066
cases have already been disposed of, which is about 94.33%. During the last five years (2012-16)
1,41,161 cases were instituted and 1,24,101 were disposed of. As regards the reasons for pendency are
concerned, it is pertinent to mention here that the cases instituted within one year are not considered
to be a part of the arrears as these cases are in circulation for completion of the service and pleadings.
In so far as the pendency of cases ripe for hearing are concerned, the primary and perhaps the main
reason is huge number of vacancies in the Tribunal across the board. It is also to be placed on record
that the functioning of the Tribunal is different than other regular Courts where Benches can be
constituted by any two judges. Here in the Tribunal, a Division Bench could only be constituted of one
Judicial and one Administrative Member. Thus, the deficiency in either category hampers the functioning
of the Tribunal.
9.2. As regards evolving a mechanism to resolve the service matters in departments is concerned, it
would be appropriate if the judgment/order implemented in one case is made applicable to all similarly
situated persons which would surely reduce the number of cases to a large extent.
Further Observation
9.3. The Committee takes note of the reply. Further, as pointed out by the Committee and
endorsed by the CAT, huge number of vacancies in the Tribunal is the principal contributing
factor in rising level of pendency. The DoPT should therefore, take proactive measures for
initiating action for filling the anticipated vacancies in the CAT well in advance.
9.4. The CAT has made an important suggestion for reducing litigation that ''the judgment/order
implemented in one case is made applicable to all similarly situated persons". The Committee
is in agreement with the opinion given by the CAT. The Committee, however, feels that the
suggested action lies with the DoPT. The Committee would like to know whether the CAT has
ever approached the DoPT in this regard. What was their response along with difficulties, if any,
faced in implementing this suggestion. The Committee also impresses upon the DoPT to furnish
its comments on feasibility of implementing the suggestion of the CAT.
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (UPSC)
Recommendation/Observation
10.0.  As previously discussed in the report (Para 3.6 and 3.7) the Committee is constrained to refer to
the submissions made by the various organizations/ institutions within the jurisdiction of the DoPT, such
as, the CBI, CIC, CVC, LBSNAA, ISTM, etc. pointing to the existence of a large number of vacancies
having remained unfilled in those organizations for a number of years and observes that if large number
of the vacancies in the organizations under the Department of Personnel and Training itself are remaining
unfilled for a number of years, the situation in other organizations of the Government of India would

24
be worse. The Committee, therefore, feels that the DoPT should in consultation with the recruiting
agencies like UPSC and SSC, evolve a mechanism for timely filling of vacancies in all organizations
of the Government. (Para 3.38)
Action Taken
10.1. In so far as CSS is concerned, direct recruitment takes place only at the level of Assistant Section
Officer (ASO). The numbers of vacancies are regularly reported to Staff Selection Commission to
nominate candidates for the post of ASO through Combined Graduate Limited Examination (CGLE) every
year.
10.2.In regard to Section Officer post, 50% of the posts are filled through Limited Departmental
Competitive Examination (LDCE) and 50% of posts through promotion. In so far as LDCE is concerned,
results of SO-LDCE, 2015 have not yet been declared due to ongoing litigation in Delhi High Court and
also promotion to the post of Section Officer is not taking place due to ongoing litigation on 'own merit'
case in Supreme Court.
10.3.As mentioned above, due to pending litigation in Supreme Court on 'own merit' case, promotion to
the posts of Section Officer and above has been kept in abeyance.
10.4. CS-II Division of DoPT posts CSSS personnel to UPSC and CIC (only Group-A officers of CSSS)
directly. The sanctioned strength and vacancies position of CSSS in UPSC is as under:
S.S. In position V acancies
CSSS 150 92 58
CSCS 256 124 132
10.5. The sanctioned strength and vacancies position of Group-A officers of CSSS in CIC is as under:
Grade S.S. In position V acancies
Sr. PPS 2 0 2
PPS 2 0 2
10.6. After the meeting of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee in February, 2017,
the following officials were posted in PESB, SSC and ISTM:
Sl. No. Name of Sub-cadre Unit Officials posted
1. Public Enterprises Selection Board 2 ASOs
2. Staff Selection Commission 1 SO, 8 ASOs including 1 ASO
in SSC(MPR)
3. Institute of Secretariat Training and Management 1 ASO and 1 Steno Gr.'D '
10.7. Filling up of vacancies in sub-cadre units is a continuous process and is being done as soon as
qualified officials are available.
10.8. The direct entry grade to the CSSS is at the level of Steno Grade 'D'. The vacancies arising in the
Grade of Steno Grade 'D' are intimated on yearly basis to the recruiting agency, i.e. SSC. On successful

25
completion of mandatory training, candidates are nominated to various cadre units including DoPT, after
taking into consideration vacancies reported by the cadre units.
10.9. As regards filling up of vacancies in various grades of CSSS, it is stated that all the vacancies
in various grades except Steno Grade 'D' are filled up on the basis of promotions through Seniority Quota
(SQ) and Limited Departmental Competitive Examination (LDCE) (for PA and PS only). Vacancies in all
other grades are filled up through issue of Select Lists on yearly basis. The vacancies mainly remaining
unfilled are backlog reserved vacancies which could not be filled up due to non-availability of eligible
reserved candidates through both the modes.
10.10. At present, vacancies in the SLYs under consideration in the grades of PS/PPS/Sr. PPS could not
be filled up and current Select Lists in the said grades also could not be issued due to pending litigations.
In case of PA of CSSS, DoPT could not fill up the existing vacancies due to non-availability of eligible
candidates in the feeder grade.
10.11. CSCS is a decentralized and dying cadre. The majority of posts in cadre units of CSCS are to
be abolished as per the decision of the Cabinet. Though most of the cadre units have already abolished
the posts of CSCS, some are yet to abolish the posts leaving a few posts to be filled up by the concerned
cadre units by promoting eligible candidates from the feeder grades. Filling up of vacancies in 2 grades
of CSCS under LDCE quota is held up due to pending litigation.
Further Observation
10.12. In spite of efforts undertaken by the Deptt. as stated above, there are still huge vacancies
existing in the Government of India. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the DoPT should,
in consultation with the recruiting agencies like UPSC and SSC, evolve a mechanism for timely
filling of vacancies in all organizations of the Government.
CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION (CIC)
Recommendation/Observation
11.0. The CIC was established in the year 2005 and even after a decade of its establishment, the CIC
is severely understaffed. As per the information provided by the Commission, against a sanctioned
strength of 160 only 25 personnel are on permanent basis and rest are working on ad-hoc basis. Even
after Recruitment Rules are framed the appointments have not been made. The Committee expresses its
dismay over manning of the Commission's Secretariat through ad-hoc and temporary appointments and
strongly recommends that appointments of regular employees are done at the earliest, so that Commission's
working is made more responsive and accountable. (Para 3.54)
Action Taken
11.1. So far the Central Information Commission is concerned; there are 160 sanctioned posts in various
categories as on 3.02.2017 out of which 16 posts of MTS are sanctioned on outsourcing basis. Out of
the remaining 144 posts, 51 posts have been filled up by regular officers and staff. Remaining posts have
been filled up either through Consultants (Retd. Govt. Officers) or through outsourced staff.
11.2. So far as, action taken to fill up the vacancies on regular basis, is concerned, it is submitted that
the Recruitment Rules of various posts in the CIC had been notified in April - June, 2012. Subsequently,

26
advertisements have been issued by the CIC for filling up of various posts in July 2012, July 2013,
August 2014, January 2015, February 2016 and August 2016. Indents had been placed to the Staff
Selection Commission for direct recruitment on 08.12.2014, 06.01.2015 and 17.03.2015 for filling up
vacant posts of 30 Upper Division Clerk, 5 Assistants and 8 Stenographers Grade D. In first phase,
dossiers of 15 UDCs and 5 Assistants had been allocated to the Central Information Commission by the
Staff Selection Commission, out of which only 5 Assistants and 7 UDCs had joined the Commission in
February/May, 2016. Eight UDCs had not reported. In second phase dossiers of 15 UDCs and 8
Stenographers Grade 'D' have been received. 8 UDCs and 8 Stenographer Grade 'D' have joined the
Commission after completion of pre-appointment formalities. Remaining 7 UDCs and 7 Steno 'D' are
likely to join in the coming months.
11.3. DoPT has also encadred 19 posts in different categories for posting of officer and staff in the
Commission. Against these posts 1 Deputy Secretary, 1 Section Officer, 5 Assistants, 1 PA and 3
Stenographer Grade 'D' have been posted so far.
Further Observation
11.4. Inspite of the efforts mentioned by the Commission, the CIC is woefully under staffed and
therefore, they have to resort to  ad-hoc and temporary appointments. The Committee, therefore, reiterates
that appointments of regular employees should be made at the earliest.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
Public Grievance Redressal and Public Service Delivery
Recommendation/Observation
12.0. Dealing with the grievances of citizen effectively is one of the core components of Good Governance.
CPGRAMS is a good initiative of the Government for redressal of citizen grievances. However, public
at large, particularly those who are living in rural and far-flung areas needs to be made aware of
existence of such grievance redressal system. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this system of
Public Grievance Redressal (CPGRAMS) should be publicized in mass media in vernacular languages,
so that common people become aware of availability of such avenue for redressal of their grievances
against the Government organisations. (Para 3.76)
Action Taken
12.1. Full page advertisements have been issued in the past in leading National and Regional newspapers
including vernacular on Public Grievance Redress Mechanism on 1.10.2011 and 20.3.2012. Issue of a
fresh advertisement in the coming months is under consideration.
Further Observation
12.2. The Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism (CPGRAMS) of the DARPG has evolved into
an effective platform for redressal of public grievances related to the Central Government.
However, people are not aware of availability of such a mechanism. Thus, there is a need for
giving wider publicity of this mechanism in mass media. Last time such an advertisement was
issued was way back in the year 2011-12 and no publicity has been done thereafter. The DARPG

27
should move beyond such tokenism and undertake aggressive mass media campaign to advertise
this grievance redressal mechanism. The Committee therefore, strongly reiterates that Public
Grievance Redressal Mechanism (CPGRAMS) should be publicized on a large scale and adequate
funds should be allotted for this. To start with, it should be regularly advertized through public
media viz. Doordarshan, All India Radio including FM channels.

28
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER -I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
The Committee takes notes of the reply.     (1.5, 2.4, 3.2, 4.2, 5.8, 6.5, 7.3, 8.5, 9.2, 10.2,
11.2, 12.2 and 14.2)
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee however wishes that Department
of Pensions and Pensioners Welfare keep pursuing with the DFS so that the pensioners are not
harassed on this account. (Para 13.2)
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
The Committee takes note of the reply. However, every Department should ensure early
commencement of its schemes/projects to ensure that 50% of the funds are utilized before
September of each year so as to avoid fund reduction by the Ministry of Finance at RE stage.
(Para 1.4)
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 2.5)
The Committee takes note of the reply. It also appreciates the steps taken by UPSC and
SSC to speed up the recruitment process and hopes that these agencies will continue with their
endeavor to further streamline the recruitment process. (Para 3.7)
The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the continual efforts of the Department
for not only disposing of grievances but assessing and analyzing the quality of grievance redressal
in the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. The data thus collected from various
Ministries/Departments should be uploaded on the website of the Department. (Para 4.3)
The Committee takes note of the reply and reiterates that the Government should consider
re-introduction of the said Bill in the year 2017-18. (Para 5.2)
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply as it is limited to only training capacity and
infrastructure of LBSNAA, whereas the Committee had observed that lack of training capacity
should not become a reason for non filling of vacancies of IAS. It hopes that the Department
would take proactive measures to ensure that there is no deficit in either of the cadres, so that
governance of the country is not adversely affected. (Para 1.2)
28

29
The data provided in the Action Taken Replies does not give a true picture of the acute staff
shortage being faced by all organizations/ institutions under the Ministry. The organizations
under the DoPT play crucial role in personnel management and governance of the country and
if these are under staffed, they cannot be expected to discharge their responsibilities efficiently.
The Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the Government to take proactive steps to fill up
the existing vacancies in a time-bound manner. (Para 2.3)
Most organizations under the DoPT had more than 20% vacancy as on 01.02.2017. The
Committee infers from the reply that the DoPT has done everything so as to deal with the
vacancy position and it has to manage with the existing strength. DoPT has itself stated that
relevant rules also contribute. The Committee suggests that, if necessary, those rules/regulations
be rationalized so as to ease the situation. The Committee further suggests that the Department
should proactively pursue the court cases for early decisions. The Committee may be appraised
of the action taken in this regard. (Para 3.4)
The Committee notes that ````` 75 Cr. were allocated in Budget Estimates of 2016-17 for all
six Plan Schemes of CBI, which was reduced to ````` 73.21 Cr. at RE stage and further reduced to
`````66.7717 Cr. in Final Grant of 2016-17. Further, as per figures provided by the CBI only
````` 46.61 Cr. (about 63.66% of the funds earmarked under plan scheme at RE stage) was utilized
by 14th February, 2017 and rest of the amount was spent only in the last six weeks of the
Financial Year. CBI should, therefore, streamline and scrupulously monitor the pace of
implementation of its schemes and pace of expenditure to ensure their timely completion,
thereby avoiding fund reduction by the Ministry of Finance. (Para 4.4)
The Committee notes that in CBI allocations are reduced at RE stage and the expenditure
steeply goes high in the last leg of financial year. However, the reply does not entail any reason
for this reduction. The Committee wishes to know the reasons and difficulties, if any, being faced
by the organization and how this could be resolved. The Committee also notices that Project
Monitoring Committees and further monitoring by DoPT have also not brought desired result.
The Committee wishes that both the DoPT & CBI ensure that this trend be checked in any case.
(Para 5.2)
The Committee is of the view that the CBI must ensure adequate staffing in order to deal
with the rising burden of investigations. However, the Government was not forthcoming regarding
measures it has taken for filling up of vacant positions. The Committee accordingly recommends
that proactive steps must be undertaken to fill up the existing vacancies in a time bound manner.
(Para 6.8)
The Committee observes that even with the construction of additional quarters, a huge gap
would still remain between the actual satisfaction level and that prescribed under the Ministry
of Urban Development norms. Therefore, the Committee reiterates that the fund allocation for
acquiring land and building staff quarters of CBI at Delhi and other locations should be significantly
enhanced, to bring the satisfaction level up to somewhere near to the level prescribed by the
Ministry of Urban Development. Further, CBI should also ensure that funds allocated for the
purpose are fully utilized. (Para 7.3)

30
The Committee takes note of the reply. It, however, reiterates that proper infrastructure
in terms of physical as well as human should be provided to the CAT, to achieve the desired level
of performance. Present pace of efforts to fill up vacancies is inadequate and an effective
mechanism should be evolved for timely filling of vacancies. Further, the Committee may be
informed about the timelines for filling up of vacancies in the CAT. (Para 8.3)
The Committee takes note of the reply. Further, as pointed out by the Committee and
endorsed by the CAT, huge number of vacancies in the Tribunal is the principal contributing
factor in rising level of pendency. The DoPT should therefore, take proactive measures for
initiating action for filling the anticipated vacancies in the CAT well in advance. (Para 9.3)
The CAT has made an important suggestion for reducing litigation that "the judgment/order
implemented in one case is made applicable to all similarly situated persons". The Committee
is in agreement with the opinion given by the CAT. The Committee, however, feels that the
suggested action lies with the DoPT. The Committee would like to know whether the CAT has
ever approached the DoPT in this regard. What was their response along with difficulties, if any,
faced in implementing this suggestion. The Committee also impresses upon the DoPT to furnish
its comments on feasibility of implementing the suggestion of the CAT. (Para 9.4)
In spite of efforts undertaken by the Deptt. as stated above, there are still huge vacancies
existing in the Government of India. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the DoPT should,
in consultation with the recruiting agencies like UPSC and SSC, evolve a mechanism for timely
filling of vacancies in all organizations of the Government. (Para 10.12)
Inspite of the efforts mentioned by the Commission, the CIC is woefully under staffed and
therefore, they have to resort to ad-hoc and temporary appointments. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates that appointments of regular employees should be made at the earliest. (Para 11.4)
The Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism (CPGRAMS) of the DARPG has evolved into an
effective platform for redressal of public grievances related to the Central Government. However,
people are not aware of availability of such a mechanism. Thus, there is a need for giving wider
publicity of this mechanism in mass media. Last time such an advertisement was issued was way
back in the year 2011-12 and no publicity has been done thereafter. The DARPG should move
beyond such tokenism and undertake aggressive mass media campaign to advertise this grievance
redressal mechanism. The Committee therefore, strongly reiterates that Public Grievance
Redressal Mechanism (CPGRAMS) should be publicized on a large scale and adequate funds
should be allotted for this. To start with, it should be regularly advertized through public media
viz. Doordarshan, All India Radio including FM channels. (Para 12.2)

31
MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th November, 2017 in Committee Room No.-4,
Block - 'A', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 110001.
MEMBER PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray - In the chair
2. Shri Swapan Dasgupta
3. Shri D. Raja
4. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
7. Adv. Joice George
8. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Adv. M. Udhaya Kumar
10. Shri B.V . Naik
11. Dr. A. Sampath
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray chaired the meeting and extended a warm welcome to all the Members
of the Committee. (* * *)
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 93rd and 94th Reports on Action Taken
by the Government on 90th and 91st Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2017-18)
pertaining to the Ministries of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions and Law & Justice, respectively.
Some Members suggested that they need more time and may also like to give suggestions, if any. It was
then agreed to take up the reports for adoption in its next meeting.
4. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.19 
P.M.
*** relates to other matter.
33

34
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 14th November, 2017 in Committee Room No.-3,
Block - 'A', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi - 110001.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Dr. K. Keshava Rao
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Shri Mehboob Ali Kaiser
11. Adv. M. Udhaya Kumar
12. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
15. Dr. A. Sampath
16. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director
Shrimati Chanderlekha Sharma, Under Secretary
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the consideration
and adoption of the (i) draft Ninety-third Report of the Committee on Action Taken Replies of the
34

35
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Ninetieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; and (ii) the draft Ninety-
fourth Report on the Action Taken Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Ninety-first Report on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Law and
Justice, respectively. Hon'ble Members deliberated on the Reports, and thereafter, the Reports were
adopted unanimously.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 3.26 
P.M.
*** relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
F. No. 55/21/2017-P&PW(C)
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, P.G. & Pensions
Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare
3rd Floor, Lok Nayak Bhawan,
New Delhi, the 17th May, 2017
Office memorandum
Subject: Redressal of grievances by banks relating to timely disbursement of pension.
The department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare has been maintaining Web based Centralized
Pension Grievances Redress and Monitoring System (CPENGRAMS) as a part of "pensioners' Portal".
Through this application the pending grievances are constantly reviewed by the Department to ensure
their redressal within a prescribed time frame.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Department of Pension and Pensioners" Welfare while
appreciating the role of the Department in addressing the grievances of the pensioners noted that many
times the banks do not disburse pension timely and correctly. Pensioners' grievances related to bank
remain unresolved.
In view of the above, the Department of Financial Services (Banking Division) is requested to advise
all the Public Sector Banks to redress the grievances of the pensioners on top priority and also adhere
to the guidelines issued by this Department for timely disposal of grievances.
(Seema Gupta)
Director
Tel: 24624802
Shri N. Srinivasa Rao,
Economic Adviser,
Room No. 12-B, 3rd Floor,
Jeevan Deep Building,
Sansad Marg, New Delhi.
Copy to:
All CPPCs of Nationalized Banks - As per list.
All Heads (Govt. Business Unit) of Banks as per list
39

40
ANNEXURE-II
F. No. 2(II)/2//2017-P&PW(Coord)
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions
Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare
3rd Floor, Lok Nayak Bhawan,
Khan Market, New Delhi, the 14th June, 2017
To,
Ms. Poonam Singh,
Associate Professor,
National Centre for Good Governance,
Block IV, Old JNU Campus,
New Mehrauli Road,
New Delhi-110067
Subject: reg. Consideration of the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
grievances and Pension by the Departmental Related Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice.
Madam,
Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide OM No. RS/3/1/2017-P&L dated 15.03.2017 has forwarded Ninetieth
report (90th) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions. As per the report three (para- 3.90, 3.91 and 3.92) recommendations/Observation concern
DoP&PW.
2. In Para 3.92, it has been stated that the filling of pension forms and pension procedure still remained
complicated even though some welcome steps have been taken by the Department in this regard. The
committee recommended that number of pension forms should be further rationalized/reduced and
simplified and suggested that the Department may consider taking services of National Centre for Good
Governance (NCGG).
3. This Department took up a comprehensive exercise in 2013-2014 to review and simplified all
Pension forms that were being used. This department revised 30 forms, in 2014, under various rules
administered by the department as indicated below:
(i) CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972
(ii) Payment of Arrears of Pension (Nomination) Rules, 1983
(iii) CCS (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981
(iv) General/Contributory Provident Fund Rules
(v) CCS (Extraordinary Pension) Rules
40

41
4. As a result of this exercise, 4 forms had been omitted and 26 forms have been amended and
retained.
5. Though, there are 26 form in all however, the retiring employee has to fill up - the Pension
Application form (Form 5) which is a one page simple., form, giving only very basic and crucial
information like bank account details, permanent-address and photograph/ signature of employee. In
addition the employee has to provide nomination details (Form 1 & A) and details of family members
(Form 3). The remaining forms have been prescribed for other usage. The Office fills up three forms
for processing a pension case:
(i) Form 7 - for assessing pension/family pension and gratuity
(ii) Form 8 - for forwarding pensio n papers to the Accounts Officer
(iii) Form 24 - for verification of service for pension
6. The remaining 18 forms have been prescribed for use in special circumstances by the Office and
different stake-holders for different purposes. These forms are seldom used however these cannot be
done away with:
(i) Forms 10. 11,13, 18, 19, 20 and 21 are various forms to be filled by the office for sanction
of retirement benefits to nominee/family pension on death of employee/pensioner.
(ii) Forms 12 & 14 are filled by claimant for family pension and nominee for gratuity on death
of employee.
(iii) Form 22 is filed only in a rare case for grant residuary. Gratuity on death of a pensioner.
(iv) Form 23 is to be filled by medical authority if an employee applies for Invalid Pension.
(v) Form 25 is for seeking permission for taking up commercial employment after retirement.
(vi) Form 26 is to he filled up by employees who retire from Security/Intelligence agencies.
(vii) One of 3 forms - 1, 1A or 2 of Commutation of Pension Rules is required to be filled by
employee / pensioners if he/she wishes to apply for commutation of Pension and has not
indicated so while submitting form 5.
(viii) Forms 3 and 4 of Commutation of Pension Rules are required to be filled by Head of Office
and Medical Authority respectively in case medical examination is required for commutation
of pension.
7. It may also be stated that through BHAVISHYA software - on-line Pension Sanction and Payment
Tracking System, the pension process has been digitized. Use of BHA VISHY A has rendered the use of
pension forms redundant. Information such as names of nominees and members of family, bank details
for receiving pension, photographs etc., is filled in by the pensioner in an information sheet. This
information is used by the system and all required forms are generated and auto-f lied in by the
BHA VISHYA software. Similarly, information to be filled in the Office is picked by the software from
the salary details of-the employee and all forms to be filled by the Office are auto-generated by the
software. Therefore, in effect there is no additional burden on the pensioner for filling up forms. Once

42
the process of generation of e-PPO is in place there would be no further need to generate manual copies
of forms for various authorities.
8. In view of the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee National Centre for Good
Governance (NCGG), is requested to examine whether there is any further scope for simplification.
Yours faithfully,
(Sujasha Choudhury)
Director
Ph: 24624802
Email: sujashachaudhary.edu@nic.in

43
ANNEXURE-III
Note on Training Capacity of LBSNAA, Mussoorie
I. Training Conducted at LBSNAA, Mussoorie
(i) The annual intake into various services including IAS is determined by the Government of India.
LBSNAA Mussoorie has trained the following number of officers in the following courses for last
three years.
Year Foundation Course IAS Professional Course IAS Professional Course
(Phase I) (Phase II)
2014 277 181 171
2015 353 181 177
2016 377 181 181
In addition. LBSNAA also conducts Mid Career Training Programmes (MCTP) and other courses
such as Joint Civil Military (JCM) and Induction Training Courses etc. The current intake into IAS
is around 180 and is likely to continue as such till 2020 in keeping with the recommendations of
the Baswan Committee. LBSNAA has adequate capacity to deliver the required training as is evident
from above details.
(ii) LBSNAA proposes to undertake construction of a new hostel for Officer Trainees to augment
its existing capacity.
II. Training Capacity of the Academy
The training capacity of the Academy can be broadly discerned into the following two heads:
1. Infrastructure in terms of classrooms and hostels:
a. Classrooms: The Academy has an auditorium with a capacity to accommodate around 450
persons. In addition, it has 3 lecture halls of around 180 capacity each, 2 lecture halls of 125
capacity each and also smaller classrooms designed for sessions delivered in half or quarter
groups.
b. Hostels: The Academy presently has 6 hostels for Officer Trainees and for senior courses in
the main campus besides two hostels in India Bhawan, located at a distance of 1 km. from
the main campus. During the Foundation Course, all Officer Trainees are provided accommodation
on twin-sharing basis in the main...................??
43

ANNEXURE-IV
Details of the Staff Strength in the Academy
Group Total Sanctioned Total Filled in Vacant Posts Remarks
Posts Posts
A 48 22 26 1. For filling up various posts under
B (Gazetted) 11 09 02 Central Staffing Scheme, DO letters
B (Non- 71 47 24 have been sent to Chief Secretaries and
Gazetted) to Establishment Officer, DoPT for
C including 195 146 49 nominating the names of eligible officers
MTS for the posts.
2. Total 10 posts have been advertised
in Employment news paper/ national
news papers and hosted on the
Academy website.
3. As regards the posts to be filled
through UPSC/SSC, proposals have
been sent to fill the vacancies under
their purview.
Total 325 224 101
44