PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                             3 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
THIRD  REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, 2004 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE  RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2005) 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
MARCH, 2005/PHALGUNA, 1926 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rs_cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 

CS (P&L)-5 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
THIRD  REPORT 
ON 
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, 2004 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE  RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
MARCH, 2005/PHALGUNA, 1926 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE............................................................................ (i) 
2. I NTRODUCTION................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. R EPORT.......................................................................................................................... 1-15  
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ....................................... 17-28 
5. A NNEXURE ..................................................................................................................... 29-136 
 A. The Right to Information Bill, 2004 ............................................................... 31-56 
 B. A comparative tabular statement showing the provisions of the  
  Freedom of Information Act, 2002, the recommendations made by  
  the National Advisory Council (NAC) and the provisions of the  
  Right to Informations Bill, 2004 .................................................................... 57-102 
 C. Gist of the views/suggestions of individuals/organisations on the  
  Right to Information Bill, 2004 and comments of Government thereon 
...................................................................................................... 
103-105 
 D. The Right to Information Bill, 2004 as  amended by the Committee .................... 106-135 
 E. List of the witnesses/organisations who appeared before the  
  Committee ................................................................................................. 136  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05) 
 
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan    -----    Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
 5. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa 
 6. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 7. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 8. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 9. Shri Raashid Alvi 
 10. Vacant 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 12. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran 
 13. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
 14. Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 15. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 16. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari 
 17. Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel 
 18. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 19. Shri Harin Pathak 
 20. Shri V. Radhakrishnan 
 21. Shri Vishwendra Singh 
 22. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 23. Prof. Vijaya Kumar Malhotra 
 24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
 25. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 26. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
 27. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 28. Shri Ramchandra Paswan 
 29. Vacant 
 30. Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Third Report on the Right to Information Bill, 2004.*  
2.  In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the Right to Information 
Bill, 2004 as introduced in the Lok Sabha and pending their, to the committee on 31st December, 2004 for 
examination and report. 
3.  The Committee considered the Bill in five sittings held on the 1st, 14th and 16th February and 1st and 
2nd  March, 2005. 
4.  The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secret ary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions in its sitting held on 1st February, 2005. 
5.  The Committee heard the views of the prominen t NGOs and eminent experts on the Bill (Annexure-E) 
in its sittings held on 14th and 16th February, 2005. 
6.  In its sittings held on 1st and 2nd March, 2005 the Committee took clause-by clause consideration of 
the Bill. 
7.  In its sitting held on 16th March, 2005 the Committee considered the draft report on the Bill and 
adopted the same. 
8.  In the said sitting, the Committee also decided that the evidence tendered before it may be laid on the 
Table of both the Houses of Parliament. 
9.  In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background note on the Bill 
received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grieva nces and Pensions; similar legislations of various 
States of India and foreign countries; suggestions received from organisations/experts; comments of the 
Ministry on the views received from organisations/experts ; queries raised by the Members on the Bill in the 
meetings; the Freedom of Information Act, 2002; 78th Report of the Committee on Home Affairs on the 
Freedom of Information Bill, 2000 and recommendations of the National Advisory Council (NAC) 
proposing amendments to the Bill. 
10.  For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
11.  On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made by 
experts/organisations who deposed before the Committee and submitted their valuable suggestions on the 
Bill.
 
E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
March 16, 2005 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
  Law and Justice 
 
*Published in gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) Part II Section 2 dated the 23rd December, 2004. 
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II (No. 41891) dated the 31st December, 2004 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
WORLDWIDE TREND TO PROMOTE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION 
1. It is being recognized globally that public participation in the democratic and governmental process is 
at its meaningful best when citizens have adequate  access to official information. This access lays the 
foundation for good governance, transparency, accountability and participation. This realization has found 
expression with over fifty five countries having enacted their comprehensive laws that protect the right to 
information and many more countries are coming forward to enact specific legislations in pursuit of this 
objective. Sweden, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Beliez, Pakistan, South Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, 
United Kingdom, Zimbabwe, Jamaica and USA are among the countries exhibiting their Governments’ 
commitment to open governance through legislative measures guaranteeing citizens access to information. 
CAMPAIGN FOR THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION IN INDIA 
2.1  India too is not left behind in the race. Grow ing realization for open governance and assured access to 
information has brought it on the world map. Eight States namely, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, 
Karnataka, Jammu and Kashmir, Assam, Goa and Madhya Pradesh have already enacted laws on the right to 
information to show their commitment for building a more dynamic and prosperous society by involving 
people in governance and decision making process. Not only this, the Supreme Court of India has, from time 
to time, interpreted article 19 which upholds the right to freedom of speech and expression; to implicitly 
include the right to receive and impart information. The Supreme Court’s judgement in S.P. Gupta v/s Union 
of India (AIR 1982 SC 149) reinforced the right to information by stating: 
“The citizens have a right to decide by whom and by what rules they shall be governed and they are 
entitled to call on those who govern on their beha lf to account for their conduct. No democratic 
government can survive without accountability and the basic postulate of accountabality in that the 
people should have informati on about the functioning of the government... The concept of open 
government is the direct emanation from the right to know which seems to be impliclt in the right of 
free speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)”. 
2.2  Despite this, a demand for an ‘access to information law’, at the Central level, grew extensively. There 
had been relentless efforts and mass mobilization in favour of a eomprehensive Central Act providing access 
to information regimes. It also became necessary to protect the fundamental right by some legal mechanism. 
The campaign started by some prominent social groups like Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sanghathan (MKSS) and 
the National Campaign for People’s Right to Informa tion, took concrete shape when in January, 1997 the 
Government set up a Working Group on “Right to Information and Transparency” under the chairmanship of 
Shri H.D. Shourie to examine the feasibility and need for a full-fledged law. The Chief Ministers, 
Conference held in Delhi in 1997 on ‘Effective and Responsive Government’ recognized the importance and 
approved the scheme. Thereafter, for greater delaberations, a statutory scheme was circulated to the 
States/Union Territories and the Ministries of G overnment of India who submitted their report with 
constructive suggestions and comments. The report of the Working Group together with the responses was 
placed before the Committee of Secretaries, which broadly endorsed the legislative proposal subject to 
certain modifications. Finally, the draft Bill was submitted to the Group of Ministers prior to approval of the 
Cabinet. The Cabinet approved the proposal in its meeting. held on l3th May, 2000. Thus the legislative 
process which passed through the different levels concretised in the form of Freedom of Information Bill, 
2000. 
 

FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL, 2000 
3.  The Freedom of Information Bill, 2000 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 25th July, 2000. The Bill 
was referred to the Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs for examination and report on  
l4th September, 2000. 
4. In order to live up to the ideals reflected in the commitment to the right to information, the Bill laid 
emphasis on the following features contained in its 21 clauses:- 
(i) Right to information to all citizens of the country; 
(ii) Access to information held by or under the Central as well as the State Governments and local 
bodies; 
(iii) Obligation on every public authority to provide information and publish all records at regular 
intervals; 
(iv)  Exemption from disclosures; and 
(v)  Appellate mechanism to deal with the ca ses of defaults in providing information. 
5. The Committee on Home Affairs presented its report to Parliament on 25th July, 2001 recommending 
some changes/modifications in that Bill. The Bill was passed by Parliament in December, 2002 and got 
assent of the President on 6th January, 2003. 
6. The vigorous campaign for bringing out a Central legislation has seen only partial success as the Act 
had not been brought into force, as according to the Government, the basic infrastructure required for its 
operationalisation had not been fully established. Meanwhile, there had been growing apprehensions that the 
Act in many respects fell short of the aspirations arid expectations of the people. The Government had 
reportedly received a number of representations from pe ople/civil society/groups pointing out the key issues 
needing modifications so that the information access right of citizens was fully realized and the legislation 
truly achieved its objectives. 
NEED FOR AN IMPROVED LEGISLATION 
7.  Having regard to the above considerations, the Government in its National Common Minimum 
Programme (NCMP) inter-alia declared that it would strive fo r a corruption free,  transparent and 
accountable governance. The NCMP envisaged enactme nt of a more progressive, participatory and 
meaningful law in place of the Freedom of Informatio n Act, 2002. In pursuance of the above commitment, 
the Government assigned to the National Advisory Council (NAC) the task of suggesting constructive 
changes in the Act of 2002. The NAC based on the inputs received from several NGOs, social groups and 
experts, proposed some 35 amendments to the Freedom Information Act, 2002 to ensure:-  
(i) Maximum disclosure and minimum exemptions consistent with the constitutional provisions; 
(ii)  Independent appeal mechanism; 
(iii)  Penalties for failure to provide information as per the law; and 
(iv)  Effective mechanism for access to in formation and disclosure by authorities. 
8.  The amendments proposed by NAC were examin ed comprehensively by the Government and certain 
provisions suggested by the Council were modified keeping in view legislative, constitutional and 
administrative requirements. Considering that the ch anges envisaged were extensive, it had also been 
decided to enact a new legislation on the subject and simultaneously repeal the existing Freedom of 

Information Act, 2002. In furthe rance thereof the Right to Inform ation Bill, .2004 (Annexure-A) was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2004. 
9. As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill, the important changes proposed to 
be incorporated inter-alia included establishment of an appellat e machinery with investigative powers to 
review decisions of the Public Information Officers’ pe nal, provisions for failure to provide information as 
per law; provisions to ensure maximum disclosure and minimum exemptions consistent with constitutional 
provisions and an effective mechanism for access to information. The Statement of Objects and Reasons also 
reassured that the proposed legislation would provide an effective mechanism/framework for effectuating the 
right to information recognized under article 19 of the Constitution of India. 
DEPOSITION OF THE SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES 
AND PENSIONS 
10.  The Secretary. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions in his deposition before the 
Committee stated that the Bill made provisions for designation of Public Information Officers within 100 
days of the enactment of the Act and such officer s would be under the Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India. Making distinction between the Freedom of Information Act, 2002 and the present 
Bill, the Secretary stated that there was a definitive ness as to when action would be taken to create the 
required infrastructure for the implementation of this Act.  There was a provision for transfer of a request by 
a public authority to another public authority wherein the subject matter/information was held by the latter. 
As per the Bill, exemptions provided in clause 8 of the Bill were not absolute and withholding of 
information must be balanced against disclosure in the public interest. All the exemptions were conditional 
and were weighed against disclosure in public interest. Clarifying the issue further, the Secretary stated that 
information was to be released if the public benefit in disclosing the information outweighed the harm that 
might be caused by such disclosure. 
10.1  He further stated that the Bill envisaged creation of an independent non-judicial appellate machinery in 
the form of the Central Information Commission comprising an Information Commissioner and ten Deputy 
Information Commissioners to decide the second appeals. The Central Information Commission was to 
monitor the implementation of the Act and prepare an Annual Report to be laid on the table of both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
10.2  On being asked why the Freedom of Information Act, 2002 was sought to be repealed and replaced by 
the Right to Information Bill, 2004, despite so much efforts put in the past to give it legislative shape, the 
Secretary replied that the number of amendments suggest ed by the NAC to the Freedom of Information Act, 
2002 were quite elaborate. Therefore, it was becoming very difficult to incorporate so many amendments in 
the Act both cosmetic and substantive. Therefore, it was decided in consultation with the Department of 
Legal Affairs and Legislative Department that, perhaps a better alternative would be to bring in a new Bill 
incorporating all those amendments rather than to amend the Act comprehensively. 
BROAD SUGGESTIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE NATIONAL ADVISORY 
COUNCIL (NAC) 
11. The Committee notes that the amendments suggested by the National Advisory Council (NAC) 1aid 
the foundation for repealing the Freedom of Information Act, 2002 (hereinafter re ferred to as Act of 2002) 
and introduction of the Right to Information Bill, 2004 (hereinafter referred to as the Bill) in the Lok Sabha. 
As informed by the Ministry, the suggestions of the NAC based on the public inputs were considered by the 
Government and substantive recommendations were incorporated in the proposed legislation. Some 
important recommendations of the NAC alongwith  analysis  of those issues in the Act of 2002 and the Bill 
are as follows: 

(i) The Bill should prescribe a period of 120 days within which the Act would come into force. In 
the Act of 2002, no time limit was specified for its commencement. It was left to the discretion 
of the Central Government to decide the date of commencement. In the new Bill, however, the 
recommendation of the NAC has been incorporated. 
(ii) As in the Act of 2002, applicability of the Bill should be expanded to the State Governments 
also. Provisions of the Bill at present are applicable to the Ce ntral Government and the bodies 
under its control. 
(iii) Definition of ‘Right to Information’ should be modified so as to cover some more categories 
therein. The Bill has incorporated the suggestion. The Act of 2002, however, had narrower 
definition of the term. 
(iv) Definition of ‘public authority’ should be modified to cover the States, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions and other Local Bodies: The Act of 2002 has a provision by and large of the similar 
nature. But the Bill restricts its applicability to the Central Government or Bodies controlled and 
owned by it. 
(v) Right to information should be conferred on all persons. The Bill restricts the right to citizens 
only. 
(vi) Information should be published within six months of the Act coming into force and thereafter 
be updated at least every twelve months. The Act of 2002 requires information to be published at 
intervals to be prescribed by the appropriat e Government. The Bill, however, provides for 
publication of information before the commencement of the Act. 
(vii) Public Information Officers should be designated within one month of the enforcement of the 
Act. The Bill prescribes one hundred days fro m its enactment for appointment of Public 
Information Officers. The Act of 2002 does not fix any time limit for the purpose. 
(viii) Information seekers should have liberty to request in the official language of the area to make 
access procedures simple. The Act of 2002 does no t give this liberty. The Bill incorporates the 
suggestion. 
(ix) The fee payable by the applicant for seeking information should be reasonable and should in no 
case exceed the actual cost of copying the information. Neither the Act of 2002 nor the Bill 
contains any such provisions. 
(x) Information Commissioner should impose a penalty  of rupees two hundre d fifty for each day’s 
delay in furnishing the information. The Act of 2002 does not have penal provisions. The Bill 
does not empower the Information Commissioner to impose penalty on the delinquent Public 
Information Officer. 
(xi) Offences should be comprehensive and detailed and should include: 
(a) Refusal to rece ive an application for information; 
(b) Malafide denial of a request for information; 
(c) Knowingly giving incorrect, wrong or incomplete information; 
(d) Destroying information; 

(e) Obstructing the activities of a Public  Information Officer and any Information 
Commissioner or the Courts. The Bill does not provide for the comprehensive/detailed list 
of offences. It provides penalty merely for persistent delay in supplying information. 
(xii) There should not be blanket exemption for intelligence and security agencies. Information 
should be released where it pertains to allegations of human rights violations besides the 
allegations of corruption. Proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 21 of the Bill does not cover 
allegations of human right violations. 
11.1  A comparative tabular statement showing the provis ions of the Freedom of Information Act, 2002, the 
recommendations made by the National Advisory Council and the provisions of the Right to Information 
Bill, 2004 is appended as Annexure-B 
ORAL EVIDENCE 
12.1 The Committee in its meeting held on the 1st and 2nd March, 2005 heard Ms. Aruna Roy and other 
representatives of Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS); National Campaign for People’s Right to 
Information (NCPRI); eminent social activist Shri Anna Hazare and Shri Prakash Kardley, Ms. Maja 
Daruwala, Director, Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CWHRI) Delhi; and other representatives, Dr: 
Jean Dreze, Professor, Centre for Development Economics, Delhi School  of Economics; Eminent Supreme 
Court Advocate and former Law Minister Shri Shanti Bhushan, Shri Shailesh Gandhi, Fellow; Indian 
Institute of Management, Ahmedabad and Dr. Jaiprakash, Convener; Lok Satta. The Committee also 
received several written suggestions from different gro ups, organizations and indi viduals on the provisions 
of the Bill. 
12.2 The suggestions/views put forward by the organizations/individuals and the witnesses who deposed 
before the Committee are summarized below:- 
(i) The Bill should have a preamble to clearly state the scheme and scope of the law so as to be 
consistent with the principles of democracy arid ideals of the Constitution; 
(ii) The applicability of the Act should not be restricted to citizens but should cover non-citizens as 
well; 
(iii) The Bill should not only apply to the Central Government and bodies owned or controlled by it 
but be extended to the States, Local Bodies or Authorities; 
(iv) The definition of ‘Government’ as provided in clause 2 (c) should be amended to ensure its 
consistency with the definition of ‘public authority’ in clause 2 (g); 
(v) The information regime should be extended to private sector; 
(vi) All political parties, MLAs/MPs/Ministers and such other public representatives should be 
included in the category of ‘public authorities’ under the Act; 
(vii) There should be no provision for paying fee at the time of making a request for information; 
(viii) The fee charged under clause 7 (5) must be reasonable, affordable and should in no case exceed 
the actual cost of supplying the information. There should be a provision for waiving the fee in 
case the information is in the larger public interest; 
(ix) To honour the spirit of the rule of maximum disclosure and minimum exemption, the Bill should 
make suitable provisions that information related to security, sovereignty and integrity of India, 

relations with foreign countries/states and cabinet  papers etc. as exempted under sub-clauses (a) 
(i) of sub section (l) of clause 8 should not be an all time exemption; 
(x)  The exemptions should be qualified with a strong public interest overriding, in the sense that the 
citizens should have access to information about the exempted agencies, their policies, personnel 
etc. so far the information relates to corruption and issues of public interest; 
(xi) Clause 11 of the Bill lays down procedure for s eeking third party information. This clause, by its 
nature, provides the Public Information Officer and the third party an opportunity to deny 
information on the ground of confidentiality It should, therefore, be deleted; 
(xii) Clause 12 to 15 of the Bill provide for constitution of the Centre Information Commission, 
appointment of Information Commissioners and Deputy Information Commissioners, their terms 
of offices and powers and functions etc. This is  the essence of the Bill in the sense that the 
mechanism of access to information will depend on effectiveness of this system. It should 
therefore be ensured that the Commission a nd its functionaries perform their duties 
independently and with complete autonomy. For this, it is necessary to elevate their status to that 
of the Election Commission of India. Moreover , their appointment criteria should include 
elements like, integrity, transparency and accountability; 
(xiii) There should be a provision clarifying that the Information Commissioner can hear appeal where 
an applicant has received no response to an appeal under sub-clause (1) of clause 16; 
(xiv) Sub-clause (l) of clause 16 should be amended to provide that the appeals should be made to the 
head of the public authority who can delegate this power to a subordinate functionary; 
(xv) In order to ensure that the autonomy of the Commission is not impeded, sub-clause (10) of 
clause 16 should be amended to provide that the procedure for decidi ng an appeal by the 
Commission should be prescribed by the Commission itself instead of the Central Government; 
(xvi) Clause 17 providing penalty for delay in supplying information needs to be amended suitably as 
it does not prescribe the adequate punishment. Sub-clause (1) of the clause should be amended 
so as to recognize more acts of ‘omission or commission’ as offences for the purpose of 
imposing penalties; 
(xvii) The Commission should be authorized to initiate legal proceedings against the delinquent officer 
through one of its officers instead of through an officer of the Central Government; 
(xviii) An explicit provision should be made to empower the appellate authority including the 
Information Commission to impose all penalties available under the law; 
(xix) Clause 17 should be amended to provide a penalty of Rs.250/- for per day’s delay against the 
defaulting Public Information Officer beyond the stipulated deadline and disciplinary action like 
suspension and dismissal at the departmental level; 
(xx) Clause 20 providing bar on jurisdiction of Courts should be deleted as it is both unconstitutional 
and inconsistent with the right to appeal to the High Court; 
(xxi) Sub-clause (1) clause 21 should be deleted or  alternatively the proviso to the sub-clause be 
amended so as to include therein the information pertaining to human right violations. This 
clause, otherwise gives blanket exclusion to the intelligence and security agencies from 
application of the Bill; and 

(xxii) Provision should be made in the Bill to remove difficulties in functioning of the proposed 
legislation. 
12.3 The mews/suggestions received from organizations/individuals and witnesses were forwarded to the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for comments. The views/suggestions in brief and 
comments of the Ministry are appended as Annexure-C. 
12.4 The Committee is of the view that the amendmen ts/suggestions received on the Bill form an 
important part of the legislative process as they give an idea as to how to make the formulations better 
and more effective. In this endeavour, many su ggestions, not incorporated in the Bill, need 
consideration by the Government so that the Bill can squarely meet its objects. 
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION 
13. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its meetings held on the 1st and 
2nd March, 2005. 
Clause - 2 
13.1 The clause defines the various terms used in the Bill. 
13.2 Sub-clause (c) of the clause defines the term ‘government’ as follows:- 
“Government in relation to a public authority established, constituted, owned, substantially financed 
by funds provided directly or indirectly or controlled by the Central Government or a Union Territory 
Administration, means the Central Government”. 
13.3 The Committee noted that the above definition of the term ‘Government’ restricts the right to access 
information to the subjects held by or under the public authority owned or controlled by Central 
Government, whereas the Freedom of Information Act, 2002 had an all India applicability covering State 
Government under the definition. The Committee also noted  that eight states have already enacted specific 
laws protecting this right. The Committee considered the recommendation of the NAC which had also 
supported the idea of all India applicability of the Bill much on the pattern of the Act of 2002. 
13.4 The Committee held detailed discussion on this issue and heard the views/suggestions of prominent 
NGOs, social groups, experts and individuals and came  to the conclusion that the proposed Right to 
Information Bill, 2004 assumed paramount importance as it was stated to be a touchstone for democracy and 
development. Not only that, by passing this legislation, India would join the world community having 
legislations guaranteeing access to information. 
13.5 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that passing a law with al l India applicability will send 
a positive signal and would squarely serve the purpose of the proposed law. 
13.6  Subject to the observations of th e Committee in the foregoing paras,  it suggests that sub-clause 
(c) should be amended in such manner as may bring the states and local bodies or authorities under its 
purview. 
13.7  The Committee recommends that in sub-clause (k ), the words ‘and includes a public authority’ 
should be deleted as one government body should not be considered a third party in respect of another 
government body. 
13.8  The clause is adopted as amended. 
 

Clause - 3 
14.  The clause confers the right to information on all citizens. 
14.1  The issue who can access information triggered an animated debate. Witnesses in their deposition 
favoured the idea of extending the coverage of the law to all persons. Examples of some foreign jurisdictions 
were placed before the Committee, which permit the right to access to be exercised by all persons. 
14.2  The Committee took note that the Act of 2002 gi ves the access right to the citizens only. Not only this, 
the fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution are exercisable by citizens and not by all. After some 
discussion, the Committee favoured retention of the provision. 
14.3  The clause is adop ted without any change. 
Clause - 4 
l5.  The clause requires public authorities to maintain information within a reasonable time and publish it 
before the commencement of the Act. The information to be published under the Act has been categorized 
widely to cover a broad spectrum of information. The clause also provides for suo motu information through 
various means of communication. 
15.1 The Committee sought clarification from the repres entatives of the Ministries of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions and Law and Justice with regard  to the expression ‘within reasonable time’ used in 
sub clause (1) as it had apprehension that the expression could lead to undue delay in maintaining the 
records. Similarly,. the Committee desired to specify a time limit in sub-clause (1) (b) to publish 
information. It observed that the NAC had also re commended a time limit for this purpose. The Secretary, 
Ministry of Personnel clarifying the position explained that fixing a time limit may delay the process rather 
than to expedite it. The idea according to him was to  put information regime in place by the time the Act 
came into force. 
15.2  The Committee however recommend that in sub clau se (b) (xiii), the words, ‘recipients of’ 
should be inserted after the words ‘particulars of’ . 
15.3  The Committee is of the view th at the obligation of public au thority to publish information 
before the commencement of the Act and thereafter update these publications at such intervals as may 
be prescribed, leaves wide discretion to the authorit y, which may lead to delay in providing the latest 
and updated information to the pub lic. It, therefore, suggests that th e clause should be amended in 
such manner as may specify the ti me for updating publication of info rmation. It therefore, suggests 
that in sub-clause (b) after item  (xvii) for the words ‘and thereaft er update these publications within 
such intervals in each year as  may be prescribed’ the words ‘a nd thereafter update these publications 
every year’ should be substituted. 
15.4 The Committee recommends that in sub-clause (2 ) after the word ‘communications’ the words 
‘including internet’ should be inserted. 
15.5  The clause is adopted as amended. 
Clause - 5 
16.1 The clause lays down the procedure for designation of Public Information Officers within one hundred 
days of the enactment of this Act. 

16.2  The Committee considered the provisions contained in  sub clauses (4) and (5) and felt that these 
may do more harm than good. It therefore, recommends that the sub-clauses should be deleted. 
16.3 The clause is adopted as amended. 
Clause - 6 
17.1 The clauses prescribes the procedure for obtaining  information from the Public Information Officers. 
17.2 The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 7 
18.1 The clause provides for disposal of request of applicants by the Public Information Officers as per the 
procedure prescribed. 
18.2  The Committee notes that the Public Information Officer is to provide the information on payment of 
such fee as may be prescribed or any further fee repr esenting the cost of providing the information. The 
clause thus allows the Public Information Officer to use discretion in determining the fee structure to access 
information. The Committee in this regard consider ed the views expressed by the witnesses and other 
suggestions received on the Bill from a wide cross secti on of the society, strongly arguing in favour of 
reasonable and affordable fee not ex ceeding the actual cost of supplying the information to the requester. It 
was also debated that if payment of fee causes financial hardship then it may invite serious obstacles in 
implementation of the Act. 
18.3  Clarifying the position in this respect, the Minist ry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has 
explained that in many jurisdictions across the world the factors which go to determine the fees to be 
charged for providing the actual information also in clude search charges, charges for preparing the 
documents for supply etc. The Bill however does not contain any provision for levying search charges etc. 
18.4  The Committee is of the view that  in a country like India where a majority of the people are 
poor or belong to rural areas, it will not be in the fi tness of thing to insist on  payment of fee, which is 
beyond the reach of a commoner. The Committee strong ly feels that people living below the poverty 
line should be exempted from paying any fee for accessing information and in other cases it should not 
exceed the actual cost of supplying the inform ation. The Committee, the refore, recommends that 
provisions should be inserted to give effect to the suggested changes. 
18.5  Subject to the above, the clause is adopted. 
Clause - 8 
19.1 The clause provides for exemption of certain information from disclosure. 
19.2 The Committee held detailed deliberation on the question of exemption from disclosure of information 
relating to sovereignty, integrity; security, foreign relations, trade secrets, cabinet papers etc. enumerated in 
sub-clauses (a) to (j) of the clause. The Committ ee heard the views of experts/NGOs and others who 
vehemently contended that to ensure maximum disclosure, exemption should be kept to the absolute 
minimum and narrowly drawn. A Member of the Committee was of the view that the provisions 
regarding exemption from disclosu re leave many flaws and as such they may be interpreted in a 
manner that may restrict or curb the extent of disc losure and widen the scope of exemptions which is 
against the spirit of the legislation and will defeat  the very purpose of its enactment. The Committee 
feels that the provisions regardin g exemption should be redrafted appropriately so as to logically 

justify their genuineness. The Committee, therefo re, recommends that the provision should be 
amended suitably as suggested by the member. 
19.3  Subject to the above, the clause is adopted. 
Clause - 9 
20.1 The clause empowers the Public Information Offi cer to reject a request for information where an 
infringement of a copyright subsisting in a person would be involved. 
20.2 The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 10 
21.1  The clause enables the public authority to severe and provide partial information which falls partly 
under the exempted categories and partly under the non-exempted categories. 
21.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 11 
22 1  The clause seeks to disclose any information or record which relates to or has been supplied by a third 
party. 
22.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 12 
23.1  The clause proposes to constitute the Central Information Commission to exercise the powers 
conferred on and to perform the functions which may be assigned to it. 
23.2  The Committee is of the view that no specific qu alification has been prescribed for appointment of the 
Information Commissioner and the Deputy Information Commissioners and scope of the areas/fields 
included in the eligibility criteria under sub-clause (5) is also very limited. It merely states that a person 
eligible for the posts of the In formation Commissioner and Deputy Information Commissioners shall be 
persons of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience of administration and governance. 
The Committee feels that persons from other walks of life should also be considered to be eligible for 
appointment to these posts. The Committee, therefore, recommends th at the sub-clause should be so 
amended as to cover thereunder the disciplines of law, science and technology, social service, 
management, journalism, mass media apart from administration and governance. 
23.3  The Committee observed that sub-clause (6) unneces sarily puts a restriction on the Member of 
Parliament or Member of the Legislature of a State or person holding any oth er office of profit or 
carrying on any business or pursuing any prof ession, to be appointe d as the Information 
Commissioner and the Deputy Information Commissi oners. It therefore recomme nds deletion of the 
sub-clause. 
23.4  The Committee considered s ub-clause (8) and found that that the Deputy Information 
Commissioner would have to function as per the direction of the Central Government. The Committee 
feels that this provision curbs the independe nce and autonomy of the officers. It therefore 
recommends deletion of this provision. 
 

Clause - 13 
24.1 The clause seeks to provide the term of office and other conditions of service of the Information 
Commissioner and the Deputy Information Commissioners. 
24.2 The Committee considered sub-clause (5) and fe lt that it would neither be desirable nor 
justifiable to put a restriction on the Info rmation Commissioner and the Deputy Information 
Commissioners from being considered eligible for further employment to any office of profit under 
the Central or a State Government or any dipl omatic assignment or Administrator of Union 
Territories on cessation of their offices. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends  that this sub-clause 
should be deleted. 
24.3  The Committee is of the view that the Central Information Commission is an important creation under 
the Act which will execute the laudable scheme of the legislation and will hold an all India responsibility for 
this. It should, therefore, be ensured that it functions with utmost independence and autonomy. The 
Committee feels that to achieve this objective, it  will be desirable to confer on the Information 
Commissioner and Deputy Informat ion Commissioners, status of the Chief Election Commissioner 
and the Election Commissioner, respectively. The Co mmittee, accordingly, recommends insertion of a 
suitable provision in the clause to this effect. 
24.4  Subject to the above, the clause is adopted. 
Clause - 14 
25.1  The clause lays down the procedure for removal of Information Commissioner or Deputy Information 
Commissioners. 
25.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 15 
26.1  The clause provides for powers and functions of the Central Information Commission. 
26.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 16 
27.1  The clause provides for appeal mechanism through which an aggrieved person who does not receive a 
decision or is aggrieved by a decision of the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public 
Information Officer may prefer an appeal within the prescribed period. 
27.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause – 17 
28.1  The clause proposes to impose penalties on the Public Information Officers for persistently delaying 
the information required. 
28.2  The Committee notes that the provisions imposing penalty lack in many respects. Firstly, the 
Information Commission has discretionary power which is restricted to authorize an officer of the Central 
Government to file a complaint against the defaulting Public Information Officer before a Judicial 
Magistrate of First Class. Secondly, the Commission may do so after forming an opinion that the Public 
Information Officer has persistently failed to provide information and such an opinion may be formed at the 
time of deciding, an appeal. Thirdly, the burden of proof to establish that the Public Information Officer has 

failed to provide information without any reasonable cause lies on the public. It also notes that only an 
appeal has been cons idered for the purpose of in itiating penal action. Almo st all NGOs/Social Groups and 
other persons who deposed before the Committee were of the unanimous view that penal provisions need to 
be strengthened, as the existing provisions were weak and ineffective. A concern was also expressed that in 
the absence of adequate and comprehensive penal provisions, objective of the law for which it was being 
brought in would not be achieved fully. 
28.3  In the light of the above observations, th e Committee feels that unless the Information 
Commission is vested with direct powers to init iate penal action against the Public Information 
Officers or some kind of disciplinary action under the service rules applicable to them; it would not be 
able to exercise due control and superintendence over the Public Information Officers who are the 
frontline functionaries in the access regime. In this connection, it no tes that the Right to Information 
Act of Maharashtra is being implemented effectively in the State and one of the reasons for its success 
has been assigned to the stringen t penal provisions of that Act. The Committee is of the view that 
similar provisions should also be  inserted in the Central Act and shortcomings or defects as noted 
above be removed by amending the provisions suitably. 
28.4  Subject to the above, the clause is adopted. 
Clause - 18 
29.1  The clause seeks to provide protection of action taken in good faith. 
29.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 19 
30.1  The clause provides that this Act shall have overriding effect over the provisions of the Official 
Secrets Act, 1923 and any other law for the time being in force. 
30.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 20 
31.l  The clause bars jurisdiction of courts in any suit, application or other proceedings in respect of any 
order made under this Act. 
31.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 21 
32.1 The clause provides that the provisions of the Act shall not apply to the intelligence arid security 
organizations specified in the Second Schedule. The proviso to the clause, however, casts an obligation on 
the authorities to provide information relating to allegations of corruption. 
32.2 It was argued that keeping the in telligence and security agencies out of purview of the Act will not be 
in the larger public interest. Curbing disclosure or denial of any information may be justified only on the 
ground of principle of public interest override. In other words, information can be refused only if releasing 
such information may be prejudicial to the larger public interest. 
32.3 The Committee appreciates the role and importan ce of the intelligence and security agencies. 
Though these agencies might have ac ted fairly and legitimately still they are not free from allegations 
of excesses. The Committee notes th at keeping in view th e importance of these agencies in national 

security and maintaining law and order, the exempt ion granted by the law m ay not be said to be 
totally irrational or illogical. It is, however, of th e view that giving blanket exclusion to these agencies 
may also not be justified. Though proviso to sub- clause (1) leaves some scop e for getting information 
pertaining to the allegations of corr uption, it is also felt desirable to  include allegations of violation of 
human rights. The Committee, therefore, recommends in sertion of a suitable pr ovision in the proviso 
to the sub-clause to give effect to the suggestion of the Committee. 
Clause - 22 
33.1  The clause provides for preparing a report on the implementation of the provisions of this Act. 
33.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 23 
34.1  The clause seeks to cast an obligation on the Central Government to develop and promote schemes for 
advancement of the information regime. 
34.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 24 
35.1  The clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules so as to carry out the provisions 
of the legislation. 
35.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 25 
36.1  The clause seeks to empower the competent authority to make rules so as to carry out the provisions of 
the legislation. 
36.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 26 
37.1  The clause seeks to require the Central Government to lay the rules before each House of Parliament. 
37.2  The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 27 
38.1  The clause empowers the Central Government to remove difficulties in giving effect to the provisions 
of the legislation within a period of two years from the commencement of the legislation. 
38.2 The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause - 28 
39.1 The clause seeks to repeal the Freedom of Information Act, 2002. 
39.2 The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause l, Enacting Formula and Title 

39.3  Clause l, the Enacting Formul a and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of 
consequential or drafting  nature, namely, the figure “2004” an d the words and “Fifty-fifth” to be 
substituted by the figure “2005” and the words “Fifty-sixth”, respectively. 
40.0  The Committee has suggested amendments in the li ght of the above observations. The Bill as 
amended by the Committee has be en appended to the Report at Annexure-D. The Committee 
recommends that Government should give due consideration to the proposed amendments. 
Recommendations on some key issues 
40.1  During the course of deposition of the Secret ary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions, some Members raised a specific query as to why the Freedom of Information Act, 2002 could not 
be enforced. Members were concerned with non-implemen tation of the Act even after a lapse of almost two 
years of its enactment. In fact, no convincing reply came from the Govern ment for not enforcing the Act for 
such a long time. The Committee felt that an important legislation of this kind should have been enforced at 
the earliest to send a positive message. The Committee is optimistic th at the new Bill, after its 
enactment, would be enforced with in the specified time affirming commitment of the Government to 
citizens to have access to information regimes through this legislation, which, in turn, will mobilize the 
people to have an effective and better participatio n in governance and streng then the institution of 
democracy. 
40.2  Members of the Committee as well as the witnesses who appeared before it were of the view that the 
long title of the Bill does not explain the democratic ideals which the Bill seeks to enforce. It seems to be 
inadequate so far as it fails to send an appropriate message consistent with the principles of maximum 
disclosure. 
 It was argued that a Preamble to the Bill would better serve the purpose.  The Committee considered 
the suggestions in the light of the views of the members and experts. It found that the recommendations of 
the National Advisory Committee were also worthwhile considering as they aimed at broadly stating the 
principles of disclosure, transparency and accountability. The Committee therefore recommends insertion of 
Preamble to the Bill on the lines suggested by a member of the Committee. 
40.3  The Committee is of the view that  in the light of its recommendati ons in clause 2 (definitions 
clause) for bringing the States and other local bodies or authorities within the purview of the proposed 
legislation; it becomes imperati ve to amend definitions of the various terms to bring them in 
consonance with the spirit of its recommendati ons. Likewise, other co nsequential changes at 
appropriate places of the Bill need to be effect ed. The Committee also recommends insertion of new 
clauses 14A, 14B and 14C in the Bill providing for constitution of State Information Commission; 
terms of and conditions of service of State Info rmation Commissioners and State Deputy Information 
Commissioners and the procedure for removal of th e State Information Commissioners or the State 
Deputy Information Commissioners. 
 
 
 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF 
THE DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES. 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the lst February, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT 
 l. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan   –– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2.  Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
 3.  Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa 
 4. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 5. Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK  SABHA 
 6. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 7. Smt. Kiran Maheshwari 
 8. Shri Harin Pathak 
 9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 10. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 12.  Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
 WITNESSES 
    I. Representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 1.  Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary 
 2. Smt. T. Jacob, Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri Hari Kumar, Director 
    II. Representative of the Legislative De partment, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary 
  III.  Representatives of the Department of Le gal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1.  Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary 
 2.  Shri R.L. Koli, Joint Secretary 
 SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grie vances and Pensions apprised the Committee that the 
Freedom of Information Act, 2002 was enacted to grant the people the right to access information held by 
Government. He deposed that since many provisions of the Act necessitated cosmetic and substantive 
amendments to make it more progressive, participatory and meaningful, the Right to Information Bill, 2003 
had been introduced to repeal the Act. He stated that the title of the Act was altered to Right to Information 
Bill to make it manifestly clear that it comes within the ambit of fundamental right of speech and expression. 
3. He informed the Committee that the legislation would commence after 120 days from its enactment 
and that it applies to public authorities under the Central Government, Constitutional Bodies and Bodies 

established by Parliament. He clarified that the exemptions provided in the Bill were conditional and that 
they were to be balanced against disclosure in public interest. He elaborated that the first appeal would be to 
the departmental officer senior to the Public In formation Officer and that  the Central Information 
Commission which shall be a non judicial machinery would decide second appeals. He explained the penal 
provisions in the Bill. Responding to queries, he clarified that the information from Central Government 
shall be accessed through the Central Act and in formation from State Governments shall be accessed 
through the State Acts. 
4. He responded to the queries raised by the Committee. 
5. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Mini stry of Law and Justice apprised the Committee that 
as regards public records pending with the Central Government or Central Government undertakings or 
agencies, Parliament had jurisdiction to enact laws and that as regards records maintained by the State 
Government, Parliament did not have any jurisdiction. 
6. He clarified the points raised by the Committee. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
7.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8.  The Committee adjourned at 1.04 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

*XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 10.30 A.M. to 1.35 P.M. and again from 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 14 TH February, 2005, in 
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT 
 1.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan   –– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2.  Dr. P.C. Alexander  
 3.  Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK  SABHA 
 4. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 5. Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 6. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 7. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 8. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
    I. WITNESSES 
 1. Smt. Aruna Roy, President of Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS), Rajasthan; 
 2. Shri Nikhil Dey, Representative of Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS), Rajasthan; 
 3. Dr. Jean Dreaze, Professor, Centre of Development Economics, Delhi School of Economics, 
University of Delhi; 
 4. Ms. Angela Rangad, Representative of National Campaign for People’s Right to Information 
(NCPRI), Assam; 
 5. Shri Shekhar Singh, Convener, of National Ca mpaign for People’s Right to Information (NCPRI), 
New Delhi; 
 6.  Shri Prakash Kardaley, Social Activist, Pune (Maharastha);  
 7.  Shri Anna Hazare, Social Activist, Pune (Maharastha); 
 8.  Shri Shailesh Gandhi, Mumbai; 
 9.  Smt. Maja Daruwala, Director, Commonwealth Human Right Initiative (CHRI) New Delhi; 
 10. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, Represen tative of the NGO ‘Lok Satta’, Bangelore; 
 11. Shri Arvind Kezriwal, Representa tive of the NGO ‘Parivartan’, New Delhi; 
 12. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Senior Counsel, Supreme Court of India, New Delhi; 
 13. Shri Prashant Bhushan, Advocate, Supreme Court of India, New Delhi; and 
 14. Shri Harsh Mander, Director, Cent er for Equity Studies; New Delhi. 
  II.  Representatives of Ministry of Pers onnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 1.  Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary 
 2. Shri T. Jacob, Joint Secretary 
 SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
 Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the historic occasion of 
consideration of Right to information Bill, 2004. The Chairman felt that this was a welcome step taken by 
the Government to bring transparency at all levels. 
3.  Welcoming the steps taken by the Government in bringing forth a legislation for a corruption free 
India, the representatives said that without right to information and transparency in Government, there could 

be no development, no justice, neither could there be progress too. Moreover, it should be made a part of the 
Constitution and specified under Article 19 ( 1 ) (a). They also stressed that there should be strong penalty or 
imprisonment or both for non-compliance of the provisions  of the legislation. They stated that the previous 
Act namely, Freedom of Information Act, 2002 did not have any independent appeal mechanism but this Bill 
did have independent appeal mechanism, which made it better. But still there had been weaknesses in the 
Bill. The Bill had been made applicable only to the Union Government’s offices and it was not applicable to 
the States or to local bodies. With regard to exempti on to the security agencies from the application of the 
legislation, it was submitted that the information pertaining to the Human Rights violation by the security 
agencies should be made accessible. 
4.  The Representative also stressed on having two separate laws i.e. State Law and Centre Law so that 
people could have a choice. Citing the example of Rajasthan where people had the option of choosing from 
the Panchayat Act, 1997 and the Right to Information Act, 2002 under which Act they wanted information to 
be furnished. Similarly, the same example should be used if the State Act and the Central Act were in 
existence. 
5.  Shri Anna Hazare, a social Activist suggested that the Act should have provisions for punishment, 
some States like Tamil Nadu, Rajashtan while framing such law did not have provision for punishment to 
appealing authority and therefore no action was being taken regarding implementation of that law in their 
respective States. He also suggested for fixing the amount in the Act itself for seeking information. He also 
informed that a team from South Korea had visited Maharashtra where Right to Information Act was in force 
and they had praised the provision of the same. 
6.  The Representatives were of the view that the ro le of Information Officer and the Deputy Information 
Officer must be a part of the Act, penal Provisions should be stringent to avoid delay. Exceptions to security 
agencies with regard to ‘Human Ri ghts’ and ‘Corruption’ was another issue which needed to be addressed 
properly. The Representative also gave suggestions to elevate the status of Info rmation Officer and Deputy 
Information Officer at par with the Election Commission so that they could function independently and 
without political interference. 
7.  The Committee expressed their apprehension about the confusion that might crop up among the people 
after enactment of the present legislation in those States which might already have their separate Acts on the 
subject. Secondly, as far as possible delay in furnishing information should be prevented and avoided in 
dealing with the subject. Thirdly, clause 17 was not having the required strength and also the powers of the 
Commission should be strengthened. Fifthly, what would be the procedure of removal of is Information 
Commissioner or Deputy Information Commissioners, must be laid down explicitly in the legislation itself. 
8.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
9.  The Committee adjourned at 6.02 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXII 
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. to 1.35 P.M. and again from 2.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 16th February, 2005, in 
Room No. 53, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT 
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan   –– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 4. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 5. Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK  SABHA 
 6. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 7. Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 8. Shri Harin Pathak 
 9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra 
 11. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of Institute of Ec onomic Growth, University of Delhi 
 1. Prof. Bina Agarwal 
 2.  Advocate Shruti Pandey 
 3.  Advocate Poonam Verma 
II. Representative of the Legislative De partment, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary 
III.  Representative of Commonwealth Hu man Rights Initiative (CHRI), Delhi 
 Ms. Charmaine Rodrigues 
IV. Representative of Non-Governme ntal Organisation ‘Parivartan’ 
 Shri Arvind Kezriwal 
V.  Representative of Department of Administrati ve Reforms and Public Grievances, Ministry of  
 Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 Shri P.I. Suvrathan, Additional Secretary 
VI.  Representative of National Capita l Region Planning Board, New Delhi 
 Dr. P.K. Mishra, Member-Secretary 
 SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
 Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 

6. * * * 
7. * * * 
8. * * * 
9.  The Chairman welcomed the representatives of “Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative” and 
“Parivartan” to make a presentation on the Right to In formation Bill, 2004. They deposed that greater clarity 
was needed with regard to definition of “Cabinet Papers” in clause 8(i) of the Bill and that in case of 
withholding information requested for, penalty should be imposed. They also stressed upon the need to 
ensure impartiality of the Information Commissioner and that he should not hold any office of profit 
simultaneously. 
10. They replied to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. 
11. * * * 
12. * * * 
13. * * * 
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
15. The Committee adjourned at 4.20 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXIV 
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the lst March, 2005, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
 PRESENT 
 1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan   –– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
 5. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa 
 6. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 7. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 8. Shri Tariq Anwar 
  LOK  SABHA 
 9. Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 10. Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel 
 11. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 14. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 15. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
 16. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 WITNESSES 
    I. Representatives of the Department of Le gal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1. Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary 
 2. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary 
   II. Representatives of the Ministry of Pers onnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 l. Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary 
 2. Shri T. Jacob, Joint Secretary 
 SECRETARIAT  
 Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
 Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman invited the representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions and the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice to the meeting to depose on the Right 
to Information Bill, 2004. The Secretary, Ministry of  Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions clarified 
that in case of information held by the State Govern ment, the citizens would have the option to access the 
requisite information, either through the Central law or the State law and that this could give rise to the issue 
of legislative competence. The Secretary, Legislative Department deposed that “third party” information had 
to be cautiously handled. 
3.  The witnesses responded to the queries raised  by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
4.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 5.58 
P.M. 

XXV 
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 4.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 2nd March, 2005, in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT 
 1.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan    –– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 4. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 5. Shri Tariq Anwar 
  LOK  SABHA 
 6.  Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran 
 7.  Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 8. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 9.  Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel 
 10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 11. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
 12. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 WITNESSES 
    I. Representative of the Ministry of Pers onnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary 
   II. Representative of the Legislative De partment, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary 
  III. Representative of the Department of Le gal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary 
 SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
 Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions and of the Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of 
Law and Justice to the meeting. 
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions while deposing on the Right to 
Information Bill, 2004, clarified that with regard to Cabinet papers, the material on the basis of which the 
decision was taken was included within the purview of the Bill. He suggested that the term of office of the 
Information Commissioner and the Deputy Information Commissioner should be stipulated as five years. He 
deposed that if there was ingress in the information regarding the functioning of security forces on the 
ground of human rights violation, every single information should be exposed for that reason alone. 
4. The Secretary, Legislative Department assured the Committee that clause 8 of the Bill would be 
redrafted as per the suggestions made by the Committ ee. He apprised the Committee that though the Chief 
Information Commissioner and other Information Commissioners were under the administrative control of 
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, they would function autonomously. 
5.  The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee. 

 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7.  The Committee adjourned at 6.18 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXVII 
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 16 TH March, 2005, in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT 
 1.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan   –– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
 5. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 6. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
  LOK  SABHA 
 7.  Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 8. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
 9.  Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 10. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 11.  Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 12. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
 14. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 WITNESSES 
    I. Representatives of the Legislative De partment, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary 
 2. Shri Z.S. Negi, Additional Secretary 
 3. Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary 
 4. Shri N.K. Nampoothry Joint Secretary 
   II. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1.  Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary 
 2.  Shri R.L. Koli, Joint Secretary 
  III.  Representative of Ministry of Pers onnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary 
 SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
 Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee first took up the consideration of the draft Report on the Right to Information Bill, 
2004 and after some discussions adopted the Report.  
3. * * * 
4.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5.  The Committee adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - A 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 23, DECEMBER 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 107 of 2004
 
 
 
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, 2004 
A 
BILL 
to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for people to 
secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to 
promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
the constitution of a Central Information Commission and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows: 
CHAPTER-I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information Act, 2004. 
 (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
 (3) It shall come into force on the one hundred and twentieth 
day of its enactment. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
 (a) “Commission” means the Central Information Commission 
constituted under section 12; 
 (b) “competent authority” means - 
 (i) the Speaker in the case of the House of the People or the 
Legislative Assembly of a Union territory and the Chairman in the 
case of the Council of States; 
 (ii)  the Chief Justice of India in the case of the Supreme Court; 
 (iii) the Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi in the case of 
the High Court of Delhi; 
 (iv) the President in the case of ot her authorities created by or 
under the Constitution; 
Short title, extent and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (v) the administrator appointed under article 239 of the 
Constitution; 
 (c)  “Government”, in relation to a public authority established, 
constituted, owned, substantially financed by funds provided 
directly or indirectly or controlled by the Central Government or a 
Union territory administration, means the Central Government; 
 (d) “information” means any mate rial in any form, including 
records, documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press 
releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, 
samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and 
information relating to any private body which can be accessed by a 
public authority under any other law for the time being in force; 
 (e) “Information Commissioner” and “Deputy Information 
Commissioners” mean the Information Commissioner and the 
Deputy Information Commissioners appointed under sub-section (3) 
of  
section 12; 
 (f)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act 
by the Government or the competent authority, as the case may be; 
 (g)  “public authority” means any authority or body established 
or constituted,- 
 (i) by or under the Constitution; 
 (ii)  by any other law made by Parliament; 
 (iii) by notification issued or order made by the Government, 
and includes any other body owned or controlled by the 
Government; 
 (h) “Public Information Officer” means the Public Information 
Officer appointed under sub-section (1), and includes an Assistant 
Information Officer designated as such under sub-section (2), of 
section 5; 
(i) “record” includes 
 (i) any document, manuscript and file; 
 (ii) any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a 
document; 
 (iii) any reproduction of image or images embodied in such 
microfilm (whether enlarged or not); and 
 (iv) any other material produced by a computer or any other 
device; 
 (j) “right to information” means the right to information 
accessible under this Act which is held by or under the control of 
any public authority and includes the right to- 
 (i) inspection of work, documents, records; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (ii) taking notes, extracts, or cer tified copies of documents or 
records; 
 (iii) taking certified samples of material; 
 (iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, 
tapes, video cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through 
print outs where such information is stored in a computer or in any 
other device; 
 (k) “third party” means a person other than the person making a, 
request for information and includes a public authority. 
CHAPTER II 
R
IGHT TO INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC 
AUTHORITIES 
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have the 
right to information. 
4. (1) Every public authority shall- 
 (a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed in a 
manner and form which facilitates the right to information under 
this Act and ensure that all records that are appropriate to be 
computerised are, within a reasonable time and subject to 
 availability of resources, computerised and connected through a 
network all over the country on different systems so that access to 
such records is facilitated; 
 (b) publish before the commencement of this Act,- 
 (i) the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties; 
 (ii) the powers and duties of its officers and employees; 
 (iii) the procedure followed in the decision making process, 
including channels of supervision and accountability; 
 (iv) the norms set by it for the discharge of its functions; 
 (v) the rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and records, 
held by it or under its control or used by its employees for 
discharging its functions; 
 (vi) a statement of the categories of documents that are held by 
it or under its control; 
 (vii) the particulars of any arrangement that exists for 
consultation with, or representation by, the members of the public in 
relation to the formulation of its policy or implementation thereof; 
 (viii)  a statement of the boards, councils, committees and other 
bodies consisting of two or more persons constituted as its part or 
for the purpose of its advise, and as to whether meetings of those 
boards, councils, committees and other bodies are open to the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to information. 
 
 
Obligations of public 
authorities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public, or the minutes of such meetings are accessible for public; 
 (ix)  a directory of its officers and employees; 
 (x) the monthly remuneration received by each of its officers 
and employees, including the system  of compensation as provided 
in its regulations; 
 (xi)  the budget allocated to each of its agency, indicating the 
particulars of all plans, proposed expenditures and reports on 
disbursements made; 
 (xii)  the manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including 
the amounts allocated and the details of beneficiaries of such 
programmes; 
 (xiii) particulars of concessions, permits or authorisations 
granted by it; 
 (xiv) details in respect of the information, available to or held 
by it, reduced in an electronic form; 
 (xv) the particulars of facilities available to citizens for 
obtaining information, including the working hours of a library or 
reading room, if maintained for public use; 
 (xvi) the names, designations and other particulars of the Public 
Information Officers; 
 (xvii) such other information as may be prescribed; 
and thereafter update these publications within such intervals in 
each year as may be prescribed; 
 (c) publish all relevant facts while formulating important 
policies or announcing the decisions which affect public; 
 (d) provide reasons for its administrative or quasi judicial 
decisions to affected persons; 
 (e) before initiating any project, or formulating any policy, 
scheme, programme or law, publish or communicate to the public in 
general or to the persons likely to be affected thereby in particular, 
the facts available to it or to which it has reasonable access which in 
its opinion should be known to them in the best interest of natural 
justice and promotion of democratic principles. 
 (2)  It shall be a constant endeavour of every public authority to 
take steps in accordance with the re quirements of clause (b) of sub-
section (1) to provide as much information suo motu to the public at 
regular intervals through various means of communications so that 
the public have minimum resort to the use of this Act to obtain 
information. 
 (3) For the purpose of sub-section (1), every information shall 
be disseminated widely and in such form and manner which is 
easily accessible and comprehensible to the public. 
 (4) All materials shall be disseminated taking into consideration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the cost effectiveness, local language and the most effective method 
of communication in that local area  and the information should be 
easily accessible, to the extent possible in electronic format with the 
Public Information Officer, available free or at such cost of the 
medium or the print cost price as may be prescribed. 
 Explanation:-  For the purposes of sub-sections (3) and (4), 
“disseminated” means making known or communicated the 
information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public 
announcements, media broadcasts, the internet or any other means, 
including inspection of offices of any public authority. 
5.  (1) Every public authority shall, within one hundred days of the 
enactment of this Act, designate as many officers as Public 
Information Officers in all administrative units or officers under it 
as may be necessary to provide information to persons requesting 
for the information under this Act. 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), every 
public authority shall designate an officer, within one hundred days 
of the enactment of this Act, at each sub-divisional level or other 
sub-district level as an Assistant Public Information Officer to 
receive the applications for inform ation or appeals under this Act 
for forwarding the same forthwith to it or to the Government: 
 Provided that where an application for information or appeal is 
given to an Assistant Public Information Officer, a period of five 
days shall be added in computing the period for response specified 
under sub-section (1) of section 7. 
 (3) Every Public Information Offi cer shall deal with requests 
from persons seeking information and render reasonable assistance 
to the persons seeking such information. 
 (4) The Public Information Officer  may seek the assistance of 
any other officer as he or she cons iders it necessary for the proper 
discharge of his or her duties. 
 (5) Any officer whose assistance has been sought under sub-
section (4), shall render all assistance to the Public Information 
Officer seeking his or her assist ance and for the purposes of any 
contravention of the provisions of this Act such other officer shall 
be treated as a Public Information Officer. 
6.  (1) A person who desires to obtain any information under this 
Act shall make a request in writing or through electronic means in 
English or in the official language of the area in which the 
application is being made, accompanying such fee as may be 
prescribed, to–– 
(a) the Public Information Officer of the concerned public authority; 
(b) the Assistant Public Information Officers, specifying the 
particulars of the information sought by him or her: 
 Provided that where such request cannot be made in writing, the 
Public Information Officer shall re nder all reasonable assistance to 
the person making the request orally to reduce the same in writing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designation of Public 
Information Officers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Request for obtaining 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (2) An applicant making request for information shall not be 
required to give any reason for re questing the information or any 
other personal details except those that may be necessary for 
contacting him. 
 (3) Where an application is made to a public authority 
requesting for an information,- 
 (i) which is held by another public authority; or 
 (ii) the subject matter of which is more closely connected with 
the functions of another public authority, 
the public authority, to which such application is made, shall 
transfer the application or such part  of it as may be appropriate to 
that other public authority and inform the applicant immediately 
about such transfer: 
 Provided that the transfer of an application pursuant to this sub-
section shall be made as soon as practicable but in no case later than 
five days from the date of receipt of the application. 
7.  (1) Subject the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 5 or the 
proviso to sub-section (3) of section 6, the Public Information 
Officer on receipt of a request  under section 6 shall, as 
expeditiously as possible, and in any case within thirty days of the 
receipt of the request, either prov ide the information on payment of 
such fee as may be prescribed or reject the request for any of the 
reasons specified in sections 8 and 9: 
 Provided that where the information sought for concerns the life 
or liberty of a person, the same shall be provided within forty-eight 
hours of the receipt of the request. 
 (2) If the Public Information Officer fails to give decision on 
the request for information within the period specified under sub-
section (1), the Public Information Officer shall be deemed to have 
refused the request. 
 (3) Where a decision is taken to provide the information on 
payment of any further fee representing the cost of providing the 
information, the Public Information Officer shall send an intimation 
to the person making the request, giving–– 
 (a) the details of further fees representing the cost of providing 
the information as determined by him, togetherwith the calculations 
made to arrive at the amount in accordance with fee prescribed 
under sub-section (1), requesting him to deposit that fees, and the 
period intervening between the despatch of the said intimation and 
payment of fees shall be excluded  for the purpose of calculating the 
period of thirty days referred to in that sub-section; 
 (b) information concerning his or her right with respect to 
review the decision as to the amount of fees charged or the form of 
access provided, including the partic ulars of the appellate authority, 
time limit, process and any other forms. 
 (4)  Where access to the record or a part thereof is required to be 
provided under this Act and the person to whom access is to be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disposal of request. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provided is sensorily disabled, the public authority shall provide 
assistance to enable access to the information, including providing 
such assistance as may be appropriate for the inspection. 
 (5) Where access to information is to be provided in the printed 
or in any electronic format, the applicant shall, subject to sub-
section (6), pay such fee as may be prescribed. 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), the 
person making request for the information shall be provided the 
information free of charge where a public authority fails to comply 
with the time limits specified in sub-section (1). 
 (7) Before taking any decision under sub-section (1), the Public 
Information Officer shall take into  consideration the representation 
made by a third party under section 11. 
 (8)  Where a request has been deemed to be rejected under sub-
section (2), the Public Information Officer shall communicate to the 
person making the request,–– 
 (i) the reasons for such rejection; 
 (ii) the period within which an appeal against such rejection 
may be preferred; and  
 (iii) the particulars of the appellate authority. 
 (9) An information shall ordinarily be provided in the form in 
which it is sought unless it would disproportionately divert the 
resources of the public authority or would be detrimental to the 
safety or preservation of the record in question. 
8.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, except as 
otherwise provided herein, the following information shall be 
exempted from disclosure, namely:–– 
 (a)  information, the disclosure of which would,–– 
 (i) prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of India, 
security, strategic, scientific or economic interest of the State, 
relation with foreign State; or 
 (ii) lead to an incitement to commit an offence; 
 (b) information, which has been expressly forbidden to be 
disclosed by any court of law or tribunal or the disclosure of which 
may constitute contempt of court; 
 (c) information, the disclosure of which may result in a breach 
of privileges of Parliament or the Legislature of a State; 
 (d) information, including commercial confidence, trade secrets 
or intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm the 
competitive position of a third Party: 
 Provided that such information may be disclosed, if the Public 
Information Officer is satisfied that  a larger public interest warrants 
the disclosure of such information; 
 (e) information available to a person in his fiduciary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exemption from 
disclosure of 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relationship: 
Provided that such information may be disclosed, if the Public 
Information Officer is satisfied that  a larger public interest warrants 
the disclosure of such information; 
 (f) information received in confidence from a foreign 
Government; 
 (g) information, the disclosure of which would endanger the life 
or physical safety of any person or cause to identify the source of 
information or assistance given in confidence of law enforcement or 
security purposes; 
 (h) information, the disclosure of which would impede the 
process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution of 
offenders; 
 (i) the Cabinet papers, including records of deliberations of the 
Council of Ministers, Secretaries and other officers: 
 Provided that the decisions of the Council of Ministers, the 
reasons thereof, and the material on the basis of which the decisions 
were taken, shall be made public after the decision has been taken, 
and the matter is complete, or over: 
 Provided further that those matters which come under the 
exemptions listed in this section shall not be disclosed; 
 (j) information which relates to personal information, the 
disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity or 
interest or which would cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy 
of the individual: 
 Provided that such information may be disclosed, if the Public 
Information Officer or the appellate authority, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of 
such information. 
 (2) Information which cannot be denied to Parliament or 
Legislature of a State, as the case may be, shall not be denied to any 
person. 
 (3) A public authority may, notwithstanding the exemptions 
specified in sub-section (1), allow access to information if public 
interest in disclosure of the information outweighs the harm to the 
public authority. 
 (4) Subject to the provisions of clauses (a) and (i) of sub-section 
(1), any information relating to any occurrence, event or matter 
which has taken place or occurred ten years before the date on 
which any request is made under section 6, shall be provided to the 
person making the request under that section: 
 Provided that where any question arises to the date from which 
the said period of ten years has to be computed, the decision of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Government shall be final. 
9. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8, a Public 
Information Officer may reject a request for information where such 
a request for providing access would involve an infringement of 
copyright subsisting in a person other than the State. 
10. (1) Where a request for access to information is rejected on the 
ground that it is in relation to information which is exempt from 
disclosure, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
access may be provided to that part of the record which does not 
contain any information which is exempt from disclosure under this 
Act and which can reasonably be severed from any part that 
contains exempt information. 
 (2) Where access is granted to a part of the record under sub-
section (1), the Public Information Officer shall give a notice to the 
applicant, informing,–– 
 (a) that only part of the record requested, after severance of the 
record containing info rmation which is exempt from disclosure, is 
being provided; 
 (b) the reasons for the decision, including any findings on any 
material question of fact, referring to the material on which those 
findings were based; 
 (c) the name and designation of the person giving the decision; 
 (d) the details of the fees determined by him or her and the 
amount of fee which the applicant is required to deposit; and 
 (e) his or her rights with respect to review of the decision 
regarding non-disclosure of part of the information, the amount of 
fee charged or the form of access provided, including the particulars 
of the appellate authority, time limit, process and any other forms. 
11. (1) Where a public authority intends to disclose any information 
or record, or part thereof on a request made under this Act, which 
relates to or has been supplied by a third party and has been treated 
as confidential by that third party, the Public Information Officer 
shall, within five days from the receipt of the request, give a written 
notice to such third party of the request and of the fact that the 
public authority intends to disclose the information or record, or 
part thereof, and invite the third party to make a submission in 
writing or orally, regarding whether the information should be 
disclosed, and such submission of the third party shall be kept in 
view while taking a decision about disclosure of information: 
 Provided that except in the case of trade or commercial secrets 
protected by law, disclosure may be allowed if the public interest in 
disclosure outweighs in importance any possible harm or injury to 
the interests of such third party. 
 (2) Where a notice is served by the Public Information Officer 
under sub-section (1) to a third party in respect of any information 
or record or part thereof, the third party shall, within ten days from 
 
 
Grounds for rejection to 
access in certain cases. 
 
 
Severability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Third party information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the date of receipt of such notice, be given the opportunity to make 
representation against the proposed disclosure.  
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Public 
Information Officer shall, within forty days after receipt of the 
request under section 6, if the third party has been given an 
opportunity to make representation under sub-section (2), make a 
decision as to whether or not to disclose the information or record 
or part thereof and give in writing the notice of his decision to the 
third party. 
 (4) A notice given under sub-section (3) shall include a 
statement that the third party to whom the notice is given is entitled 
to prefer an appeal under section 15 against the decision. 
CHAPTER III 
T
HE CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION 
12. (1) The Central Government shall,  by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a bo dy to be known as the Central 
Information Commission to exer cise the powers conferred on, 
and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act. 
 (2) The Commission shall consist of–– 
 (a) the Information Commissioner; and 
 (b) such number of Deputy Info rmation Commissioners not 
exceeding ten as may be deemed necessary. 
 (3) The Information Commissioner and the Deputy Information 
Commissioners shal1 be appointed by the President on the 
recommendation of a committee consisting of- 
(i) the Prime Minister, who sha ll be the Chairperson of the 
committee; 
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and 
(iii) the Chief Justice of India. 
 Explanation.–– For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is 
hereby declared that where the Leader of Opposition in the House 
of the People has not been recogni sed as such, the Leader of the 
single largest group in opposition of the Government in the House 
of the People shall be deemed to be the Leader of the Opposition. 
 (4) The general superintendence, direction and management of 
the affairs of the Commission shall vest in the Information 
Commissioner who shall be assisted  by the Deputy Information 
Commissioners and may exercise all such powers and do all such 
acts and things which may be exercised or done by the Commission 
autonomously without being subjected to directions by any other 
authority under this Act. 
 (5) The Information Commissioner and the Deputy Information 
Commissioners shall be persons of eminence in public life with 
wide knowledge and experience of administration and governance. 
 (6) The information Commissioner or a Deputy Information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitution of Central 
Information 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commissioner shall not be a Member of Parliament or Member of 
the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, 
or hold any other office of profit or connected with any political 
party or carrying on any business or pursuing any profession. 
 (7)  The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi and 
the Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, establish offices at other places in India. 
 (8)  Every Deputy Information Commissioner shall perform his 
functions within such area as may be specified by the Central 
Government. 
13. (1) The Information Commissioner sh all hold office  for a term 
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and 
shall not be eligible for reappointment: 
 Provided that the Central Government may extend the term of 
five years by one more year if recommended by the committee 
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 12: 
 Provided further that no Information Commissioner shall hold 
office as such after he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 
 (2) Every Deputy Information Co mmissioner shall hold office 
for a term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is 
earlier: 
 Provided that every Deputy Information Commissioner shall, 
on vacating his office under this sub-section, be eligible for 
appointment as the Information Commissioner in the manner 
specified in sub-section (3) of section 12: 
 Provided further that where the Deputy Information 
Commissioner is appointed as the Information Commissioner, his 
term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the 
Deputy Information Commissioner and the Information 
Commissioner. 
 (3) The Information Commissioner or a Deputy Information 
Commissioner, shall before he enters upon his office make and 
subscribe before the President or some other person appointed by 
him in that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set 
out for the purpose in the First Schedule. 
 (4)  The information Commissioner or a Deputy information 
Commissioner may, at any time, by writing under his hand 
addressed to the President, resign from his office: 
 Provided that the Information Commissioner or a Deputy 
Information Commissioner may be removed in the manner specified 
under section 14. 
 (5) The Information Commissioner or a Deputy Information 
Commissioner shall, on cessation of his office, not be eligible for- 
 (a) any diplomatic assignment, assignment as administrator of a 
Union territory or such other assignment or appointment which is 
required by law to be made by the President by warrant under his 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Term of office and 
conditions of service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hand and seal; 
 (b) further employment to any office of profit under the 
Government of India or the Government of a State. 
 (6) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and 
conditions of service of–– 
 (a) the information Commissioner shall be the same as that of a 
Secretary to the Government of India; 
 (b) the Deputy Information Commissioner shall be the same as 
that of a Joint Secretary or an Additional Secretary to the 
Government of India: 
 Provided that if the Information Commissioner or a Deputy 
Information Commissioner, at the time of his appointment is, in 
receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in 
respect of any previous service under the Government of India or 
under the Government of a State, his salary in respect of the service 
as the Information Commissioner or a Deputy Information 
Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of that pension 
including any portion of pension which was commuted and pension 
equivalent of other forms of retirement benefits excluding pension 
equivalent of retirement gratuity: 
 Provided further that if the Information Commissioner or a 
Deputy Information Commissioner if, at the time of his appointment 
is, in receipt of retirement benefits in respect of any previous 
service rendered in a Corporation established by or under any 
Central Act or State Act or a Government company owned or 
controlled by the Central Government or the State Government, his 
salary in respect of the service as the Information Commissioner or 
the Deputy Information Commissioner shall be reduced by the 
amount of pension equivalent to the retirement benefits: 
 Provided also that the salaries, allowances and the other 
conditions of service of the Information Commissioner and the 
Deputy Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their 
disadvantage after their appointment. 
 (7) The Central Government sha ll provide the Information 
Commissioner and the Deputy Information Commissioners with 
such officers and employees as  may be necessary for the 
efficient performance of their f unctions under this Act, and the 
salaries and allowances payabl e to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the officers and other employees 
appointed for the purpose of this  Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the information 
Commissioner or any Deputy Information Commissioner shall be 
removed from his office only by order of the president on the 
ground of proved misbehaviour or  incapacity after the Supreme 
Court, on a reference made to it by the President, has, on inquiry, 
reported that the Information Commissioner. Commissioner or any 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal of  Information 
Commissioner or 
Deputy Information 
Commissioner. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deputy Information Commissioner, as the case may be, ought on 
such ground be removed. 
 (2)  The President may suspend from office, and if deem 
necessary prohibit also from attendin g the office during inquiry, the 
Information Commissioner or Deputy Information Commissioner in 
respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court 
under sub-section (1) until the President has passed orders on 
receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference. 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
President may by order remove from office the Information 
Commissioner or any Deputy Information Commissioner if the 
Information Commissioner or a Deputy Information Commissioner, 
as the case may be,- 
 (a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
 (b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of 
the President, involves moral turpitude; or 
 (c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment 
outside the duties of his office; or 
 (d) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office 
by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or 
 (e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions as an Information Commissioner 
or a Deputy Information Commissioner. 
 (4) lf the Information Commissioner or any Deputy Information 
Commissioner in any way, concerned or interested in any contract 
or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or 
participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or 
emolument arising therefrom otherw ise than as a member and in 
common with the other members of an incorporated company, he 
shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1), be deemed to be guilty of 
misbehaviour. 
15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of 
the Commission to receive and inquire into a complaint from any 
person,–– 
 (a) who has been unable to submit a request to a Public 
Information Officer, either by reason  that no such officer has been 
appointed under this Act, or because the Assistant Public 
Information Officer has refused to accept his or her application for 
forwarding the same to the public authority or the Government; 
 (b) who has been refused access to any information requested 
under this Act; 
 (c) who has not been given a response to a request for 
information or access to information within the time limits specified 
under this Act; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers and functions of 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1908.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (d) who has been required to pay an amount of fee which he or 
she considers unreasonable; 
 (e) who believes that he or she has been given incomplete, 
misleading or false information under this Act; and 
 (f)  in respect of any other matter relating to requesting or 
obtaining access to records under this Act.  
 (2) Where the Commission is satisfi ed that there are reasonable 
grounds to inquire into the matter, it may initiate an inquiry in 
respect thereof. 
 (3) The Commission shall, while inquiring into any matter 
under this section, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in 
respect of the following matters, namely:- 
 (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and 
compel them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce 
the documents or things; 
 (b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;  
 (c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
 (d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any 
court or office;  
 (e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or 
documents; and 
 (f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 (4)  Notwithstanding anything unconsistent contained in any 
other Act of Parliament, the Commission may, during the inquiry of 
any complaint under this Act, examine any record to which this Act 
applies which is under the control of the public authority, and no 
such record may be withheld from it on any grounds. 
16. (1) Any person who, does not receive a decision within the time 
specified in sub-section (1) or clause (a) of sub-section (3) of 
section 7, or is aggrieved by a decision of the Public Information 
Officer, may within thirty days from the expiry of such period or 
from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal to such officer 
who is senior in rank to the Public Information Officer in each 
public authority: 
 Provided that such officer may admit the appeal after the expiry 
of the period of thirty days if he or she is satisfied that the appellant 
was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
 (2) A second appeal against the decision under sub-section (1) 
shall lie within ninety days from the date on which the decision 
should have been made or was actually received, with the 
Commission: 
 Provided that the Commission may admit the appeal after the 
expiry of the period of ninety days if it is satisfied that the appellant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
 (3) Where an appeal is preferred against an order made by the 
Public Information Officer under section 11 to disclose third party 
information, the appeal by the concerned third party shall be made 
within thirty days from the date of the order. 
 (4) lf the decision of the Public Information Officer against 
which an appeal is preferred relates to information of a third party, 
the Commission shall give a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
to that third party. 
 (5)  In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial of 
a request was justified shall be on the public authority which denied 
the request. 
 (6) An appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be 
disposed of within thirty days of the receipt of the appeal or within 
such extended period not exceeding a total of forty-five days from 
the date of filing thereof, as th e case may be, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing. 
 (7) The decision of the Commission shall be binding.  
 (8) In its decision, the Commission has the power to; 
 (a) require the public authority to take any such steps as may be 
necessary to secure compliance with  the provisions of this Act, 
including 
 (i) by providing access to information, if so requested, in a 
particular form; 
 (ii) by appointing a Public Information Officer; 
 (iii) by publishing certain information or categories of 
information; 
 (iv)  by making necessary changes to its practices in relation to 
the maintenance, management and destruction of records; 
 (v) by enhancing the provision of training on the right to 
information for its officials; 
 (vi) by providing it with an annual report in compliance with 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4; 
 (b) require the public authority to compensate the complainant 
for any loss or other detriment suffered; 
 (c) impose any of the penalties provided under this Act; 
 (d) reject the application. 
 (9)  The Commission shall give notice of its decision, including 
any right of appeal, to the complainant and the public authority. 
 (10) The Commission shall decide the appeal. in accordance 
with such procedure as may be prescribed. 
 (11) An appeal against the decisi on of the Commission shall lie 
in the High Court on any point of fact and law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 of 1923.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 20, where the 
Commission at the time of deciding any appeal is of the opinion that 
the Public Information Officer has persistently failed to provide 
information without any reasonable cause within the period 
specified under sub-section (1) of section 7, the Commission may 
authorise any officer of the Central Government to file a complaint 
against such Public Information Officer before a Judicial Magistrate 
of First Class. 
 (2) Any Public Information Officer who is in default under sub-
section (1) shall be liable on conviction to fine which may extend to 
rupees twenty-five thousand or a term of imprisonment which may 
extend to five years, or with both. 
CHAPTER IV 
M
ISCELLANEOUS 
18. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act or any rule made thereunder. 
19. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith co ntained in the Official Secrets 
Act, 1923, and any other law for the time being in force or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
20. No court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding 
in respect of any order made under this Act and no such order shall 
be called in question otherwise than  by way of an appeal under this 
Act. 
21. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the intelligence 
and security organisations specified in the Second Schedule, being 
organisations established by the Central Government or any 
information furnished by such organisations to that Government: 
 Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of 
corruption shall not be excluded under this sub-section. 
 (2) The Central Government may by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Schedule by including therein any other 
intelligence or security organisation established by that Government 
or omitting therefrom any organisation already specified therein and 
on the publication of such notification, such organisation shall be 
deemed to be included in or, as the case may be, omitted from the 
Schedule. 
 (3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
22. (1) The Commission shall, as soon as practicable after the end 
of each year, prepare a report on the implementation of the 
provisions of this Act during that year and forward a copy thereof to 
the Central Government. 
 (2) Each Ministry or Department shall, in relation to the public 
authorities within their jurisdiction, collect and provide such 
Penalties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protection of action 
taken in good faith. 
 
 
Act to have overriding 
effect. 
 
 
 
Bar of Jurisdicition of 
courts.  
 
 
 
Act not to 
apply to certain 
organisations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring and 
reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information to the Commission as is required to prepare the report 
under this section and comply with the requirements concerning the 
furnishing of that information and keeping of records for the 
purposes of this section. 
 (3) Each report shall state in respect of the year to which the 
report relates,- 
 (a) the number of requests made to each public authority; 
 (b) the number of decisions where applicants were not entitled 
to access to the documents pursuant to the requests, the provisions 
of this Act under which these decisions were made and the number 
of times such provisions were invoked; 
 (c) the number of appeals referred to the Commission for 
review, the nature of the appeals and the outcome of the appeals; 
 (d) particulars of any disciplinary action taken against any 
officer in respect of the administration of this Act; 
 (e) the amount of charges collected by each public authority 
under this Act;  
 (f) any facts which indicate an effort by the public authorities to 
administer and implement the spirit and intention of this Act; 
 (g) recommendations for reform, including recommendations in 
respect of the particular public authorities, for the development, 
improvement, modernisation, reform or amendment to this Act or 
other legislation or common law or any other matter relevant for 
operationalising the right to access information. 
 (4) The Central Government may, as soon as practicable after 
the end of each year, cause a copy of the report of the Commission 
referred to sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
 (5) If it appears to the Commission that the practice of a public 
authority in relation to the exercise of its functions under this Act 
does not conform with the provisions  or spirit of this Act, it may 
give to the authority a recommendation specifying the steps which 
ought in its opinion to be taken for promoting such conformity. 
23. (1) The Central Government may, to the extent of availability of 
financial and other resources,- 
 (a) develop and organise educational programmes to advance 
the understanding programmes. of the public, in particular of 
disadvantaged communities as to how to exercise the rights 
contemplated under this Act; 
 (b) encourage public authorities to participate in the 
development and organisation of programmes referred to in clause 
(a) and to undertake such programmes themselves; 
 (c) promote timely and effective dissemination of accurate 
Information by public authorities about their activities; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Government to 
prepare programmes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (d) train Information Officers of public authorities and produce 
relevant training materials for use by the public authorities 
themselves. 
 (2) The Government shall, within eighteen months from the 
commencement of this Act, compile in its official language a guide 
containing such information, in an easily comprehensible form and 
manner, as may reasonably be required by a person who wishes to 
exercise any right specified in this Act. 
 (3) The Government shall, if necessary, update and publish the 
guidelines referred to in sub-section (2) at regular intervals which 
shall, in particular and without prejudice to the generality of sub-
section (2), include- 
 (a) the objects of this Act; 
 (b) the postal and street address, the phone and fax number and, 
if available, electronic mail address of the Public Information 
Officer of every public authority appointed under sub-section (1) of 
section 5; 
 (c) the manner and the form in wh ich request for access to an 
information shall be made to a public authority; 
 (d) the assistance available from and the duties of the Public 
Information Officers of a public authority under this Act; 
 (e) the assistance available from the Commission; 
 (f) all remedies in law available regarding an act or failure to act 
in respect of a right or duty conferred or imposed by this Act 
including the manner of filing an appeal to the Commission; 
 (g) the provisions providing for the voluntary disclosure of 
categories of records in accordance with section 4; 
 (h) the notices regarding fees to be paid in relation to requests 
for access to an information; and 
 (i) any additional regulations or circulars made or issued in 
relation to obtaining access to an information in accordance with 
this Act. 
 (4) The Government must, if necessary, update and publish the 
guidelines at regular intervals. 
24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 (2) In particular, and without prej udice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:- 
 (a) intervals at which matters refe rred to in sub-clauses (i) to 
(xvii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be 
published; 
 (b) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the materials to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make rules by 
Central Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be disseminated under sub-section (4) of section 4; 
 (c) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 6; 
 (d) the fee payable under sub-sections (1) and (5) of section 7; 
 (e) the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and 
conditions of service of the officers and other employees under sub-
section (7) of section 13; 
 (f) the procedure to be adopted by the Commission in deciding 
the appeals under sub-section (10) of section 16; and 
 (g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
25. (1) The competent authority may, by  notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 (2) In particular, and without prej udice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:- 
 (i) intervals at which matters referred to in sub-clauses (i) to 
(xvii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be published; 
 (ii) the cost of the medium or point cost price of the materials to 
be disseminated under sub-section (4) of section 4; 
 (iii) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 6; 
 (iv) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 7; and 
 (v) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
26. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised of one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session  or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such  modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
27. (1) lf any difficulty arises in givi ng effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removal of the difficulty: 
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date of the commencement of this Act. 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may 
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make rules by 
competent authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laying of rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 of 2003.  
 
28. The Freedom of Information Act, 2002 is hereby repealed. Repeal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sub-section (3) of section 13] 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Information Commissioner or the  
Deputy Information Commissioner 
 “I, ....................., having been appointed In formation Commissioner/Deputy information 
Commissioner swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that 1 will bear true faith and allegiance to the 
Constitution of India as by law established, that I w ill uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that 1 
will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my 
office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that 1 will uphold the Constitution and the laws.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 21 ) 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ORGANISAT ION ESTABLISHED BY THE CENTRAL 
GOVERNMENT 
  1.  Intelligence Bureau. 
  2.  Research and Analysis Wing of the Cabinet Secretariat. 
  3.  Directorate of Revenue Intelligence. 
  4.  Central Economic Intelligence Bureau. 
  5.  Directorate of Enforcement. 
  6.  Narcotic s Control Bureau. 
  7.  Aviation Research Centre. 
  8.  Special Frontier Force. 
  9.  Border Security Force. 
10. Central Reserve Police Force. 
11. Indo-Tibetan Border Police. 
12. Central Industrial Security Force. 
13. National Security Guards. 
14. Assam Rifles. 
15. Special Service Bureau. 
16. Special Branch (CID), Andaman and Nicobar. 
17. The Crime Branch-C.I.D.- CB, Dadra and Nagar Haveli. 
18. Special Branch, Lakshadweep Police. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 In order to ensure greater and more effective acce ss to information, the Government resolved that the 
Freedom of Information Act, 2002 enacted by the Parliament needs to be made more progressive, 
participatory and meaningful. The National Advisory Council deliberated on the issue and suggested certain 
important changes to be incorporated in the existing Act to ensure smoother and greater access to 
information. The Government examined the suggestions made by the National Advisory Council and others 
and decided to make a number of changes in the law. 
 The important changes proposed to be incorporated, inter alia, include establishment of an appellate 
machinery with investigating powers to review decisions of the Public Information Officers; penal 
provisions for failure to provide information as per law; provisions to ensure maximum disclosure and 
minimum exemptions, consistent with the constitution al provisions, and effective mechanism for access to 
information and disclosure by authorities, etc. In view of significant changes proposed in the existing Act, 
the Government also decided to repeal the Freedom of Information Act, 2002. The proposed legislation will 
provide an effective framework for effectuating the right of information recognized under Article 19 of the 
Constitution of India. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
 
 
 
N
EW DELHI; SURESH  PACHOURI 
The l8th December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NOTES ON CLAUSES 
 Clause 1 deals with the short title, extent and the commencement of the legislation. The legislation 
will come into force on the one hundred and twentieth day of its assent by the President. 
 Clause 2 defines various words and expressions used in the Bill. 
 Clause 3 seeks to confer on the citizens a right of access to information held by public authorities. 
 Clause 4 seeks to entrust a duty on every public authority to maintain records and publish manuals 
rules, regulations, instructions, etc. in its possession. 
 Clause 5 provides for designation of Public Information Officers and Assistant Public Information 
Officers. 
 Clause 6 specifies the manner in which requests may be made by a citizen to the authority for 
obtaining the information. It also provides for transferring the request to the other concerned public authority 
who may hold the information. 
 Clause 7 lays down specific time limit with in which a public authority shall provide information and 
the fees to be paid for processing the request and for providing the information. 
 Clause 8 deals with various categories of information which shall be exempted from disclosure. 
 Clause 9 empowers the Public Information Officer to  reject a request for information where an 
infringement of a copyright subsisting in a person would be involved. 
 Clause 10 enables the public authority to severe and provide partial information which falls partly 
under the exempted categories and partly under the non-exempted categories.  
 Clause 11 provides for consultation with the third party where the request relates to or has been 
supplied by a third party and has been treated as confidential by that party.  
 Clauses 12 to 15 provides for constitution of Central Information Commission, the terms and 
conditions of service and the powers of the Information Commissioners and the Deputy Information 
Commissioners. 
 Clause 16 seeks to provides for first and second appeals,  the first appeals lies with the officer senior in 
rank to the Public Information Officer and the second appeal may be made to the Commission. 
 Clause 17 provides for imposition of penalty on a Public Information Officer for persistently failing to 
provide information without any reasonable cause within the specified period. The Commission may 
authorise any officer of the Central Government to file a complaint against such Public Information Officer 
before a Judicial Magistrate and on conviction, a penalty upto rupees twenty five thousand, or an 
imprisonment upto five years, or both, may be imposed. 
 Clause 18 bars the institution of legal proceedings against any person for things done in good faith 
under the Act. 
 Clause 19 seeks to make the legislation overriding in character so that the scheme is not subverted 
through the operation of other enactment. 
 Clause  20 seeks to bar the jurisdiction of the subordinate courts. 
 Clause  21 seeks to exempt certain intelligence and security organisations from the purview of the 
legislation but information pertaining to allegation of corruption, shall, without prejudice to the exemption, 
be provided. 
 Clause 22 provides for preparation of an annual re port by the Commission and laying of such report 
by the Central Government before each House of Parliament. 

 Clause 23 seeks to cast an obligation on the Central Government to develop and promote schemes for 
advancement of the information regime. 
 Clause 24 seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules so as to carry out the provisions of 
the legislation. 
 Clause 25 seeks to empower the competent authority to make rules so as to carry out the provisions of 
the legislation. 
 Clause 26 seeks to require the Central Government to lay the rules before each House of Parliament. 
 Clause 27 empowers the Central Government to remove difficulties in giving effect to the provisions 
of the legislation within a period of two years from the commencement of the legislation. 
 Clause 28 seeks to repeal the Freedom of Information Act, 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
1.  Sub-clauses (1 ) and (2) of clause 12 provide for constituting the Central Information Commission 
which shall consist of a Information Commissioner and such number of Deputy Information Commissioners, 
not exceeding ten, as may be deemed necessary. 
2.  Sub-clause (7) of clause 13 provides for a ppointment of officers and employees for assisting the 
Information Commissioner and the Deputy Information Commissioners as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of their functions under the Act. 
3.  An estimated recurring expenditure of rupees one crore eighty-six lakhs is likely to be incurred on the 
salaries of the Information Commissioner, Deputy Information Commissioners  and other officers and 
employees of the Commission. 
4.  At this stage, it is not possible to give precise details of the expenditure to be incurred on material 
resources in terms of office accommodation, vehicles, telephones and other office equipments required by 
the Commission. Adequate provisions will have to be made in the annual grants of the Commission to meet 
this expenditure. 
5.  The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Sub-clause (2) of clause 21 of the Bill empower s the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, to amend the Schedule for including any other intelligence or security organisation 
established by the Central Government or omit therefrom any organisation already specified therein. 
 Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of 
the Act. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates th e matter with respect to which rules may be made under 
this clause. 
 These matters relate to, inter alia, the publishing of particulars of public authority, functions and duties 
of its officers, details of facilities available to citizens for obtaining information, fee payable to obtain an 
information from a public authority, salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees, procedure for disposal of appeals and the authority before whom 
an appeal may be preferred against the decision of Public Information Officer. 
 Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the competent authority to make rules to carry out the provisions of 
the Act. These matters relate to, inter alia, the fee payable for obtaining the information from the Public 
Information Officer of a public authority; the appellate authority before whom an appeal may be preferred 
against the decision of the Public Information Officer and the procedure to be adopted by the Commission in 
deciding the appeals. 
 Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Govern ment by order to remove certain difficulties which 
may appear to it to be necessary or expedient in giving  effect to the provisions of the Act within a period of 
two years from the commencement of the Act. 
 The matters in respect of which rules and the order may be made are matters of administrative 
details and procedure and, it is not practicable to make provisions for them in the Bill. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-B 
 
COMPARATIVE TABLE OF THE PROVISIONS IN THE 
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT, 2002 /NAC’s RIGHT TO INFORMATION 
BILL, 2004 RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, 2004 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Sl.No. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT, 2002 NAC’s RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, 2004 RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, 2004  
  PREAMBLE AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
   PREAMBLE 
  1                           2                                3                             4 
                    PREAMBLE                         PREAMBLE                     PREAMBLE 
 An Act to provide for freedom to every 
citizen to secure access to information 
under the control of public authorities, 
consistent with public interest, in order to 
promote openness, transparency and 
accountability in admi nistration and in 
relation to matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
 
CHAPTER 1: PRELIMINARY 
1. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Freedom 
of Information Act, 2002 
2. 1. (2) It extends to the whole of India 
except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
3. 1. (3) It shall come into force on such date 
as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
4. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
5. Does not exist in the present Act. 
A Bill to operationalise the right to information by setting out 
the practical regime for people to secure access to 
information under the control of public authorities, consistent 
with public interest, in order to promote openness, 
transparency and acco untability and in relation to matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
CHAPTER 1: PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information Act, 
2004 
l. (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir. 
l. (3) It shall come into for ce within 120 days of it being 
enacted. 
 
1. (4) Where State legislation exists dealing with the right to 
access information, a person. will have the right to seek 
information under the State law as well as under this Act, if 
the information pertains to a subject under the State List in 
Schedule 7 of the Constitution of India. 
1. (5) Objectives of the Act: The objectives of the Act are to  
A Bill to provide for setting out the practical regime 
of right to information for people to secure access to 
information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability 
in the working of every public authority, the 
constitution of a Central Information Commission 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
 
CHAPTER 1: PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to 
Information Act, 2004. 
1. (2) It extends to the whole of India except the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
1. (3) It shall come into force on the one hundred 
and twentieth day of its enactment. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires: 
 (a) “appropriate Government” means in 
relation to a public authority established, 
constituted, owned, substantially financed 
by funds provided directly or indirectly or 
controlled- 
 (i) by the Central Go vernment, the Central 
Government; 
 (ii) by the State Government, the State 
Government; 
 (iii) by the Union territory, the Central 
(i) give effect to the Fundam ental Right to Information, 
which will contribute to strengthening democracy, 
improving governance, increasing public participation, 
promoting transparency and accountability in Union, 
State and Local Self Government Institutions. 
(ii) establish voluntary and mandatory mechanisms or 
procedures to give effect to right to information in a 
manner which enables persons to obtain access to records 
of public authorities in a swift, effective, inexpensive and 
reasonable manner. 
(iii) promote transparency, accountability and effective 
governance of all public authorities by, including but not 
limited to, empowering and educating all persons to: 
- understand their rights in terms of this Act in order to 
exercise their rights in relation to public authorities; 
- understand the functions and operation of public 
authorities; and 
- effectively participating in decision making by public 
authorities that affects their rights. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in relation to a public 
authority established, constituted, owned, substantially 
financed by funds provided directly or indirectly or 
controlled–– 
(i) by the Union Government, the Union Government; 
(ii) by the State Government, the State Government;  
(iii) by the Union Territory, the Union Government; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
(c ) “Government”, in relation to a public authority 
established, constituted, owned, substantially 
financed by funds provided directly or indirectly or 
controlled by the Central Government or a Union 
territory administration, means the Central 
Government; 
 
 
 
 
 

Government; 
7. (b) “competent authority” means- 
 (i) the Speaker in the case of the House of 
the People or the Legislative Assembly and 
the Chairman in the case of the Council of 
States or  the Legislative Council; 
 (ii) the Chief Justice of India in the case of 
the Supreme Court; 
 (iii) the Chief Justice of the High Court in 
the case of a High Court; 
 (iv) the President or the Governor, as the 
case may be, in case of other authorities 
created by or under the Constitution; 
 (v) the administrator appointed under article 
239 of the Constitution; 
8. (c) “freedom of in formation’’ means the 
right to obtain information from any public 
authority by means of – 
 (i) inspection, taking of extracts and notes; 
 (ii) certified copies of any records of such 
public authority; 
 (iii) disketts, floppies or in any other 
electronic mode or through printouts where 
such information is stored in a computer or 
in any other device; 
 
 
 
9. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
(b) “competent authority” means- 
(i) the Speaker in the case of the House of the People or the 
Legislative Assembly and the Chairman in the case of the 
Council of States or the Legislative Council; 
(ii) The Chief Justice of Indi a in the case of the Supreme 
Court; 
(iii) The Chief Justice of the High Court in the case of a High 
Court; 
(iv) The President or the Gove rnor, as the case may be, in 
case of other authorities created by or under the Constitution; 
(v) the administrator appointed under article 239 of the 
Constitution; 
 
 
(d) “right to information” means the right to access 
information held by, legally accessible by or under the 
control of any public authority and includes – 
(i) Inspection of works, documents, records; 
(ii) Taking notes and extracts and obtaining certified copies 
of documents or records; 
(iii) Taking certified samples of material; 
(iv) Obtaining information in th e form of diskettes, floppies, 
tapes, video cassettes or in any other electronic mode or 
through printouts where such information is stored in a 
computer or in any other device; 
 
(c) “Chief Information Co mmissioner’’, “Information 
Commissioner” and “State Information Commissioner” 
means the authorities so appointed under this Act. 
 
(b) “competent authority” means- 
(i) the Speaker in the case of the House of the People 
or the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory and 
the Chairman in the case of the Council of States; 
(ii) the Chief Justice of India in the case of the 
Supreme Court; 
(iii) the Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi; 
(iv) the President in the case of other authorities 
created by or under the Constitution; 
(v) the administrator appointed under article 239 of 
the Constitution; 
 
 
(j) “right to informatio n” means the right to 
information accessible under this Act which is held 
by or under the control of any public authority and 
includes the right to- 
(i) inspection of work, documents, records; 
(ii) taking notes, extracts, or certified copies of 
documents or records; 
(iii) taking certified samples of material; 
(iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, 
floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any other
 electronic mode or through printouts where such 
information is stored in a computer or in any other 
device; 
(a) “Commission” means the Central Information 
Commission constituted under section 12; 
(e) “Information Commissioner” and “Deputy 

 
 
 
10. (d) “information” means any material in 
any form relating to the administration, 
operations or decisions of a public 
authority; 
 
 
 
11. (e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules 
made under this Act by the appropriate 
Government or the co mpetent authority, as 
the case may be; 
12. (f) “public authority”  means any authority 
or body established or constituted,- 
 (i) by or under the Constitution; 
 (ii) by any law made by the appropriate 
Government, and includes any other body 
owned, controlled or substantially financed 
by funds provided directly or indirectly by 
the appropriate Government; 
 
 
13. (g) “Public Information Officer” means the 
Public Information O fficer appointed under 
sub-section (1) of section 5; 
 
 
14. (h) “record” includes- 
 
 
 
(e) “information” means any material in any form, including 
records, documents, file notings memos, emails, opinions, 
advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, 
reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any 
electronic form and any information relating to a private 
body which can be accessed by a public authority under any 
law; 
 
f) “prescribed” means prescribed  by rules made under this 
Act by the appropriate Government or the competent  
authority, as the case may be; 
 
g) “public authority” means any authority or body 
established or constituted,- 
(i) by or under the Constitution; 
(ii) by any law made by the appropriate Government, and 
includes any other body owned or controlled by the 
appropriate Government and includes panchayati raj 
institutions and other community bodies, like district 
councils, and village or locality durbars, performing public 
functions in areas notified under schedule 5 and 6 of the 
Constitution. 
 
h)“Public Information Officer” means the Public Information 
Officer appointed under sub-section (1), and/or (1)(a) of 
section 5; 
 
 
(i) “record” includes 
Information Commissioners” mean the Information 
Commissioner and the Deputy Information 
Commissioners appointed under sub-section (3) of 
section 12; 
(d) “information” means an y material in any form, 
including records, documents, memos, emails, 
opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, 
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, 
models, data material held in any electronic form 
and information relating to any private body which 
can be accessed by a public authority under any 
other law for the time being in force; 
f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made 
under this Act by the Government or the competent  
authority, as the case may be; 
 
g) “public authority” means any authority or body 
established or constituted,- 
(i) by or under the Constitution; 
(ii) by any other law made by Parliament; 
(iii) by notification issued or order made by the 
Government; 
and includes any other body owned or controlled by 
the Government; 
 
 
h)“Public Information Officer” means the Public 
Information Officer appointed under sub-section (1), 
and includes an Assistant Public Information Officer 
designated as such under sub-section (2), of section 
5; 
(i) “record” includes- 

 (i) any document, manuscript and file; 
 (ii) any microfilm, mi crofiche and facsimile 
copy of a document; 
 (iii) any reproduction of image or images 
embodied in such microfilm (whether 
enlarged or not); and 
 (iv) any other material produced by a 
computer or by any other device; 
15. (i) “third party” means a person other than 
the person making a request for information 
and includes a public authority. 
 
CHAPTER II 
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION AND 
OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES 
 
16. 3. Subject to the provision of this Act, all 
citizens shall have freedom of information. 
17. 4. Every public authority shall- 
 (a) maintain all its records, in such manner 
and form as is consistent with its 
operational requirements duly catalogued 
and indexed; 
 
 
 
 
18. (b) publish at such intervals as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government 
or competent authority,- 
 (i) the particulars of its organisation, 
(i) any document, manuscript and file; 
(ii) any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a 
document; 
(iii) any reproduction of image or images embodied in such 
microfilm (whether enlarged or not); and 
(iv) any other material produced by a computer or by any 
other device; 
 
(j) “third party” means a person other than the person making 
a request for information and includes a public authority. 
 
CHAPTER II 
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF 
PUBLIC AUTHORITIES 
 
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have 
the right to information. 
4. Every public authority shall- 
(a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed in a 
manner and the form which
facilitates the right to information as provided for in this Act, 
including ensuring that all
records, covered by the Act that are appropriate to 
computerised are within a r easonable time and subject to 
availability of resources, computerized and connected 
through a network all over the country on different systems 
so that authorised access to such records is facilitated; 
(b) publish within 6 months of this Act coming into force and 
thereafter update at least every 12 months- 
(i) the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties; 
(ii) the powers and duties of its officers and employees 
(i) any document, manuscript and file; 
(ii) any microfilm, microfic he and facsimile copy of 
a document; 
(iii) any reproduction of image or images embodied 
in such microfilm (whether enlarged or not); and 
(iv) any other material produced by a computer or 
any other device; 
 
(k) “third party” means a person other than the 
person making a request for information and 
includes a public authority. 
CHAPTER II 
RIGHT TO INFORMATION AND 
OBLIGATIONS 
OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES 
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens 
shall have the right to information. 
4. (1) Every public authority shall- 
(a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and 
indexed in a manner and the form which facilitates 
the right to information under this Act and ensure 
that all records that are appropriate to be 
computerised are, within a reasonable time and 
subject to availability of resources, computerized 
and connected through a network all over the 
country on different systems so that access to such 
records is facilitated; 
(b) publish before the commencement of this Act,- 
(i) the particulars of its organisation, functions and 
duties; 
(ii) the powers and duties of its officers and 

functions and duties; 
 (ii) the powers and duties of its officers and 
 employees and the procedure followed by 
them in the decision maxing process; 
 (iii) the norms set by the public authority 
for the discharge of its functions; 
 (iv) rules, regulations, instructions, manuals 
and other categories of records under its 
control used by its employees for 
discharging its functions; 
 (v) the details of facilities available to 
citizens for obtaining information; and 
 (vi) the name, designation and other 
particulars of the Public Information 
Officer; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Procedures followed during the decision making process, 
including chains of supervision and accountability. 
(iv) The norms set by the public authority for the discharge 
of its functions. 
(v) Rules, regulations, instructions, manual and records held 
by or under its control used by its employees for discharging 
its functions. 
(vi) A statement of the categories of documents that are held 
by or under the control of the public authority. 
(vii) Particulars of any arrangement that exists for 
consultation with, or representation by, members of the 
public in relation to the formulation of policy in, or in the 
administration of, the public authority. 
(viii) A statement listing all boards, councils, committees and 
other bodies constituted by two or more persons, that are part 
of, or that have been established for the purpose of advising, 
the public authority, and whose meetings are open to the 
public, or the minutes of whose meetings are available for 
public inspection; 
(ix) A directory of their public servants, from the level of the 
head of the department or his/her equivalent and below; 
(x) The monthly remuneration received for each position, 
including the system of compensation as established in 
regulations; 
(xi) Information concerning the budget assigned to each 
agency, including all plans, proposed expenditures and 
reports on disbursement; 
(xii) The design and execution of subsidy programs, 
including the amounts allocated to them, criteria for access, 
implementation details and beneficiaries; 
(xiii) All concessions, permits or authorisations granted, with 
their recipients specified; 
employees; 
(iii) the procedure followed in the decision making 
process, including channels of supervision and 
accountability ; 
(iv) the norms set by it for the discharge of its 
functions; 
(v) the rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and 
records, held by it or under its control or used by its 
employees for discharging its functions; 
(vi) a statement of the categories of documents that 
are held by it or under its control; 
(vii) the particulars of any arrangement that exists 
for consultation with, or representation by, the 
members of the public in relation to the formulation 
of its policy or implementation thereof; 
(viii) a statement of the boards, councils, committees 
and other bodies consisting of two or more persons 
constituted as its part or for the purpose of its advise, 
and as to whether meetings of those boards, 
councils, committees and other bodies are open to 
the public, or the minutes of such meetings are 
accessible for public; 
(ix) a directory of its officers and employees; 
(x) the monthly remuneration received by each of its 
officers and employees, including the system of 
compensation as provided in its regulations; 
(xi) the budget allocated to each of its agency, 
indicating the particulars of all plans, proposed 
expenditures and reports on disbursements made; 
(xii) the manner of execution of subsidy 
programmes, including the amounts allocated and 
the details of beneficiaries of such programmes; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. (c) publish all relevant facts concerning 
important decisions and policies that affect 
the public while announcing such decisions 
and policies; 
20. (d) give reasons for its decisions, whether 
administrative or quasi judicial to those 
affected by such decisions; 
21. (e) before initiating any project, publish or 
communicate to the public generally or to 
the persons affected or likely to be affected 
by the project in particular, the facts 
available to it or to which it has reasonable 
(xiv) All information available to the public authority in 
electronic form or capable of  being reduced to electronic 
form which is not exempt under this Act, subject to 
availability of resources; 
(xv) the details of facilities av ailable to citizens for obtaining 
information, including if the public authority maintains 
a library or reading room that is available for public 
use, a statement of that fact including details of the 
address and hours of opening of the library or reading 
room;  
(xvi) the name, designation and other particulars of the 
Public Information Officer; and 
(xvii) such other information as prescribed by the 
appropriate government or Information Commissioner 
from time to time which would promote transparency 
across public authorities or in specific public 
authorities, as appropriate; 
on the basis that it shall be a constant endeavour of public 
authorities to take steps to provide as much information to 
the public suo moto  at regular intervals through various 
means of communication so that the public have minimum 
resort to the use of this Act to obtain information. 
(c) publish all relevant facts concerning important decisions 
and policies that affect the public while announcing such 
decisions and policies; 
 
(d) give reasons for its decisions, whether administrative or 
quasi-judicial to those affected by such decisions; 
 
(e) before initiating any project, publish or communicate to 
the public generally or to the persons affected or likely to be 
affected by the project in particular, the facts available to it 
or to which it has reasonable access which in its opinion 
should be known to them in the best interests of natural 
(xiii) particulars of concessions, permits or 
authorisations granted by it ; 
(xiv) details in respect of the information, available 
to or held by it, reduced in an electronic form; 
(xv) the particulars of facilities available to citizens 
for obtaining information, including the 
working hours of a library or reading room, if 
maintained for public use; 
(xvi) the names, designations and other particulars 
of the Public Information Officers; 
(xvii) such other information as may be prescribed; 
and thereafter update these publications within such 
intervals in each year as may be prescribed. 
(2) It shall be a constant endeavour of every public 
authority to take steps in accordance with the 
requirements of clause (b) of sub-section (1) to 
provide as much information suo moto to the public 
at regular intervals th rough various means of 
communications so that the public have minimum 
resort to the use of this Act to obtain information. 
 
(c) publish all relevant facts while formulating 
important policies or announcing the decisions 
which affect public; 
 
(d) provide reasons for its administrative or quasi -
judicial decisions to affected persons; 
 
(e) before initiating any project, or formulating any 
policy, scheme, programme or law, publish or 
communicate to the public in general or to the 
persons likely to be affected thereby in particular, 
the facts available to it or to which it has reasonable 

access which in its opinion should be 
known to them in the best interests of 
natural justice and promotion of democratic 
principles. 
22. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. 5. (1) Every public authority shall for the 
purposes of this Act, appoint one or more 
officers as Public Information Officers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
justice and promotion of democratic principles. 
 
 
 
(f) For the purpose of this sect ion, information should be 
disseminated widely and in a form and manner which is 
easily accessible and comprehensible to the public. 
“Disseminated” shall mean appropriately making known to 
the public the information to be communicated through 
notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, media 
broadcasts, the internet or other such means and shall include 
inspection at all of the bodies offices. All materials shall be 
disseminated keeping in mind cost effectiveness, the local 
language and the most effective method of communication in 
that local area. Such information should be easily accessible, 
with the Public Information Officer, where possible in 
electronic format, which shall be available free or at the cost 
of the medium, or in print at cost price. 
 
 
 
 
5. (1) Every public authority sh all for the purposes of this 
Act, designate as many officers as Public Information 
officers, in all administrative  units and offices under such 
authority, as are necessary to render the public body as 
accessible as reasonably possible for requesters of 
information, within one month of this Act coming into force. 
(a) An officer at each sub-divisional level or other 
appropriate sub-district level, shall be designated a Public 
Information Officer, within three months of this Act coming 
into force, for the purposes of this Act. He/she shall receive 
all requests for information, and appeals, both under the State 
and the Central Acts, and pass them on to a designated 
access which in its opinion should be known to them 
in the best interest of natural justice and promotion 
of democratic principles. 
 
(3) For the purpose of sub-section (1), every 
information shall be disseminated widely and in 
such form and manner which is easily accessible and 
comprehensible to the public. 
(4) All materials shall be disseminated taking into 
consideration the cost effectiveness, local language 
and the most effective method of communication in 
that local area and the information should be easily 
accessible, to the extent possible in electronic format 
with the Public Information Officer, available free or 
at such cost of the medium or in print cost price as 
may be prescribed. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of sub-sections (3) 
and (4), “disseminated” means making known or 
communicated the information to the public through 
notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, 
media broadcasts, the internet or any other means, 
including inspection of offices of any public 
authority. 
5. (1) Every public authority shall, within one 
hundred days of the enactment of this Act, designate 
as many officers as Public Information Officers in 
all administrative units or offices under it as may be 
necessary to provide in formation to persons 
requesting for the information under this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (1), every public au thority shall designate an 
officer, within one hundred days of the enactment of 
this Act, at each sub-divisional level or other sub-
district level as an Assistant Public Information 
Officer to receive the applications for information or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
24. (2) Every Public In formation Officer shall 
deal with requests for information and shall 
render reasonable assistance to any person 
seeking such information. 
25. (3) The Public Information Officer may 
seek the assistance of any other officer as 
he considers necessary for the proper 
discharge of his duties. 
26. (4) Any officer whose assistance has been 
sought under sub-section (3), shall render 
all assistance to the Public Information 
Officer seeking his assistance. 
 
27. 6. A person desirous of obtaining 
information shall make a request in writing 
or through electronic means, to the 
concerned Public Information Officer 
specifying the particulars of the information 
sought by him: 
 
 
 
 
 
28. Provided that where such request cannot be 
made in writing the Public Information 
authority for onward transmission to the relevant 
department/agency. 
(b) Where applications/appeals are handed over at the sub-
divisional or sub-district level, an additional period of five 
days would be added to the time of response specified under 
this Act, in order to enable the request/appeal to be 
communicated to the relevant authority. 
(2) Every Public Information O fficer shall deal with requests 
for information and shall render reasonable assistance to any 
person seeking such information. 
 
(3) The Public Inform ation Officer may seek the assistance 
of any other officer as he cons iders necessary for the proper 
discharge of his duties. 
 
(4) Any officer whose assistance has been sought under sub-
section (3), shall render all assistance to the Public 
Information Officer seeking his/her assistance and be treated 
as a Public Information Officer for the purposes of the 
penalty provision in this Act. 
6. (1) A person desirous of obtaining information shall make 
a request in writing or through electronic means in English or 
in the official language of the area in which the application is 
being submitted, to: 
(a) the Public Information Offi cer of the relevant public 
authority; 
(b) other designated Public Information Officers, as specified 
in 5 (la ) specifying the particulars of the information sought 
by him/her. 
 
 
Provided that where such request cannot be made in writing 
the Public Information Officer shall render all reasonable 
appeals under this Act for forwarding the same 
forthwith to it or to the Government: 
Provided that where an application for information 
or appeal is given to an Assistant Public Information 
Officer, a period of five days shall be added in 
computing the period for response specified under 
sub-section (1) of section 7. 
(2) Every Public Information Officer shall deal with 
requests from persons seeking information and 
render reasonable assistance to the persons seeking 
such information. 
(3) The Public Informati on Officer may seek the 
assistance of any other officer as he or she considers 
it necessary for the proper discharge of his or her 
duties. 
(4) Any officer whose assi stance has been sought 
under sub-section (4), shal l render all assistance to 
the Public Information Officer seeking his or her 
assistance and for the purposes of any contravention 
of the provisions of this Act such other officer shall 
be treated as a Public Information Officer. 
6. (1) A person who desires to obtain any 
information under this Act shall make a request in 
writing or through electronic means in English or in 
the official language of the area in which the 
application is being made, accompanying such fee as 
may be prescribed, to- 
(a) the Public Information Officer of the concerned 
public authority; 
(b) the Assistant Public Information Officers, 
specifying the particulars of the information sought 
by him or her: 
Provided that where such request cannot be made in 
writing, the Public Information Officer shall render 

Officer shall render all reasonable 
assistance to the person making the request 
orally to reduce it in writing. 
29. Does not exist in present Act. 
 
 
 
30. Does not exist in present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31. 7. (1) On receipt of a request under section 
6, the Public Information Officer shall, as 
expeditiously as possible, and in any case 
within thirty days of the receipt of the 
request, either provide the information 
requested on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed or reject the request for any of 
the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9: 
 Provided that where the information sought 
for concerns the life and liberty of a person, 
the same should be provided within forty-
assistance to the person making the request orally to reduce it 
in writing. 
 
6 (2) An applicant for access to information shall not be 
required to give any reason for requesting access to that 
information or any other personal details except those 
necessary for contacting the applicant. 
 
6 (3) (1) Where an application is made to a Public Authority 
for information: 
(a) which is held by another Public Authority; or 
(b) the subject matter of which is more closely connected 
with the functions of another Public Authority, 
the first mentioned Public Authority shall transfer the 
application or such part of it as may be appropriate to that 
other Public Authority and shall inform the applicant 
immediately of the transfer. 
(2) A transfer of an application pursuant to 
sub-section (1) shall be made as soon as practicable but not 
later than 5 days after the date of receipt of the application. 
 
 
7(1) Subject to section 5, sub-section (lb) above and section 
7, sub-section (3)(a) below, on receipt of a request under 
section 6, the Public Information Officer shall as 
expeditiously as possible and in  any case within fifteen days 
of the receipt of the request, either provide the information 
requested on payment of such f ee as may be prescribed or 
reject the request for any of th e reasons specified in sections 
8 and 9: 
Provided that where the informa tion sought for concerns the 
life and liberty of a person, the same should be provided 
all reasonable assistance to the person making the 
request orally to reduce the same in writing. 
 
6(2) An applicant making request for information 
shall not be required to give any reason for 
requesting the information or any other personal 
details except those that may be necessary for 
contacting him. 
6(3) Where an application is made to a public 
authority requesting for an information,- 
(i) which is held by another public authority; or 
(ii) the subject matter of which is more closely 
connected with the functions of another public 
authority, 
the public authority, to which such application is 
made, shall transfer the application or such part of it 
as may be appropriate to that other public authority 
and inform the applicant immediately about such 
transfer: 
Provided that the transfer of an application pursuant 
to this sub-section shall be made as soon as 
practicable but in no case later than five days from 
the date of receipt of the application. 
7. (1) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (2) of 
section 5 or the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 
6, the Public Information Officer on receipt of a 
request under section 6 shall, as expeditiously as 
possible, and in any case within thirty days of the 
receipt of the request, either provide the information 
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed or 
reject the request for any of the reasons specified in 
sections 8 and 9: 
Provided that where the information sought for 
concerns the life or liberty of a person, the same 

eight hours of the receipt of the request: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. Provided further that where it is decided to 
provide the information on payment of any 
further fee representing the cost of 
providing the information, he shall send an 
intimation to the person making the request, 
giving the details of the fees determined by 
him, requesting him to deposit the fees and 
the period intervening between the despatch 
of the said intimation and payment of fees 
shall be excluded for the purpose of 
calculating the period of thirty days referred 
to above. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
within forty-eight hours of the receipt of the request: 
(2) If a Public Inform ation Officer fails to give the decision 
on a request for access to the requestor concerned within the 
period contemplated in section 7(1), the Public Information 
Officer would, for the purposes of this Act, be regarded as 
having refused the request. 
 
7(3) Where it is decided to provide the information on 
payment of any further fee representing the cost of providing 
the information, the Public Information Officer shall send an 
intimation to the person making the request, giving: 
(a) the details of such fees as determined by him, showing 
the calculations as per the Act, at prescribed rates, requesting 
him to deposit the fees, and the period intervening between 
the despatch of the said intimation and payment of fees shall 
be excluded for the purpose of calculating the period of 
fifteen days referred to above; 
(b) information concerning his/her rights with respect to 
review the decision as to the amount of fees charged and/or 
the form of access provided, including the contact details of 
the appellate authority, time limits, process and any relevant 
forms. 
 
 
 
 
7 (4) Where access to a record or a part thereof is to be given 
under this Act and the person to whom access is to be given 
has a sensory disability, the public authority will provide 
assistance to enable access to the information, including 
providing assistance with inspection as appropriate. 
 
 
shall be provided within forty-eight hours of the 
receipt of the request. 
(2) If the Public Informati on Officer fails to give 
decision on the request for information within the 
period specified under s ub-section (I), the Public 
Information Officer shall be deemed to have refused 
the request. 
7(3) Where a decision is taken to provide the 
information on payment of any further fee 
representing the cost of providing the information, 
the Public Information Officer shall send an 
intimation to the person making the request, giving –
– 
(a) the details of further fees  representing the cost of 
providing the information as determined by him, 
together with the calculations made to arrive at the 
amount in accordance with fee prescribed under sub-
section (1), requesting him to deposit that fees, and 
the period intervening between the despatch of the 
said intimation and payment of fees shall be 
excluded for the purpose of calculating the period of 
thirty days referred to in that sub-section; 
(b) information concerning  his or her right with 
respect to review the decision as to the amount of 
fees charged or the form of access provided, 
including the particulars of the appellate authority, 
time limit, process and any other forms. 
7(4) Where access to the reco rd or a part thereof is 
required to be provided under this Act and the 
person to whom access is to be provided is sensorily 
disabled, the public authority shall provide 
assistance to enable access to the information, 
including providing such assistance as may be 
appropriate for the inspection. 
 

34. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35. 7 (2) Before taking any decision under sub-
section (1), the Public Information Officer 
shall take into consideration the 
representation made by a third party under 
section 11. 
 
36. 7 (3) Where a request is rejected under sub-
section (2), the Public Information Officer 
shall communicate to the person making 
request, 
 (i) the reasons fo r such rejection; 
 (ii) the period within which an appeal 
against such rejections may be preferred; 
 (iii) the particulars of the appellate 
authority. 
37. 7(4) Information shall ordinarily be 
provided in the form in which it is sought 
7(5)(a) Subject to sub-sectio ns (b) and (c) below, where 
access to information is to be given in the form of printed 
copies, or copies in some other form, such as on tape, disk, 
film or other material, the applicant shall pay the prescribed 
fee. 
(b) Any fees payable by the applicant shall be reasonable, 
and shall in no case exceed the actual cost of copying the 
information or in the case of samples of materials the cost of 
obtaining the sample, and shall be set via regulations at a 
maximum limit taking account of the general principle that 
fees should not be set so high that they undermine the 
objectives of this Act in practice. 
(c) Notwithstanding subsection (a), where a public authority 
fails to comply with the time limits specified in section 7, 
any access to information to which the applicant is entitled 
pursuant to his request shall be provided free of charge. 
7 (6) Before taking any decision under sub-section (1), the 
Public Information Officer shall take into consideration the 
representation made by a third party under section 11. 
 
 
 
7 (7) Where a request is rejected under sub-section (2), the 
Public Information Officer shall communicate to the person 
making request, 
(i) the reasons for such rejection; 
(ii) the period within which an appeal against such rejections 
may be preferred; 
(iii) the particulars of the appellate authority. 
 
 
7 (8) Information shall ordinarily  be provided in the form in 
which it is sought unless it would disproportionately divert 
7(5) Where access to information is to be provided 
in the printed or in any electronic format, the 
applicant shall, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (6), pay such fee as may be prescribed. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (5), the person making request for the 
information shall be provided the information free of 
charge where a public authority fails to comply with 
the time limits specified in sub-section (1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7(7) Before taking any decision under sub-section 
(1), the Public Informatio n Officer shall take into 
consideration the represen tation made by a third 
party under section 11. 
 
 
7(8) Where a request has been deemed to be rejected 
under sub-section (2), the Public Information Officer 
shall communicate to the person making the request, 
(i) the reasons for such rejection; 
(ii) the period within whic h an appeal against such 
rejection may be preferred; and 
(iii) the particulars of the appellate authority. 
 
 
7(9) An information shall ordinarily be provided in 
the form in which it is sought unless it would 

unless it would disproportionately divert the 
resources of the public authority or would 
be detrimental to the safety or preservation 
of the record in question. 
38. 8. (1) Notwithstanding anything herein 
before contained, the following information 
not being information relating to any matter 
referred to in sub-section (2), shall be 
exempted from disclosure, namely:- 
 (a) information, the disclosure of which 
would prejudicially affect the sovereignty 
and integrity of India, security of the State, 
strategic scientific or economic interest of 
India or conduct of international relations; 
 (b) information, the disclosure of which 
would prejudicially affect public safety and 
order, detection and investigation of an 
offence or which may lead to an incitement 
to commit an offence or prejudicially affect 
fair trial or adjudication of a pending case; 
 (c) information, the disclosure of which 
would prejudicially affect the conduct of 
Centre State relations, including 
information exchanged in confidence 
between the Central and State Governments 
or any of their authorities or agencies; 
 (d) Cabinet papers including records of 
deliberations of the Council of Ministers, 
Secretaries and other officers; 
 (e) minutes or records of advice including 
legal advice, opinions or recommendations 
made by any officer of a public authority 
the resources of the public authority or would be detrimental 
to the safety or preservation of the record in question. 
 
 
8 (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there 
shall be no obligation to give any person: 
(a) information, disclosure of which would prejudicially 
affect the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security, 
strategic, scientific or economic interests of the State, 
relation with foreign State or lead to incitement of an 
offence; (b) information which has been expressly forbidden 
to be published by any court of law or tribunal or the 
disclosure of which may constitute contempt of court ; 
(c) information, the disclosure of which would cause a 
breach of privilege of Parliament or the State Legislature; 
(d) information including commercial confidence, trade 
secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure of which 
would harm the competitive position of a third party, unless 
the Competent Authority is satisfied that larger public 
interest warrants the disclosure of such information; 
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary 
relationship, unless the Competent Authority is satisfied that 
the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such 
information; 
(f) information received in  confidence from foreign 
government; 
(g) information, the disclosure of which would endanger the 
life or physical safety of any person or identify the source of 
information or assistance given in confidence for law 
enforcement or security purposes; 
(h) information which would impede the process of 
disproportionately divert the resources of the public 
authority or would be detrimental to the safety or 
preservation of the record in question. 
 
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, except as otherwise provided herein, the 
following information shall be exempted from 
disclosure, namely: 
(a) information, the disclosure of which would, 
(i) prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity 
of India, security, strategic, scientific or economic 
interest of the State, relation with foreign State ; or 
(ii) lead to an incitement to commit an offence; 
(b) information, whic h has been expressly 
 forbidden to be disclosed by any court of law or 
tribunal or the disclosure of which may constitute 
contempt of court; 
(c) information, the disclo sure of which may result 
in a breach of privileges of Parliament or the 
Legislature of a State; 
(d) information, including commercial confidence, 
trade secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure 
of which would harm the competitive position of a 
third party: 
Provided that such information may be disclosed, if 
the Public Information Officer is satisfied that a 
larger public interest warra nts the disclosure of such 
information; 
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary 
relationship: 
Provided that such information may be disclosed, if 

during the decision making process prior to 
the executive decision or policy 
formulation; 
 (f) trade or commercial  secrets protected by 
law or information, the disclosure of which 
would prejudicially affect the legitimate 
economic and commercial interests or the 
competitive position of a public authority; 
or would cause unfair gain or loss to any 
person; and 
 (g) information, the disclosure of which 
may result in the breach of privileges of 
Parliament or the Legislature of a State, or 
contravention of a lawful order of a court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders; 
(i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of the 
Council of Ministers, Secretaries and other officers, provided 
that the decisions of Council of Ministers, the reasons 
thereof, and the material on the basis of which the decisions 
were taken shall be made public after the decision has been 
taken, and the matter is complete, or over; provided further 
that those matters which come under the exemptions listed in 
Section 8 shall not be disclosed; 
(j) information which relates to personal information the 
disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity 
or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion of 
the privacy of the individual unless the Information Officer 
or the appellate authority, as the case might be, is satisfied 
that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such 
information. 
Provided that the information, which cannot be denied to the 
Parliament or a State Legislature, shall not be denied to any 
person. 
Notwithstanding anything in the Official Secrets Act, 1923 
nor any of the exemptions permissible in accordance with 
section 8 (1), a public authority may allow access to 
information, if public interest in disclosure outweighs the 
harm to the protected interests. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Public Information Officer is satisfied that a 
larger public interest warra nts the disclosure of such 
information; 
(f) information received in confidence from a 
foreign government; 
(g) information, the disc losure of which would 
endanger the life or physical safety of any person or 
cause to identify the source of information or 
assistance given in confidence of law enforcement or 
security purposes; 
(h) information, the disc losure of which would 
impede the process of investigation or apprehension 
or prosecution of offenders; 
(i) the Cabinet papers, including records of 
deliberations of the Council of Ministers, Secretaries 
and other officers: 
Provided that the decisions of the Council of 
Ministers, the reasons thereof, and the material on 
the basis of which the decisions were taken, shall be 
made public after the decision has been taken, and 
the matter is complete, or over: 
Provided further that those matters which come 
under the exemptions listed in this section shall not 
be disclosed; 
(j) information which relates to personal 
information, the disclosure of which has no 
relationship to any public activity or interest or 
which would cause unwarranted invasion of the 
privacy of the individual: 
Provided that such information may be disclosed, if 
the Public Information Officer or the appellate 
authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the 
larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39. 8(2) Subject to the provisions of clause (a) 
of sub-section 1, any information relating to 
any occurrence, event or matter which has 
taken place, occurred or happened twenty-
five years before the date on which any 
request is made under section 6 shall be 
provided to any person making a request 
under that section: 
 
40. Provided that where any question arises as 
to the date from which the said period of 
twenty-five years has to be computed, the 
decision of the Central Government shall be 
final. 
41. 9. Without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 8, a public information officer may 
reject a request for in formation also where 
such request- 
 (a) is too general in nature or is of such a 
nature that, having regard to the volume of 
information required to be retrieved or 
processed would involve unreasonable 
diversion of the resources of a public 
authority or would adversely interfere with 
the functioning of such authority: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 (2) Subject to the provisions of clause (a) and (i) of sub-
section 1 of section 8, any information relating to any 
occurrence, event or matter which has taken place, occurred 
or happened ten years before the date on which any request is 
made under section 6 shall be provided to any person making 
a request under that section. 
Provided that the matters covered by sub-Section 8(a) and 
sub-Section 8(i) may be disclosed after twenty-five years. 
Provided that where any question arises as to the date from 
which the said period of ten years or twenty-five has to be 
computed, the decision of the Union Government shall be 
final, subject to the usual appeals provided for in this Act. 
 
9. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8, a Public 
Information Officer may reject  a request fo r information 
where such a request for providing access would involve an 
infringement of copyright subsisting in a person other than 
the State. 
 
 
 
 
information. 
(2) An information which cannot be denied to 
Parliament or Legislature of a State, as the case may 
be, shall not be denied to any person. 
(3) A public authority may, notwithstanding the 
exemptions specified in sub-section (1), allow access 
to information if public interest in disclosure of the 
information outweighs the harm to the public 
authority. 
8(4) Subject to the provisions of clauses (a) and (i) 
of sub-section (1), any information relating to any 
occurrence, event or matter which has taken place or 
occurred ten years before the date on which any 
request is made under section 6, shall be provided to 
the person making the request under that section: 
 
 
Provided that where any question arises to the date 
from which the said period of ten years has to be 
computed, the decision of the Central Government 
shall be final. 
 
9. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8, a 
Public Information Officer may reject a request for 
information where such a request for providing 
access would involve an infringement of copyright 
subsisting in a person other than the State. 
 
 
 
 

 Provided that where such request is rejected 
on the ground that the request is too 
general, it would be the duty of the Public 
Information Officer to render help as far as 
possible to the person making request to 
reframe his request in such a manner as 
may facilitate compliance with it; 
 (b) relates to information that is required by 
law, rules, regulations or orders to be 
published at a particular time and such 
information is likely to be so published 
within thirty days of the receipt of such 
request; 
 (c) relates to information that is contained 
in published material available to public; or 
 (d) relates to info rmation which would 
cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy 
of any person. 
42. 10. (1) If a request for access to information 
is rejected on the ground that it is in relation 
to information which is exempted from 
disclosure, then notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, access may be given 
to that part of the record which does not 
contain any information that is exempted 
from disclosure under this Act and which 
can reasonably be severed from any part 
that contains exempted information. 
43. 10. (2) Where access is granted to a part of 
the record in accordance with sub-section 
(1), the person making the request shall be 
informed,- 
 (a) that only part of  the record requested, 
after severance of the record containing 
information which is exempted from 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. (1) If a request for access to information is rejected on the 
ground that it is in relation to information which is exempted 
from disclosure, then notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, access may be given to that part of the record which 
does not contain any information that is exempted from 
disclosure under this Act and which can reasonably be 
severed from any part that contains exempted information. 
 
 
 
10(2) Where access is granted to  a part of the record in 
accordance with sub-section (1), the Public Information 
Officer shall send a notice to the applicant, advising: 
(a) that only part of the record  requested, after severance of 
the record containing information which is exempted from 
disclosure, is being furnished; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. (1) Where a request fo r access to information is 
rejected on the ground that it is in relation to 
information which is exempt from disclosure, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
access may be provided to that part of the record 
which does not contain any information which is 
exempt from disclosure under this Act and which 
can reasonably be severed from any part that 
contains exempt information. 
 
10(2) Where access is granted to a part of the record 
under sub-section (1), the Public Information Officer 
shall give a notice to the applicant, informing,- 
(a) that only part of th e record requested, after 
severance of the record containing information 
which is exempt from disclosure, is being provided; 

disclosure, is being furnished; and 
 (b) of the provisions of the Act under which 
the severed part is exempted from 
disclosure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44. (11)(1) Where a public authority intends to 
disclose any information or record, or part 
thereof, on a request made under this Act 
which relates to, or has been supplied by a 
third party and has been treated as 
confidential by that third party, the Public 
Information Officer shall, within twenty -
five days from the receipt of a request, give 
written notice to such third party of the 
request and of the fact that the public 
authority intends to disclose the information 
or record, or part thereof; 
 Provided that except in the case of trade or 
commercial secrets protected by law, 
disclosure may be allowed if the public 
interest in disclosure outweighs in 
importance any possible harm or injury to 
the interests of such third party. 
 (2) where a notice is given by the Public 
Information Officer under sub-section (1) to 
a third party in respect of any information 
(b) The reasons for the decision ; including any findings on 
any material questions of fact, referring to the material on 
which those findings were based; 
(c) The name and designation of the person giving the 
decision; and 
(d) Details of the fees determined by him/her and requesting 
the applicant to deposit the fees; 
(e) Information concerning his/ her rights with respect to 
review of the decision regarding non-disclosure of part of the 
information, the amount of fees charged and/or the form
 of access provided, including the contact details of the 
appellate body, time limits, process and any relevant forms; 
 
11. (1) Where a public authority intends to disclose any 
information or record, or part thereof on a request made 
under this Act which relates to, or has been supplied by a 
third party and has been treated as confidential by that third 
party, the Public Information O fficer shall, within five days 
from the receipt of a request, give written notice to such third 
party of the request and of the fact that the public authority 
intends to disclose the information or record, or part thereof 
and invite the third party to make a submission, in writing or 
orally, regarding whether the information should be 
disclosed, which submission shall be taken into account 
when determining whether to disclose the information. 
Provided that except in the case of trade or commercial 
secrets protected by law, disclosure may be allowed if the 
public interest in disclosure outweighs in importance any 
possible harm or injury to the interests of such party. 
(2) where a notice is given by the Public Information Officer 
under sub-section (1) to a third party in respect of any 
information or record or part thereof; the third party shall, 
within ten days from the date of issuance of notice, be given 
the opportunity to make representation against the proposed 
(b) the reasons for the decision, including any 
findings on any material question of fact, referring to 
the material on which those findings were based; 
(c) the name and designation of the person giving 
the decision; 
(d) the details of the fees determined by him or her 
and the amount of fee which the applicant is 
required to deposit; and 
(e) his or her rights with respect to review of the 
decision regarding non-disclosure of part of the 
information, the amount of fee charged or the form 
of access provided, including the particulars of the 
appellate authority, time limit, process and any other 
forms. 
11. (1) Where a public authority intends to disclose 
any information or record, or part thereof on a 
request made under this Act, which relates to or has 
been supplied by a third party and has been treated 
as confidential by that third party, the Public 
Information Officer shall, within five days from the 
receipt of the request, give a written notice to such 
third party of the request and of the fact that the 
public authority intends to disclose the information 
or record, or part thereof, and invite the third party 
to make a submission in writing or orally, regarding 
whether the information should be disclosed, and 
such submission of the third party shall be kept in 
view while taking a decision about disclosure of 
information: 
Provided that except in the case of trade or 
commercial secrets protected by law, disclosure may 
be allowed if the public interest in disclosure 
outweighs in importance any possible harm or injury 
to the interests of such third party. 
(2) Where a notice is served by the Public 

or record or part thereof, the third party 
shall, within twenty days from the date of 
issuance of notice, be given the opportunity 
to make representation against the proposed 
disclosure 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 7, the Public Information Officer 
shall, within sixty days after receipt of the 
request under section 6, if the third party 
has been given an opportunity to make 
representation under sub-section (2), make 
a decision as to whether or not to disclose 
the information or record or part thereof 
and give in writing the notice of his 
decision to the third party. 
 (4) A notice given under sub-section (3) 
shall include a statement that the third party 
to whom the notice is given is entitled to 
prefer an appeal against the decision under 
section 12. 
 
 
45. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disclosure. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the 
Public Information Officer shall, within twenty days after 
receipt of the request under sect ion 6, if the third party has 
been given an opportunity to make representation under sub-
section (2), make a decision as to whether or not to disclose 
the information or record or part thereof and give in writing 
the notice of his decision to the third party. 
(4) A notice given under sub-section (3) shall include a 
statement that the third party to whom the notice is given is 
entitled to prefer an appeal against the decision under section 
12(2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12(1): (i)(a) The President shall appoint or designate a Chief 
Information Commissione r for all matters pertaining to the 
Union. Such appointment shall be made on the basis of a 
recommendation made by an Appointing Committee 
presided by the Prime Mini ster, with the Leader of 
Opposition in the Lok Sabha and the Chief Justice of India as 
members. 
(i) (b) The Governor shall appoint or designate a State 
Information Commissione r for all matters pertaining to the 
State. Such appointment shall be made on the basis of 
recommendation made by an Appointing Committee 
presided by the Chief Mini ster, with the Leader of 
Opposition in the Legislative Assembly and the Chief Justice 
Information Officer under sub-section (1) to a third 
party in respect of any information or record or part 
thereof, the third party shall, within ten days from 
the date of receipt of such notice, be given the 
opportunity to make representation against the 
proposed disclosure.   
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, 
the Public Information Officer shall, within forty 
days after receipt of the request under section 6, if 
the third party has been given an opportunity to 
make representation under sub-section (2), make a 
decision as to whether or not to disclose the 
information or  record or part thereof and give 
in writing the notice of his decision to the third 
party. 
(4) A notice given under sub-section (3) shall 
include a statement that the third party to whom the 
notice is given is entitled to prefer an appeal under 
section 15 against the decision. 
CHAPTER III 
THE CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body 
to be known as the Central Information Commission 
to exercise the  powers conferred on, and to 
perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2) The Commission shall consist of – 
(a) the Information Commissioner; and 
(b) such number of Deputy Information 
Commissioners not exceeding ten as may be deemed 
necessary. 
(3) The Information Co mmissioner and the 
Deputy Information Commissioners shall be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the High Court as members. 
(ii) Information Commissioners may be appointed by the 
President or the Governor, as the case may be, in 
consultation with the appropriate Appointing Committee and 
the Chief Information Commi ssioner or State Information 
Commissioners, as the case may be. 
(iii) Every Chief Information Commissioner, State 
Information Commissioner and Information Commissioner 
shall be a person with wide knowledge and experience of 
administration and governance, and/or a person with high 
public stature. 
(iv) The Chief Information Commissioners and any 
Information Commissioners shall not be members of 
Parliament or members of the Legislative of any State or 
Union Territory and shall not hold any other office of profit 
and shall not be connected with any political party or be 
carrying on any business or practice any profession; 
(v) The requisite budgetary allocations for the emoluments 
and expenses, including office expenses, of the Chief 
Information Commissioner and of other Information 
Commissioners will be provided by the Government of India 
through special budgetary provisions made available to the 
respective States out of the Union Government Budget. 
(vi) The Chief Informatio n Commissioner and other 
Information Commissioners shall function autonomously 
without being subjected to directions by any other authority 
and would be under the administrative control of the 
Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances. 
 
 
 
 
appointed by the President on
 the recommendation of a committee consisting of – 
(i) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairperson 
of me committee; 
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and 
(iii) the Chief Justice of India. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of removal of doubts, 
it is hereby declared that where the Leader of 
Opposition in the House of the People has not been 
recognised as such, the Leader of the single largest 
group in opposition of the Government in the House 
of the People shall be deemed to be the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
(4) The general superintendence, direction and 
management of the affairs of the Commission shall 
vest in the Information Commissioner who shall be 
assisted by the Deputy Information Commissioners 
and may exercise all such powers and do all such 
acts and things which may be exercised or done by 
the Commission autonomously without being 
subjected to directions by any other authority under 
this Act. 
(5) The Information Co mmissioner and the Deputy 
Information Commissioners shall be persons of 
eminence in public life with wide knowledge and 
experience of administration and governance. 
(6) The Information Co mmissioner or a Deputy 
Information Commissioner shall not be a member of 
Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any 
State or Union territory, as the case may be, or hold 
any other office of profit or connected with any 
political party or carrying on any business or 
pursuing any profession. 
(7) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at 

 
 
 
 
 
46. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 (vii) Every person appointed as a Chief Information 
Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall hold 
office for a term of five years from the date on which he 
enters upon his office. He/she will not be eligible for 
reappointment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delhi and the Commission may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish 
offices at other places in India. 
(8) Every Deputy Inform ation Commissioner shall 
perform his functions within such area as may be 
specified by the Central Government. 
13. (1) The Information Commissioner shall hold 
office for a term of five years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office or till he attains the 
age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and 
shall not be eligible for reappointment: 
Provided that the Central Government may extend 
the term of five years by one more year if 
recommended by the Committee referred to in sub-
section (3) of Section 12: 
Provided further that no Information Commissioner 
shall hold office as such after he has attained the age 
of sixty-five years. 
(2) Every Deputy Inform ation Commissioner shall 
hold office for a term of four years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office or till he attains the 
age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that every Deputy Information 
Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under 
this sub-section, be eligible for appointment as the 
Information Commissioner in  the manner specified 
in sub-section (3) of section 12: 
Provided further that wher e the Deputy Information 
Commissioner is appointed as the Information 
Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more 
than five years in aggregate as the Deputy 
Information Commissioner and the Information 
Commissioner. 
(3) The Information Co mmissioner or a Deputy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Commissioner, sh all before he enters 
upon his office make and subscribe before the 
President or some other person appointed by him in 
that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the 
form set out for the purpose in the First Schedule. 
(4) The Information Co mmissioner or a Deputy 
Information Commissioner may, at any time, by 
writing under his hand addressed to the President, 
resign from his office: 
Provided that the Information Commissioner or a 
Deputy Information Commissioner may be removed 
in the manner specified under section 14. 
(5) The Information Co mmissioner or a Deputy 
Information Commissioner shall, on cessation of his 
office, not be eligible for––   
(a) any diplomatic assignment, assignment as 
administrator of a Union territory or such other 
assignment or appointment which is required by law 
to be made by the President by warrant under his 
hand and seal; 
(b) further employment to any office of profit under 
the Government of India or the Government of a 
State. 
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to and other 
terms and conditions of service of––  
(a) the Information Commissi oner shall be the same 
as that of a Secretary to the Government of India; 
(b) the Deputy Information 
 Provided that if the Information Commissioner 
or a Deputy Information Commissioner, at the time 
of his appointment is, in receipt of a pension (other 
than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any 
previous service under the Government of India or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Does not exist in the Bill. 
under the Government of a State, his salary in 
respect of the service as the Information 
Commissioner or a Deputy Information 
Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of 
that pension including any portion of pension which 
was commuted and pension equivalent of other 
forms of retirement benefits excluding pension 
equivalent of retirement gratuity: 
Provided further that if the Information 
Commissioner or a Deputy Information 
Commissioner, at the time of his appointment is, in 
receipt of retirement benefits in respect of any 
previous service rendered in a Corporation 
established by or under any Central Act or State Act 
or a Government company owned or controlled by 
the Central Government or the State Government, 
his salary in respect of the service as the Information 
Commissioner or the Deputy Information 
Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of 
pension equivalent to the retirement benefits: 
Provided also that the salaries, allowances and the 
other conditions of service of the Information 
Commissioner and the Deputy Information 
Commissioners shall not be varied to their 
disadvantage after their appointment. 
(7) The Central Government shall provide the 
Information Commissioner and the Deputy 
Information Commissioners with such officers and 
employees as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of their functi ons under this Act, and 
the salaries and allowances payable to and the other 
terms and conditions of service of the officers and 
other employees appointed for the purpose of this 
Act shall be such as may be prescribed. 
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), 
the Information Commissioner or any Deputy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Commissioner shall be removed from 
his office only by order of the President on the 
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after 
the Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the 
President, has, on inquiry, reported that the 
Information Commissioner or any Deputy 
Information Commissioner, as the case may be, 
ought on such ground be removed. 
(2) The President may suspend from office, and if 
deem necessary prohibit also from attending the 
office during inquiry, the Information Commissioner 
or Deputy Information Commissioner in respect of 
whom a reference has been made to the Supreme 
Court under sub-section (1) until the President has 
passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme 
Court on such reference. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), the President may by order remove from 
office the Information Commissioner or any Deputy 
Information Commissioner if the Information 
Commissioner or a Deputy Information 
Commissioner, as the case may be, 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the 
opinion of the President, involves moral turpitude; 
or 
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid 
employment outside the duties of his office; or (d) 
is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue 
in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or 
(e) has acquired such financia l or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as an 
Information Commissioner or a Deputy Information 
Commissioner. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12(3) Powers of the Chief Information Commissioner/State 
Information Commissioners/Information Commissioners 
(1) Subject to this Act, the Chief Information Commissioner 
/State Information Commissioners/Information 
Commissioners shall receive and investigate complaints from 
persons: 
(a) who have been unable to submit a request to a Public 
Information Officer, either becau se none has been appointed 
as required under the Act or because the Public Information 
Officer has refused to accept their application; 
(b) who have been refused access to information requested 
under this Act; 
(c) who have not been given a response or access to 
information within the time limits required under this Act; 
(d) who have been required to pay an amount under the fees 
provisions that they consider unreasonable; 
(e) who believe that they have been given incomplete, 
misleading or false information under this Act; 
(f) in respect of any other ma tter relating to requesting or 
obtaining access to records under this Act. 
(2) Where a Chief Inform ation Commissioner/State 
Information Co mmissioner/Information Commissioner is 
satisfied that there are reasona ble grounds to investigate a 
(4) lf the Information Co mmissioner or any Deputy 
Information Commissioner in any way, concerned or 
interested in any contract or agreement made by or 
on behalf of the Government of India or participates 
in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or 
emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a 
member and in common with the other members of 
an incorporated company, he shall, for the purposes 
of sub-section (1), be deemed to be guilty of 
misbehaviour. 
15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall 
be the duty of the Commission to receive and inquire 
into a complaint from any person,- 
 (a) who has been unable to submit a request to a 
Public Information Officer, either by reason that no 
such officer has been appointed under this Act, or 
because the Assistant Public Information Officer has 
refused to accept his or her application for 
forwarding the same to the public authority or the 
Government; 
(b) who has been refused access to any information 
requested under this Act; 
(c) who has not been given a response to a request 
for information or access to  information within the 
time limits specified under this Act; 
(d) who has been required to pay an amount of fee 
which he or she considers unreasonable; 
(e) who believes that he or she has been given 
incomplete, misleading or false information under 
this Act; and 
(f) in respect of any ot her matter relating to 
requesting or obtaining access to records under this 
Act. 
(2) Where the Commission is satisfied that there are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
matter relating to requesting or obtaining access to records 
under this Act, he/she may initiate a complaint in respect 
thereof. 
(3) The Chief Information Co mmissioner/State Information 
Commissioners/Information Commissioners have, in relation 
to the carrying out of the investigation of any complaint 
under this Act, power: 
(a) to summon and enforce the appearance of persons and 
compel them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to 
produce such documents and things as the Commissioner 
deems requisite to the full investigation and consideration of 
the complaint, in the same manner and to the same extent as 
a superior court of record; 
(b) to administer oaths; 
(c) to receive and accept such evidence and other 
information, whether on oath or by affidavit or otherwise, as 
the relevant Information Commissioner sees fit, whether or 
not the evidence or information is or would be admissible in 
a court of law; 
(d) to enter any premises occupied by any government 
institution on satisfying any security requirements of the 
institution relating to the premises; 
(e) to converse in private w ith any person in any premises 
entered pursuant to paragraph (d) and otherwise carry out 
therein such inquiries within the authority of the Chief 
Information Commissioner under this Act as the 
Commissioner sees fit; and 
(f) to examine or obtain copies  of or extracts from books or 
other records found in any pr emises entered pursuant to 
paragraph (d) containing any matter relevant to the 
investigation. 
(g) To impose the penalties prescribed under this Act, after 
giving due opportunity to the concerned official of being 
reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter, it may 
initiate an inquiry in respect thereof. 
(3) The Commission shall, while inquiring into any 
matter under this section, have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court while trying a suit under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the 
following matters, namely:- 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of 
persons and compel them to give oral or written 
evidence on oath and to produce the documents or 
things; 
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of 
documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof 
from any court or office; 
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or 
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(4) Notwithstanding any thing consistent contained 
in any other Act of Parliament, the Commission 
may, during the inquiry of any complaint under this 
Act, examine any record to which this Act applies 
which is under the control of the public authority, 
and no such record may be withheld from it on any 
grounds. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49. 12. (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision 
of the Public Information Officer may, within 
thirty days of receipt of such decision, prefer an 
appeal to such authority as may be prescribed: 
Provided that such authority may entertain the 
appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the 
appeal in time. 
 (2) A second appeal against the decision 
under sub-section (1) shall lie within thirty 
days of such decision, to the Central 
Government or the State Government or the 
competent authority, as the case may be: 
 Provided that the Central Government or 
the State Government or the competent 
authority, as the case may be, may entertain 
the appeal after the expiry of the said period 
of thirty days if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal in time. 
heard. 
(4) Notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament or any 
privilege under the law of ev idence, an Chie f Information 
Commissioner /State Information 
Commissioners/Information Commissioners may, during the 
investigation of any complaint under this Act, examine any 
record to which this Act applies that is under the control of a 
government institution, and no such record may be withheld 
from any Commissioner on any grounds. 
(5) All the powers of the Chief Information Commissioner 
would also be enjoyed by the State Information 
Commissioners and other Information Commissioners, 
within their jurisdictions. 
12. (2) (i) Any person who does not receive a decision in the 
time period specified in Section 7(1) or 7(3)(a) above, or is 
aggrieved by a decision of the Public Information Officer 
may, within thirty days of the expiry of such a period or of 
receipt of such a decision, pref er an appeal to an appellate 
authority prescribed for the purpose in each department and 
senior in rank to the Public Information Officer. 
Provided that such authority may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
filing the appeal in time. 
(ii) A second appeal against the decision (or lack of it), under 
sub-section (i), shall lie within 90 days from the time by 
which the decision should have been made or was actually 
received, with the relevant Chief/State/Information 
Commissioner; 
Provided that the relevant Chief/State/Information 
Commissioner may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the 
said period of ninety days if it is satisfied that the appellant 
was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. (1) Any person who, does not receive a decision 
within the time specified in sub-section (1) or clause 
(a) of sub-section (3) of section 7, or is aggrieved by 
a decision of the Public Information Officer, may 
within thirty days from the expiry of such period or 
from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal 
to such officer who is senior in rank to the Public 
Information Officer in each public authority: 
Provided that such officer may admit the appeal 
after the expiry of the period of thirty days if he or 
she is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
(2) A second appeal against the decision under sub-
section (1) shall lie within ninety days from the date 
on which the decision should have been made or was 
actually received, with the Commission: 
Provided that the Commission may admit the appeal 
after the expiry of the period of ninety days if is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
(3) Where an appeal is preferred against an order 

 (3) The appeals referre d to in sub-sections 
(1) and (2) shall be disposed of within thirty 
days of the receipt of such appeals or within 
such extended period, as the case may be, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
 (4) If the decision of the Public Information 
Officer against which the appeal is 
preferred under sub-sect ion (1) or (2) also 
relates to information of third party, the 
appellate authority shall give a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to that third 
party. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Where an appeal is being preferred against an order 
made by the Public Information officer under Section 11 to 
disclose “third party” information , the appeal by the 
concerned third party must be made within thirty days of the 
order. 
(iv)If the decision of the Publ ic Information Officer against 
which the appeal is preferred relates to information of a third 
party, the relevant Information Commissioner shall give a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard to that third party. 
(v) In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial 
of a request was justified will be on the public authority that 
denied the request. 
(vi) Appeals to any appell ate authority/ Information 
Commissioner shall be disposed of within thirty days of the 
receipt of the appeals, for with in such extended period, not 
exceeding a total of forty five days from the date of filing of 
appeal, for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
(vii) The decision of the Information Commissioner shall be 
binding. 
(viii) In his/her decision, the relevant Information 
Commissioner has the power to: 
(a) require the public authority to take any such steps as may 
be necessary to bring it into compliance with the Act, 
including by; 
(i) providing access to informati on, including in a particular 
form; 
(ii) appointing an Information Officer; 
(iii) publishing certain information and/or categories of 
information; 
(iv)making certain changes to its practices in relation to the 
keeping, management and destruction of records; 
(v)enhancing the provision of training on the right to 
made by the Public Information Officer under 
section 11 to disclose third party information, the 
appeal by the concerned th ird party shall be made 
within thirty days from the date of the order. 
(4) If the decision of the Pu blic Information Officer 
against which an appeal is preferred relates to 
information of a third party, the Commission shall 
give a reasonable opportunity of being heard to that 
third party. 
(5) In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that 
a denial of a request was justified shall be on the 
public authority which denied the request. 
(6) An appeal under sub- section (I) or sub-section 
(2) shall be disposed of within thirty days of the 
receipt of the appeal or within such extended period 
not exceeding a total of forty-five days from the date 
of filing thereof, as the case may be, for reasons to 
be recorded in writing. 
(7) The decision of the Commission shall be 
binding. 
(8) In its decision, the Commission has the power to: 
(a) require the public authority to take any such steps 
as may be necessary to secure compliance with the 
provisions of this Act, including–– 
 (i) by providing access to information, if so 
requested, in a particular form; 
(ii) by appointing a Public Information Officer; 
(iii) by publishing certain information or categories 
of information; 
(iv) by making necessary changes to its practices in 
relation to the maintenance , management and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
information for its officials; 
(vi) providing him or her with an annual report, in 
compliance with section 4(b); 
(b) require the public body to compensate the complainant 
for any loss or other detriment suffered; 
(c) impose any of the penalties available under this Act; 
(d) reject the application. 
(ix) The Information Commissioner shall serve notice of 
his/her decision, including any rights of appeal, on both the 
complainant and the public authority.  
(x) A decision of the Information Commissioner may be 
appealed to the High Court or  the Supreme Court, on any 
point of fact and law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 (4) Penalties 
(1) Subject to sub-section (3), where any Public Information 
Officer has, without any reasonab le cause, failed to supply 
the information sought, within the period specified under 
section 7(1), the relevant Information Commissioner shall, 
on appeal, impose a penalty of rupees two hundred and fifty, 
which amount must be increased by regulation at least once 
every five years, for each day’s delay in furnishing the 
information, after giving such Public Information Officer a 
destruction of records;  
 (v) by enhancing the provision of training on the 
right to information for its officials; 
(vi) by providing it with an annual report in 
compliance with clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 4; 
(b) require the public authority to compensate the 
complainant for any loss or other detriment suffered; 
(c) impose any of the penalties provided under this 
Act; 
(d) reject the application. 
(9) The Commission shall give notice of its decision, 
including any right of appeal, to the complainant and 
the public authority. 
(10) The Commission shall decide the appeal in 
accordance with such procedure as may be 
prescribed. 
(11) An appeal against the decision of the 
Commission shall lie in the High Court on any point 
of fact and law. 
 
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 20, where the Commission at the time of 
deciding any appeal is of the opinion that the Public 
Information Officer has persistently failed to provide 
information without any reasonable cause within the 
period specified under sub-section (1) of section 7, 
the Commission may authorise any officer of the 
Central Government to file a complaint against such 
Public Information Offi cer before a Judicial 
Magistrate of First Class. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), where it is found in appeal that 
any Public Information Officer has–– 
(i) Refused to receive an application for information; 
(ii) Mala fide denied a request for information; 
(iii) Knowingly given incorrect or misleading information; 
(iv) Knowingly given wrong or incomplete information; 
(v) Destroyed information subject to a request, or 
(vi) Obstructed the activities of  a Public Information Officer, 
any Information Commissioner or the courts; 
he/she would have committed an offence and will be liable 
upon summary conviction to a fine of not less than rupees 
two thousand and imprisonment of up to five years, or both. 
(3) An officer whose assistan ce has been sought by the 
Public Information Officer fo r the performance of his/her 
duties under this Act shall be liable for penalty as prescribed 
in sub-sections (1) and (2 ) jointly with the Public 
Information Officer or severally as may be decided by the 
relevant Information Commissioner. 
(4) Any fines imposed under s ub-sections (1),  (2) and (3) 
shall be recoverable from the sa lary of the concerned officer, 
including the Public Information Officer, or if no salary is 
drawn, as an arrears of land revenue, recoverable within a 
maximum of six months of the order imposing the fine. 
(5) The Public Info rmation Officer or any other officer on 
whom the penalty under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) is 
imposed shall also be liable to appropriate disciplinary action 
under the service rules applicable to him. Provided that in 
cases where the officer is proved  guilty of deliberate denial 
of information or misinformation, the punishment imposed 
shall be a major penalty, i.e., dismissal or removal or 
reduction in rank. 
(2) Any Public Information Officer who is in default 
under sub-section (1) shall be liable on conviction to 
fine which may extend to rupees twenty-five 
thousand or a term of imprisonment which may 
extend to five years, or with both. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER III: MISCELLANEOUS 
51. 13. No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceeding shall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act or any 
rule made thereunder. 
52. 14. The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect not withstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in the 
Official Secrets Act, 1923, and any other 
law for the time being in force or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any 
law other than this Act. 
 
53. 15. No court shall entertain any suit, 
application or other proceeding in respect 
of any order made under this Act and no 
such order shall be called in question 
otherwise than by way of an appeal under 
this Act. 
 
54. 16. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall 
apply to the intelligence and security 
organisations, specified in the Schedule, 
being organizations established by the 
Central Government or any information 
furnished by such organisations to that 
Government. 
 (2) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Schedule by including therein any other 
intelligence or security organisation 
established by that government or omitting 
therefrom any organization already 
specified therein and on the publication of 
CHAPTER III: MISCELLANEOUS 
13. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made 
thereunder. 
 
14. The provisions of this Act shall have effect not 
withstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the 
Official Secrets Act, 1923, and any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of 
any law other than this Act. 
 
 
 
15. No court shall entertain any suit, application or other 
proceeding in respect of any order made under this Act and 
no such order shall be called in question otherwise than by 
way of an appeal under this Act. 
 
 
 
16. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the 
intelligence and security organisations, specified in the 
Schedule being organizations established by the Union 
Government or any information furnished by such 
organisations to that Government. 
Provided that information pertaining to alleged violations of 
human rights, to the life and liberty of human beings and to 
the allegations of corruption will not be excluded under this 
clause. 
(2) The Union Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, amend the Schedule by including therein 
any other intelligence or security organisation established by 
that government or omitting therefrom any organisation 
CHAPTEK IV: MISCELLANEOUS 
18. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act or any rule made thereunder. 
 
19. The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in the Official Secrets Act, 1923, and any 
other law for the time being in force or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other 
than this Act. 
 
 
20. No court shall entertain any suit, application or 
other proceeding in respect of any order made under 
this Act and no such order shall be called in question 
otherwise than by way of an appeal under this Act. 
 
 
21. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to 
the intelligence and security organizations specified 
in the Second Schedule, being organizations 
established by the Central Government or any 
information furnished by such organisations to that 
Government: 
Provided that the information pertaining to the 
allegations of corruption shall not be excluded under 
this sub-section. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule by 
including therein any other intelligence or security 
organisation established by that Government or 

such notification, such organisation shall be 
deemed to be included in or, as the case 
may be, omitted from the Schedule. 
 (3) Every notification issued under sub-
section (2) shall be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
 (4) Nothing contained in this Act shall 
apply to such intelligence and security 
organisations which may be specified by a 
notification in the Official Gazette, by a 
State Government from time to time. 
 (5) Every notification issued under sub 
section (4) shall be laid before the State 
Legislature. 
55. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
already specified therein and on the publication of such 
notification such organisation shall be deemed to be included 
in or, as the case may be omitted from the Schedule. 
(3) Every notification issued un der sub-section (2) shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament. (4) Nothing contained 
in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and security 
organisations which may be specified, by a notification in the 
official gazette, by a State Government from time to time. 
Provided that information pertaining to alleged violations of 
human rights, to the life and liberty of human beings and to 
the allegations of corruption will not be excluded under this 
clause. 
(5) Every notification issued under sub section (4), shall be 
laid before the State Legislature. 
16A. Monitoring and Reporting 
1. The Chief Information Co mmissioners/State Information 
Commissioners/Information Commissioners shall, as soon as 
practicable after the end of each  year, prepare a report on the 
implementation of this Act during that year and cause a copy 
of the report to be laid before the legislatures of the 
concerned State and each House of the Parliament. 
2. Each responsible department/ministry shall, in relation to 
the public authorities within their jurisdiction, collect and 
provide such information to the Chief/State/ Information 
Commissioners, as is required to prepare the report under this 
section, and shall comply with any prescribed requirements 
concerning the furnishing of that information and the keeping 
of records for the purposes of this section. 
3. Each report shall, at a minimum, state in respect of the 
year to which the report relates: 
(a) the number of requests made to each public authority; 
(b) the number of decisions that an applicant was not entitled 
to access to a document pursuant to a request, the 
omitting therefrom any organisation already 
specified therein and on the publication of such 
notification, such organization shall be deemed to be 
included in or, as the case may be, omitted from the 
Schedule. 
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) 
shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
22. (1) The Commission shall, as soon as practicable 
after the end of each year , prepare a report on the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act during 
that year and forward a copy thereof to the Central 
Government. 
(2) Each Ministry or Departme nt shall, in relation to 
the public authorities within their jurisdiction, 
collect and provide such information to the 
Commission as is required to prepare the report 
under this section and comply with the requirements 
concerning the furnishing of that information and 
keeping of records for the purposes of this section. 
(3) Each report shall state in respect of the year to 
which the report relates,- 
(a) the number of requests made to each public 
authority; 
(b) the number of decisions where applicants were 
not entitled to access to the documents pursuant 
to the requests, the provisions of this Act under 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provisions of this Act under which these decisions were 
made and the number of times each provision was 
invoked; 
(c) the number of appeals sent to the Information 
Commissioners for revi ew, the nature of the complaints 
and the outcome of the appeals; 
(d) particulars of any disciplinary action taken against any 
officer in respect of the administration of this Act; 
(e) the amount of charges collected by each public authority 
under this Act; 
(f) any facts which indicate an effort by public authorities to 
administer and implement the spirit and intention of this 
Act; 
(g) recommendations for reform, including recommendations 
in respect of particular public authorities, for the 
development, improvement, modernisation, reform or 
amendment of this Act or other legislation or common 
law or any other matter relevant to operationalising the 
right to access information, as appropriate. 
4. The Union Government Ministry responsible for the 
administration of this Act, as soon as practicable after the 
end of each year, prepar e a summary report on the 
implementation of this Act during that year and cause a copy 
of the report to be laid before the concerned State 
Legislatures and each House of the Parliament, drawing on 
the information provided in the reports of the Chief 
Information Commissioners for each State. 
5. If it appears to any Chief Information Commissioner that 
the practice of a public authority in relation to the exercise of 
its functions under this Act does not conform with provisions 
or spirit of the Act , s/he may give to the authority a 
recommendation specifying the steps which ought in his/her 
opinion to be taken for promoting such conformity. 
which these decisions were made and the number 
of times such provisions were invoked; 
(c) the number of appeals referred to the 
Commission for review, the nature of the appeals 
and the outcome of the appeals; 
(d) particulars of any disciplinary action taken 
against any officer in respect of the 
administration of this Act; 
(e) the amount of charges collected by each public 
authority under this Act; 
(f) any facts which indicate an effort by the public 
authorities to administer and implement the spirit 
and intention of this Act; 
(g) recommendations fo r reform, including 
recommendations in respect of the particular 
public authorities, for the development, 
improvement, modernisation, reform or 
amendment to this Act or other legislation or 
common law or any other matter relevant for 
operationalising the right to access information. 
 
(4) The Central Governme nt may, as soon as 
practicable after the end of  each year, cause a copy 
of the report of the Commission refe rred to sub-
section (1) to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16B (1) 
The Government must, to the extent that financial and other 
resources are available: 
(a) develop and conduct educational programmes to advance 
the understanding of the public, in particular of 
disadvantaged communities of this Notification and of 
how to exercise the rights contemplated in this Act; 
(b) encourage public authorit ies to participate in the 
development and conduct of programmes referred to in 
paragraph (a) and to undertake such programmes 
themselves;  
(c) promote timely and effective dissemination of accurate 
information by public authorities about their activities; 
and 
(d) train information officers of public authorities and/or 
produce relevant training materials for use by authorities 
themselves. 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) The Government must, within 18 months of this Act 
coming into force, compile in each official language a guide 
containing such information, in an easily comprehensible 
form and manner, as may reasonably be required by a person 
who wishes to exercise any right contemplated in this Act. 
 
 
(3) The Government must, if necessary, update and publish 
the guide at regular intervals. The guide must, without 
(5) If it appears to the Commission that the practice 
of a public authority in relation to the exercise of its 
functions under this Act does not conform with the 
provisions or spirit of this Act, it may give to the 
authority a recommendation specifying the steps 
which ought in its opinion to be taken for promoting 
such conformity. 
23. (1) The Central Government may, to the extent 
of availability of financial and other resources,- 
(a) develop and organize educational programmes to 
advance the understanding of the public, in 
particular of disadvantaged communities as to 
how to exercise the rights contemplated under 
this Act; 
(b) encourage public authorities to participate in the 
development and organisation of programmes 
referred to in clause (a ) and to undertake such 
programmes themselves; 
(c) promote timely and effective dissemination of 
accurate information by public authorities about 
their activities; and 
(d) train Information Offi cers of public authorities 
and produce relevant training materials for use by 
the public authorities themselves. 
(2) The Government shall, within eighteen months 
from the commencement of this Act, compile in its 
official language a guide containing such 
information, in an easily comprehensible form and 
manner, as may reasonably be required by a person 
who wishes to exercise any right specified in this 
Act. 
(3) The Government shall, if necessary, update and 
publish the guidelines referred to in sub-section (2) 
at regular intervals which shall, in particular and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57. 17. (1) The Central Government may by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make 
limiting the generality of sub-section (2), include a 
description of- 
(a) the objects of this Act; 
(b) the postal and street address, phone and fax number and, 
if available, electronic mail address of the Public 
Information Officer of ev ery public authority as 
appointed under sub- section (1) of section 5 
(c) the manner and form of a request for access to a 
information of a public authority; 
(d) the assistance available from and the duties of Public 
Information Officers of a public authority in terms of this 
Act; 
(e) the assistance availa ble from the Information 
Commissioners in terms of this Act; 
(f) all remedies in law available regarding an act or failure to 
act in respect of a right or duty conferred or imposed by 
this Act, including the manner of lodging an appeal with 
the appellate authorities/Chief/State/Information 
Commissioners and a court ag ainst a decision by the 
Public Information Officer of a public authority; 
(g) the provisions providing for the voluntary disclosure of 
categories of records in accordance with section 4; 
(h) the notices regarding fees to be paid in relation to requests 
for access; and 
(i) any additional regulations or circulars relevant to 
obtaining access to information in accordance with this 
Act. 
(4) The Government must, if necessary, update and publish 
the guide at regular intervals. 
17. (1) The Union Government may by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
without prejudice to the generality of sub-section 
(2), include- 
(a) the objects of this Act; 
(b) the postal and street ad dress, the phone and fax 
number and, if available, electronic mail address 
of the Public Information Officer of every public 
authority appointed under sub-section (1) of 
section 5; 
(c) the manner and the form in which request for 
access to an information shall be made to a 
public authority; 
(d) the assistance available from and the duties of the 
Public Information Officers of a public authority 
under this Act; 
(e) the assistance available from the Commission; 
(f) all remedies in law available regarding an act or 
failure to act in respect of a right or duty 
conferred or imposed by this Act including the 
manner of filing an appeal to the Commission; 
(g) the provisions providing for the voluntary 
disclosure of categories of records in accordance 
with section 4; 
(h) the notices regarding fees to be paid in relation to 
requests for access to an information; and 
(i) any additional regulations or circulars made or 
issued in relation to obtaining access to an 
information in accordance with this Act. 
(4) The Government must, if necessary, update and 
publish the guidelines at regular intervals. 
24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the 

rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to 
the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:- 
 (a) intervals at which matters referred to in 
sub-clauses (i) to (vi) of clause (b) of 
section 4 shall be published; 
 (b) The fee payable under sub-section (1) of 
section 7; 
 (c) the authority before whom an appeal 
may be preferred under sub-section (1) 
of section 12; . 
 (d) any other matter which is required to be, 
or may be, prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58. 18. (1) The State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to 
the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: 
 (a) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of 
section 7; 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of 
the following matters, namely:- 
(a) intervals at which matters re ferred to in sub-clauses (i) to 
(vi) of clause (b) of section 4 shall be published; 
(b) The fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 7; 
(c) the authority before whom an appeal may be preferred 
under sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of 
the following matters namely: 
(a) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 7; 
(b) the authority before whom an appeal may be preferred 
under sub-section (1) of section 12; 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:- 
(a) intervals at which ma tters referred to in sub-
clauses (i) to (xvii) of cl ause (b) of sub-section ( 
1 ) of section 4 shall be published; 
(b) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the 
materials to be disseminated under sub-section 
(4) of section 4; 
(c) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 
6; 
(d) the fee payable under s ub-sections (1) and (5) of 
section 7; 
(e) the salaries and allowances payable to and the 
terms and conditions of service of the officers 
and other employees under sub-section (7) of 
section 13; 
(f) the procedure to be adopted by the Commission 
in deciding the appeals under sub-section (10) of 
section 16; and 
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may 
be, prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 (b) the authority before whom an appeal 
may be preferred under sub-section (1 ) 
of section 12; 
 (c) any other matter wh ich is required to be, 
or may be, prescribed: 
 Provided that initially the rules shall be 
made by the Central Government by 
notification in the official Gazette. 
59. 19. (1) The competent authority may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to 
the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:–– 
 (a) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of 
section 7; 
 (b) the authority before whom an appeal 
may be preferred under sub-section (1) 
of section 12; 
 (c) any other matter which is required to be, 
or may be, prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
60. 20. (1) Every rule made by the Central 
Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed: 
Provided that initially the rules shall be made by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette. 
 
 
 
19. (1) The competent authority may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for al1 or any of 
the following matters, namely:- 
(a) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 7;  
(b) the authority before whom an appeal may be preferred 
under sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20. (1) Every rule made by the Union Government under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions afores aid, both Houses agree in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25. (1) The competent authority may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:- 
(i) intervals at which matte rs referred to in sub--
clauses (i) to (xvii) of clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 4 shall be published; 
(ii) the cost of the medium of print cost price of the 
materials to be disseminated under sub-section 
(4) of section 4; 
(iii)the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 
6; 
(iv)the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 
7; 
(v) any other matter which is required to be, or may 
be, prescribed. 
26. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the 

expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Hous es agree in ‘making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
61. 20(2) Every rule made under this Act by a 
State Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is notified, before the State 
Legislature. 
62. (1) If any difficulty aris es in giving effect to 
the provisions of this Act, the Union 
Government may, by order publised in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act 
as appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removal of the difficulty: 
 Provided that no such order shall be made 
after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of the commencement of this 
Act. 
 (2) Every order made under this section 
shall as soon as may be after it is made, be 
laid before each Houses of Parliament. 
63. Does not exist in the present Act. 
 
 
64. Does not exist in the present Act. 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
 
 
 
 
 
20(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is notified, before the 
State Legislature. 
 
21. (1) If any difficulty arises  in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the Union Government may, by order 
publised in the Official Gazet te, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to 
be necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of 
a period of two years from the date of the commencement of 
this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall as soon as may 
be after it is made, be laid before each Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
 
Does not exist in the Bill. 
 
 
Does not exist in the Bill. 
successive sessions aforesai d, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27. (1) If any difficulty arises  in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, 
by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removal of the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the 
expiry of a period of two years from the date of the 
commencement of this Act. 
 
 
 
 
(2) Every order made under this section shall as soon 
as may be after it is made, be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
28. The Freedom of Information Act, 2002 is hereby 
repealed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65.               THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 16) 
 INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY 
ORGANISATIONS ESTABLISHED BY 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT. 
 1. Research and Analysis Wing of the 
Cabinet Secretariat. 
 2. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence. 
 3. Central Economic Intelligence Bureau. 
 4. Directorate of Enforcement. 
 5. Narcotics Control Bureau. 
 6. Aviation Research Centre. 
 7. Special Frontier Force. 
 8. Border Security Force. 
 9. Central Reserve Police Force. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 16 (1) 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ORGANISATIONS 
ESTABLISHED BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT. 
 1. Intelligence Bureau. 
 2. Research and Analysis Wing of Secretariat. 
 3. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence. 
 4. Central Economic Intelligence Bureau. 
 5. Directorate of Enforcement. 
 6. Narcotics Control Bureau. 
 7. Aviation Research Centre. 
 8. Special Frontier Force. 
 9. Border Security Force. 
10. Central Reserve Police Force. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sub-section (3) of section 13] 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the 
Information Commissioner or the Deputy 
Information 
Commissioner 
“I, ..............., having been  appointed Information 
Commissioner/Deputy Information Commissioner 
swear in the name of God, that I will bear true faith 
solemnly affirm allegiance to the Constitution of 
India as by law established, that I will uphold the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly 
and faithfully and to the best of my ability, 
knowledge and judgement perform the duties of my 
office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and 
that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.” 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 21) 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY 
ORGANISATIONS ESTABLISHED BY THE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT. 
 1. Intelligence Bureau. 
 2. Research and Analysis Wing of the Cabinet 
Secretariat. 
 3.  Directorate of Revenue Intelligence. 
 4.  Central Economic Intelligence Bureau.  
 5.  Directorate of Enforcement. 
 6.  Narcotics Control Bureau.  
 7.  Aviation Research Centre.  
 8.  Special Frontier Force. 

 10. Indo Tibetan Border Police. 
 11. Central Industrial Security Force. 
 12. National Security Guards. 
 13.  Assam Rifles. 
 14.  Special Service Bureau. 
 15.  Special Branch (CID), Andaman and 
 Nicobar. 
 16.  The Crime Branch-CID, - CB, Dadra 
and 
Nagar Haveli. 
 17.  Directorate of Vigilance including Anti
Corruption Branch, National Capital
Territory of Delhi. 
 19.  Special Branch, Lakshadweep Police. 
11. Indo Tibetan Border Police. 
12.  Central Industrial Security Force. 
13.  National Security Guards.   
14. Assam Rifles. 
15. Special Service Bureau. 
16. Special Branch (CID), Andaman and Nicobar. 
17.  The Crime Branch-CID, - CB, Dadra and Nagar Haveli. 
18.  Directorate of Vigilance including Anti Corruption 
Branch, National Capital Territory of Delhi. 
19. Special Branch, Lakshadweep Police. 
 9.  Border Security Force. 
 10. Central Reserve Police Force.  
 11. Indo Tibetan Border Police. 
 12. Central Industrial Security Force.  
 13. National Security Guards. 
 14. Assam Rifles. 
 15. Special Service Bureau. 
16.  Special Branch (CID), Andaman and Nicobar. 
17.  The Crime Branch-CID. - CB, Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli. 
18.  Special Branch, Lakshadweep Police. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - C 
GIST OF THE SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED ON THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, 2004 
ALONGWITH THE COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY 
Clauses Suggestions Comments of the Remarks 
  Ministry  
     1        2        3       4  
2: Definitions ‘Public authority’ and Opinion of experts The Committee 
 ‘Government’ need to be is being sought. may consider this 
 amended so as to cover State  issue in the light of 
 Governments and other local  much debated 
 bodies within purview of the  matter of 
 Bill.  Legislative 
   competence. 
3: Right to The word ‘citizens’ be Government may  
Information. substituted by  the word accept this   
 ‘persons’. amendment in view  
  of the similar laws  
  being implemented  
  in other countries.  
4: Obligations i) Contracts entered into by It will not be in the  
of public public authorities may also be interest of national  
authorities. included. security to accept  
  this recommendation.  
 ii) Information should be   
 published suo-moto.   
  C1 4 (2) provides The Committee 
  suo-moto may consider this 
  information. suggestion. 
6: Request for Fee should be fixed in the Such matters are   
obtaining  legislation itself. relegated to   
information.  subordination  
  legislation.  
7: Disposal of i) Fee must be r easonable and There is a practice  
request. should not exceed the actual in other countries to  
 cost of supplying the charge fee even for  
 information. search and preparing  
 ii) Fee should be waived in documents while  
 case it causes financial the Bill does not  
 hardship or public interest is make any such  
 involved. Provision and  
  therefore it is  
  reasonable.  
  Moreover there is a  
  Provision to  

  intimate the seeker  
  about calculations.  
8: Exemption Provision regarding the cabinet Article 192 (2)  
from disclosure papers be deleted and be imposes reasonable  
of information. substituted by an expression restrictions on the  
 which may include under Right in the interest  
 exemption only those cabinet of sovereignty and  
 documents premature integrity of the  
 disclosure of which would country etc.  
 harm public authority.   
11: Third party There is apprehension that Third party  
information. information can be denied on intervention is well  
 the ground that it is  accepted and  
 confidential. Almost all foreign  
  Acts contain such  
  provision.  
12: 
Constitution  
(i) There should not be 
previous 
The provisions  
of Central approval of the Central regarding  
Information Government as mentioned in constitution of the  
Commission. clause 12(7). Commission  
  Adequately cover  
  the points raised.  
 (ii) Number of Deputy The suggestion that  
 Information Commissioners Deputy Information  
 should be more to cover the Commissioner  
 whole country. Should perform is  
  function under  
  direction of the  
  Information  
 (iii) There should be more Commissioner has  
 autonomy and independence been noted.  
 for the commission.   
 (iv) Qualifications should be   
 specified.   
16: Appeal. (i) Appeal should be made to Suggestions have  
 the head of the public been noted for  
 authority. Detailed  
 (ii) The Commission should examination  
 have power to evolve its own   
 procedure in deciding appeals.   
17: Penalties. (i) Penalty clause makes the Information  
 whole Bill ineffective and Commission will be  

 toothless as it has not specified non-judicial non-  
 offences as recommended by departmental  
 NAC. appellate body and   
  Therefore is not  
 (ii) Power of imposing penalty permissible in law  
 has been taken away from the to empower such a  
 Information Commissioner. body impose  
  penalty.  
21: Act not to The Bill excludes violations of It has not been  
apply to certain human rights and right of life considered  
organizations. and liberty of human being desirable to extent   
 from being disclosed. This exemption to other  
 gives blanket exclusion to the areas on the ground  
 intelligence and security of national security  
 agencies. or embarrassment  
  to the Government  
  in its functioning or  
  prejudice the   
  national interest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - D 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
(See page 36, para 41.0 of the Report) 
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, 2004 
(AS AMENDED BY THE STANDING COMMITTEE) 
[Words underlined indicate the amendments/insertions suggested by the Committee, asterisks indicate 
deletions] 
A 
BILL 
 to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for people to secure access to 
information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability in 
the working of every public authority, the constitution of a Central Information Commission and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 Whereas the Constitution of India has estabtished democratic Republic; and 
 And whereas democracy requires an informed citizenry  and transparency of information which are vital 
to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities 
accountable to the governed; 
 And whereas revelation of information in actual practice is likely to conflict with other public interests 
such as efficient operations of the Governments, optimum use of limited fiscal resources and the 
preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information; 
 And whereas it is necessary to harmonise these conf licting interests while preserving the paramountcy 
of the democratic ideal; 
 NOW, Therefore, It is expedient to provide for furn ishing certain information to persons desirous of it; 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of  India as follows: 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
Short title, extent and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information Act, 2004. 
 (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
 (3) It shall come into force on the one hundred and twentieth day of 
its enactment. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
 (aa) “appropriate Government” means in relation to a public 
authority which is established, co nstituted, owned or substantially 
financed - 
 (i) by the Central Government or the Union Territory administration, 
the Central Government: 
 (ii) by the State Government the State Government; 
 (a) “Central information Commission” means the Central 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Commission constituted under sub-section (1) of section 
12; 
 (b) “competent authority” means - 
 (i) the Speaker in the case of the House of the People or the 
Legislative Assembly of a State or a Union territory and the Chairman 
in the case of the Council of States or a Legislative Council of a State; 
 (ii) the Chief Justice of India in the case of the Supreme Court; 
 (iii) the Chief Justice of the Hi gh Court in the case of a High Court; 
 (iv) the President or the Governor . as the case may be in the case of 
other authorities created by or under the Constitution; 
 (v) the administrator appointed under article 239 of the Constitution; 
 (c) ********** 
 (d) “information” means any material  in any form, including records, 
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, 
orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data 
material held in any electronic form and information relating to any 
private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any 
other law for the time being in force; 
 (e) “Central Inform ation Commissioner” and “Central Deputy 
Information Commissioners” mean  the Central Information 
Commissioner and the Deputy Central Information Commissioners 
appointed under sub-section (3) of section 12; 
 (f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by 
the appropriate Government or the competent authority, as the case may 
be; 
 (g) “public authority” means any local authority or local body or 
local Self Government institution established or constituted,- 
 (i) by or under the Constitution; 
 (ii) by any other law made by Parliament; 
 (iii) by any other law made by State Legislature; 
 (iv) by notification issued or order made by the appropriate 
Government, 
 and includes any non-Government organisation or any other body 
owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds provided directly 
or indirectly by the appropriate Government; 
 (h) “Central Public Information Officer” means the Central Public 
Information Officer appointed under subsection (1), and includes an 
Assistant Information Officer designat ed as such under sub-section (2), 
of section 5; 
 (i) “record” includes 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to information. 
 
 
Obligations of public 
authorities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) any document, manuscript and file; 
 (ii) any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a document; 
 (iii) any reproduction of image or images embodied in such 
microfilm (whether enlarged or not); and 
 (iv) any other material produced by a computer or any other device; 
 (j) “right to information” means the sight to information accessible 
under this Act which is held by or under the control of any public 
authority and includes the right to- 
 (i) inspection of work, documents, records; 
 (ii) taking notes, extracts, or certified copies of documents or 
records; 
 (iii) taking certified samples of material; 
 (iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, 
video cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts 
where such information is stored in a computer or in any other device; 
 (JJ) “State Information Commission” means the State Information 
Commission constituted under subsection (1) of section 17 B; 
 (jjj) “State Information Commissioner” and “State Deputy 
Information Commissioners” mean the State Information Commissioner 
and the State Deputy Information Commissioners appointed under sub-
section (3) of section 17B ; 
 (jjj) “State Public Information Officer” means the State Public 
Information Officer appointed unde r subsection (1) and includes an 
State Assistant Information Officer designated as such under sub-section 
(2) of section 17A; 
 (k) “third party” means a person other than the person making a 
request for information ****. 
CHAPTER II 
RIGHT TO INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC 
AUTHORITIES 
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have the right to 
information. 
4. (1) Every public authority shall –– 
 (a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed in a manner 
and form which facilitates the right to information under this Act and 
ensure that all records that are appropriate to be computerised are, 
within a reasonable time and subject to availability of resources, 
computerised and connected through a network all over the country on 
different systems so that access to such records is facilitated; 
 (b) publish before the commencement of this Act,–– 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i)  the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties; 
 (ii)  the powers and duties of its officers and employees; 
 (iii) the procedure followed in the decision making process, 
including channels of supervision and accountability; 
 (iv) the norms set by it for the discharge of its functions; 
 (v) the rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and records, held by 
it or under its control or used by its employees for discharging its 
functions; 
 (vi) a statement of the categories of documents that are held by it or 
under its control; 
 (vii) the particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation 
with, or representation by, the members of the public in relation to the 
formulation of its policy or administration thereof; 
 (viii) a statement of the boards, councils, committees and other 
bodies consisting of two or more persons constituted as its part or for the 
purpose of its advise, and as to whether meetings of those boards, 
councils, committees and other bodies are open to the public, or the 
minutes of such meetings are accessible for public; 
 (ix)  a directory of its officers and employees;  
 (x) the monthly remuneration received by each of its officers and 
employees, including the system of compensation as provided in its 
regulations; 
 (xi)  the budget allocated to each of its agency, indicating the 
particulars of all plans, proposed expenditures and reports on 
disbursements made; 
 (xii) the manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including the 
amounts allocated and the details of beneficiaries of such programmes; 
 (xiii) particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or 
authorisations granted by it; 
 (xiv) details in respect of the information, available to or held by it, 
reduced in an electronic form; 
 (xv)  the particulars of facilities available to citizens for obtaining 
information, including the working hours of a library or reading room, if 
maintained for public use; 
 (xvi)  the names, designations and other particulars of the Public 
Information Officers; 
 (xvii)  such other information as may be prescribed; 
and thereafter update these publications every year; 
 (c) publish all relevant facts while formulating important policies or 
announcing the decisions which affect public; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designation of 
Central of State 
Public Information 
Officers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (d) provide reasons for its administrative or quasi judicial decisions 
to affected persons; 
 (e)  before initiating any project, or formulating any policy, scheme, 
programme or law, publish or communicate to the public in general or to 
the persons likely to be affected thereby in particular, the facts available 
to it or to which it has reasonable access which in its opinion should be 
known to them in the best interest of natural justice and promotion of 
democratic principles. 
 (2)  It shall be a constant endeavour of every public authority to take 
steps in accordance with the requirements of clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) to provide as much information suo motu  to the public at regular 
intervals through various means of communications including internet 
so that the public have minimum resort to the use of this Act to obtain 
information. 
 (3) For the purpose of sub-section (1), every information shall be 
disseminated widely and in such form and manner which is easily 
accessible and comprehensible to the public. 
 (4)  All materials shall be disseminated taking into consideration the 
cost effectiveness, local language and the most effective method of 
communication in that local area and the information should be easily 
accessible, to the extent possible in electronic format with the Central or 
the State Public Information Officer, available free or at such cost of the 
medium or the print cost price as may be prescribed. 
 Explanation–– For the purposes of sub-sections (3) and (4), 
“disseminated” means making known or communicated the information 
to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, 
media broadcasts, the internet or any other means, including inspection 
of offices of any public authority. 
5.  (1) Every public authority shall, within one hundred days of the 
enactment of this Act, designate as many officers as the Central Public 
Information Officers or the State Pu blic Information Officers, as the 
case may be, in all administrative units or offices under it as may be 
necessary to provide information to persons requesting for the 
information under this Act. 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), every 
public authority shall designate an officer, within one hundred days of 
the enactment of this Act, at each sub-divisional level or other sub-
district level as the Central Assistan t Public Information Officer or the 
State Assistant Public Information Officer, as the case may be, to 
receive the applications for information or appeals under this Act for 
forwarding the same forthwith to it or to the appropriate Government: 
 Provided that where an application for information or appeal is given 
to a Central or State Assistant Publ ic Information Officer, a period of 
five days shall be added in computing the period for response specified 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Request for obtaining 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disposal of request. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
under sub-section (1) of section 7. 
 (3) Every Central or State Public Information Officer shall deal with 
requests from persons seeking information and render reasonable 
assistance to the persons seeking such information. 
 (4) ************** 
 (5) ************** 
6. (l) A person who desires to obtain any information under this Act 
shall make a request in writing or through electronic means in English 
or in the official language of the area in which the application is being 
made, accompanying such fee as may be prescribed, to–– 
 (a) the Central or State Public Info rmation Officer of the concerned 
public authority; 
 (b) the Central or State Assistan t Public Inform ation Officers 
designated by the concerned public authority, 
specifying the particulars of the information sought by him or her: 
 Provided that where such request cannot be made in writing, the 
Central or State Public Information Officer shall render all reasonable 
assistance to the person making the request orally to reduce the same in 
writing. 
 (2) An applicant making request for information shall not be required 
to give any reason for requesting the information or any other personal 
details except those that may be necessary for contacting him. 
 (3) Where an application is made to  a public authority requesting for 
an information,–– 
 (i) which is held by another public authority; or 
 (ii) the subject matter of which is more closely connected with the 
functions of another public authority, 
the public authority, to which such application is made, shall transfer the 
application or such part of it as may be appropriate to that other public 
authority and inform the applicant immediately about such transfer: 
 Provided that the transfer of an application pursuant to this sub-
section shall be made as soon as practicable but in no case later than five 
days from the date of receipt of the application. 
7. (1) Subject the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 5 or the proviso to 
sub-section (3) of section 6, the Central Public Information Officer or 
the State Public Information Officer  on receipt of a request under 
section 6 shall, as expeditiously as possible, and in any case within 
thirty days of the receipt of the request, either provide the information 
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed or reject the request for 
any of the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9: 
 Provided that where the informatio n sought for concerns the life or 
liberty of a person, the same shall be provided within forty-eight hours 
of the receipt of the request. 
 (2) If the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Officer fails to give de cision on the request for information 
within the period specified under sub-section (1), such Public 
Information Officer shall be deemed to have refused the request. 
 (3) Where a decision is taken to provide the information on payment 
of any further fee representing the cost of providing the information, the 
Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information 
Officer shall send an intimation to the person making the request, 
giving–– 
 (a) the details of further fees representing the cost of providing the 
information as determined by him, together with the calculations made 
to arrive at the amount in accordance with fee prescribed under sub-
section (l), requesting him to deposit that fees, and the period 
intervening between the despatch of the said intimation and payment of 
fees shall be excluded for the purpose of calculating the period of thirty 
days referred to in that sub-section; 
 (b) information concerning his or her right with respect to review the 
decision as to the amount of f ees charged or the form of access 
provided, including the particulars of the appellate authority, time limit, 
process and any other forms. 
 (4) Where access to the record or a part thereof is required to be 
provided under this Act and the person to whom access is to be provided 
is sensorily disabled, the Central Public Information Officer shall 
provide assistance to enable access to the information, including 
providing such assistance as may be appropriate for the inspection. 
 (5) Where access to information is to be provided in the printed or in 
any electronic format, the applicant shall, subject to sub-section (6), pay 
such fee as may be the prescribed. 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), the 
person making request for the information shall be provided the 
information free of charge where a pub lic authority fails to comply with 
the time limits specified in sub-section (1). 
 (7) Before taking any decision under sub-section  (1) , the Central 
Public Information Officer or the St ate Public Information Officer shall 
take into consideration the representation made by a third party under 
section 11. 
 (8) Where a request has been deemed to be rejected under sub-
section (2), the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public 
Information Officer shall communicate to the person making the 
request,–– 
 (i)  the reasons for such rejection; 
 (ii) the period within which an appeal against such rejection may be 
preferred; and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exemption from 
disclosure of 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iii) the particulars of the appellate authority. 
 (9) An information shall ordinarily be provided in the form in which 
it is sought unless it would disproportionately divert the resources of the 
public authority or would be detrimen tal to the safety or preservation of 
the record in question. 
8. (1) Nothing in the foregoing sections shall compel any public 
authority to disclose the following:–– 
 (a)  information which, if disclosed will prejudicially affect the 
sovereignty and integrity of India or the defence and security of India or 
relations with foreign St ates and which has been classified as such in 
pursuance of any rule or order made by the appropriate Government; 
 (b) information, which has been expressly forbidden to be disclosed 
by any court of law or tribunal or the disclosure of which may constitute 
contempt of court: 
 (c) legitimate trade secrets, and commercial or financial information 
obtained from or furnished by a third party on condition of strict 
confidentiality; 
 (d) information the disclosure of which will lead to identification of 
an informer or his sources of information or which would endanger the 
life or safety of any person for having furnished material information 
useful to the Indian nation or would materially hamper investigations 
into crimes or other law enforcement activities; 
 (e) the Cabinet papers including records of deliberations of the 
Council of Ministers, Secretaries and other officers: 
 Provided that the decisions of the Council of Ministers, the reasons 
thereof and the material on the basis of which the decisions were taken 
shall be made public after the decisions has been taken, and the matters 
is complete, or over: 
 Provided further that those matters which come under the 
exemptions listed in this section shall not be disclosed; 
 (f)  information not related to operations of appropriate Government 
or its instrumentalities and disclosure of which would constitute a clear 
unwarranted invasion of privacy of an individual. 
 (2) Information which cannot be denied to Parliament or Legislature 
of a State, as the case may be, shall not be denied to any person. 
 (3) A public authority may, notwithstanding the exemptions 
specified in sub-section (1), allow access to information if public 
interest in disclosure of the information outweighs the harm to the 
public authority.  
 (4) Subject to the provisions of clauses (a) and (e) of sub-section (1), 
any information relating to any occu rrence, event or matter which has 
taken place or occurred ten years before the date on which any request is 
made under section 6, shall be provided to the person making the 
request under that section: 

 
 
 
 
 
Grounds for rejection 
to access in certain 
cases. 
 
 
Severability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Third party 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Provided that where any question ar ises to the date from which the 
said period of ten years has to be computed, the decision of the 
appropriate Government shall be final. 
9. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8, a Central or State  
Public Information Officer may reject a request for information where 
such a request for providing access would involve an infringement of 
copyright subsisting in a person other than the State. 
10. (1) Where a request for access to information is rejected on the 
ground that it is in relation to information rejected on the ground that it 
is in relation to information which is exempt from disclosure, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, access may be provided 
to that part of the record which do es not contain any information which 
is exempt from disclosure under this Act and which can reasonably be 
severed from any part that contains exempt information. 
 (2) Where access is granted to a part of the record under sub-section 
(1), the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public 
Information shall give a notice to the applicant, informing,–– 
 (a) that only part of the record requested, after severance of the 
record containing information which is exempt from disclosure, is being 
provided; 
 (b) the reasons for the decision, including any findings on any 
material question of fact, referring to the material on which those 
findings were based; 
 (c) the name and designation of the person giving the decision; 
 (d) the details of the fees determined by him or her and the amount of 
fee which the applicant is required to deposit; and 
 (e) his or her rights with respect to review of the decision regarding 
non-disclosure of part of the information, the amount of fee charged or 
the form of access provided, including the particulars of the appellate 
authority, time limit, process and any other forms. 
11. (1) Where a public authority intends to disclose any information or 
record, or part thereof on a request made under this Act, which relates to 
or has been supplied by a third party and has been treated as confidential 
by that third party, the Central Public Information Officer or the State 
Public Information Officer shall, within five days from the receipt of the 
request, give a written notice to such third party of the request and of the 
fact that the public authority intends to disclose the information or 
record, or part thereof, and invite the third party to make a submission in 
writing or orally, regarding whether the information should be disclosed, 
and such submission of the third party shall be kept in view while taking 
a decision about disclosure of information: 
 Provided that except in the case of trade or commercial secrets 
protected by law, disclosure may be allowed if the public interest in 
disclosure outweighs in importance any possible harm or injury to the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitution of 
Central Information 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interests of such third party. 
 (2)  Where a notice is served by the Central Public Information 
Officer or the State Public Information Officer under sub-section (1) to a 
third party in respect of any information or record or part thereof, the 
third party shall, within ten days from the date of receipt of such notice, 
be given the opportunity to make representation against the proposed 
disclosure. 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Central 
Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer shall, 
within forty days after receipt of the request under section 6, if the third 
party has been given an opportunity to make representation under sub-
section (2) , make a decision as to whether or not to disclose the 
information or record or part thereof and give in writing the notice of his 
decision to the third party. 
 (4) A notice given under sub-section  (3)  shall include a statement 
that the third party to whom the notice is given is entitled to prefer an 
appeal under section 15 against the decision. 
CHAPTER III 
T
HE CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, by  notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a body to be  known as the Central Information 
Commission to exercise the powers  conferred on, and to perform 
the functions assigned to, it under this Act. 
 (2) The Central Information Commission shall consist of 
 (a) the Central Information Commissioner; and  
 (b)  such number of Central De puty Information Commissioners 
not exceeding ten as may be deemed necessary. 
 (3) The Central Information Commissioner and the Central Deputy 
Information Commissioners shall be appointed by the President on the 
recommendation of a committee consisting of –– 
 (i) the Prime Minister, who shal l be the Chairperson of the 
committee; 
 (ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and 
 (iii) the Chief Justice of India. 
 Explanation. —For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that where the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People 
has not been recogn ised as such, the Leader of  the single largest group 
in opposition of the Government in the House of the People shall be 
deemed to be the Leader of the Opposition. 
 (4) The general superintendence, direction and management of the 
affairs of the Central Commission shall vest in the Central Information 
Commissioner who shall be assisted by the Central Deputy Information 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Terms of office and 
conditions of service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commissioners and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts 
and things which may be exercised or done by the Central Commission 
autonomously without being subjected to directions by any other 
authority under this Act. 
 (5) The Central Information Commissioner and the Central Deputy 
Information Commissioners shall be persons of eminence in public life 
with wide knowledge and experience in the discipline of law, science 
and technology social service, management, journalism, mass media or 
administration and governance. 
 ******** 
 (7) The headquarters of the Central Commission shall be at Delhi 
and the Central Information Commission may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in 
India. 
 ******** 
13. (1) The Central Information Commis sioner shall hold office for a 
term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and 
shall not be eligible for reappointment: 
 Provided that the Central Government may extend the term of five 
years by one more year if recommende d by the committee referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 12: 
 Provided further that no Central Information Commissioner shall 
hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 
 (2) Every Central Deputy Information Commissioner shall hold 
office for a term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier: 
 Provided that every Central Deputy Information Commissioner shall, 
on vacating his office under this sub-section, be eligible for appointment 
as the Central Information Commissioner in the manner specified in 
sub-section (3) of section 12: 
 Provided further that where the Central Deputy Information 
Commissioner is appointed as the Central Information Commissioner, 
his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the 
Central Deputy Information Commissi oner and the Central Information 
Commissioner. 
 (3)  The Central Information Commissioner or a Central Deputy 
Information Commissioner, shall before he enters upon his office make 
and subscribe before the President or some other person appointed by 
him in that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out 
for the purpose in the First Schedule. 
 (4) The Central Information Commissioner or a Central Deputy 
Information Commissioner may, at any time, by writing under his hand 
addressed to the President, resign from his office: 
Provided that the Central Information Commissioner or a Central 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal of  
Information 
Commissioner or 
Deputy Information 
Commissioner.
 
Deputy Information Commissioner may be removed in the manner 
specified under section 14. 
 ******** 
 (5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and 
conditions of service of–– 
 (a) the Central Information Commissioner shall be the same as that 
of the Chief Election Commissioner of India; 
 (b) the Central Deputy Information Commissioner shall be the same 
as that of the Election Commissioner of India: 
 Provided that if the Central Information Commissioner or a Central 
Deputy Information Commissioner, at the time of his appointment is, in 
receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect 
of any previous service under the Government of India or under the 
Government of a State, his salary in respect of the service as the Central 
Information Commissioner or a Central Deputy Information 
Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of that pension including 
any portion of pension which was commuted and pension equivalent of 
other forms of retirement benefits excluding pension equivalent of 
retirement gratuity: 
 Provided further that if the Central Information Commissioner or a 
Central Deputy Information Commissioner if, at the time of his 
appointment is, in receipt of retirement benefits in respect of any 
previous service rendered in a Corporation established by or under any 
Central Act or State Act or a Government company owned or controlled 
by the Central Government or the State Government, his salary in 
respect of the service as the Cent ral Information Co mmissioner or the 
Central Deputy Information Commissioner shall be reduced by the 
amount of pension equivalent to the retirement benefits: 
 Provided also that the salaries, allowances and the other conditions 
of service of the Central Information Commissioner and the Central 
Deputy Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their 
disadvantage after their appointment. 
 (6) The Central Government sh all provide the Central 
Information Commissioner and th e Central Deputy Information 
Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be 
necessary for the efficient performa nce of their functions under this 
Act, and the salaries and allowan ces payable to and the other terms 
and conditions of service of the officers and other employees 
appointed for the purpose of this  Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Central 
Information Commissioner or any Central Deputy Information 
Commissioner shall be removed from his office only by order of the 
President on the ground of proved mi sbehaviour or incapacity after the 
Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the President, has, on 
inquiry, reported that the Central Information Commissioner or any 

Central Deputy Information Commissioner, as the case may be, ought 
on such ground be removed. 
 (2) The President may suspend from office, and if deem necessary 
prohibit also from attending the office during inquiry, the Central 
Information Commissioner or Central Deputy Information 
Commissioner in respect of whom a reference has been made to the 
Supreme Court under sub-section (1) until the President has passed 
orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference. 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
President may by order remove fro m office the Central Information 
Commissioner or any Central Deputy Information Commissioner if the 
Central Information Commissioner or  a Central Deputy Information 
Commissioner, as the case may be,–– 
 (a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
 (b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the 
President, involves moral turpitude; or 
 (c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside 
the duties of his office; or 
 (d) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by 
reason of infirmity of mind or body; or 
 (e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as an Central Information Commissioner or a 
Central Deputy Information Commissioner. 
 (4) If the Central Information Co mmissioner or any Central Deputy 
Information Commissioner is in any way, concerned or interested in any 
contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India 
or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or 
emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in 
common with the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, 
for the purposes of sub-section (1), be deemed to be guilty of 
misbehaviour.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER III A 
The STATE INPORMATION COMMISSION AND 
INFORMATION OFFICER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14A. (1) Every State Government shall, by notification the Official Gazette 
constitute a body to be k nown as the ..........(name of the State) Information 
Commission to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under this Act. 
 (2) The State Commission shall consist of–– 
 (a) the State Information Commissioner; and 
 (b) such number of State Deputy Information Commissioners not 
exceeding ten as may be deemed necessary. 
 (3) The State Information Commissioner and the State Deputy 
Information Commissioners shall be appointed by the Governor on the 
recommendation of a committee consisting of–– 
 (i)  the Chief Minister who shall be the Chairperson of the committee; 
 (ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly; and 
 (iii) the Chief Justice of High Court. 
 Explanation––For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that where the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly has 
not been recognised as such, the Leader of the single largest group in 
opposition of the Government in the Legislative Assembly shall be deemed to 
be the Leader of the Opposition. 
 (4)  The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs 
of the State Commission shall vest in the State Information Commissioner 
who shall be assisted by the State Deputy Information Commissioners and 
may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things which may be 
exercised or done by the State Commission autonomously without being 
subjected to directions by any other authority under this Act. 
 (5) The State Information Commissioner and the State Deputy 
Information Commissioners shall be persons of eminence in public life with 
wide knowledge and experience of law, science and technology, social 
service, management journalism mass media or administration and 
governance. 
 (6) The headquarters of the State Commission shall be at such place as 
the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette specify and 
the State Information Commission may, with the previous approval of the 
State Government establish offices at other places in the State. 
14B. (1) The State Information Commissioner shall hold office for a term of 
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall not be 
eligible for reappointment: 
 Provided that the State Government may extend the term of five years by 
one more year if recommended by the committee referred to in sub-section 
(3) of section 14A: 
 Provided further that no State Information Commiss ioner shall hold 
office as such after he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 
 (2)  Every State Deputy Information Commissioner shall hold office for a 
Constitution of State 
Information Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Term of office and 
conditions of service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his office or till he 
attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that every State Deputy Information Commissioner shall, on 
vacating his office under this sub-section. be eligible for appointment as the 
State Information Commissioner in the manner specified in sub-section (3) of 
section 14A: 
 Provided further that where the State Deputy Information Commissioner 
is appointed as the State Information Commissioner. his term of office shall 
not be more than five years in aggr egate as the State Deputy Information 
Commissioner and the State Information Commissioner. 
 (3) The State Information Commissione r or a State Deputy Information 
Commissioner, shall before he enters upon his office make and subscribe 
before the Governor or some other person appointed by him in that behalf, an 
oath or affirmation according to the fo rm set out for the pur pose in the First 
Schedule. 
 (4) The State Information Commissione r or a State Deputy Information 
Commissioner may, at any time, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Governor, resign from his office: 
 Provided that the State Information Commissioner or a State Deputy 
Information Commissioner may be removed in the manner specified under 
section 14C. 
 (5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions 
of service of –– 
 (a) the State Information Commissioner shall be the same as that of the 
Election Commissioner of India: 
 (b) the State Deputy Information Commissioner shall be the same as that 
of the Chief Secretary to the State: 
 Provided that if the State Information Commissioner or a State Deputy 
Information Commissioner, at the time of his appointment is in receipt of a 
pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous 
service under the Government of India or under the Government of a State, 
his salary in respect of the service as the State Information Commissioner or 
a State Deputy Information Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of 
that pension including any portion of pension which was commuted and 
pension equivalent of other forms of retirement benefits excluding pension 
equivalent of retirement gratuity: 
 Provided further that if the State Information Commissioner or a State 
Deputy Information Commissioner if at the time of his appointment is, in 
receipt of retirement benefits in respect of any previous service rendered in a 
Corporation established by or under any Central Act or State Act or a 
Government company owned or controlled by the Central Government or the 
State Government, his salary in respect of the service as the State Information 
Commissioner or the State Deputy Information Commissioner shall be 
reduced by the amount of pension equivalent to the retirement benefits: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Provided also that the salaries allowances and the other conditions of 
service of the State Information Commissioner and the State Deputy 
Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after 
their appointment. 
 (7)  The State Government shall provide the State Information 
Commissioner and the State Deputy Information Commissioners with such 
officers and employees as may be nece ssary for the efficient performance of 
their functions under this Act, and the salaries and allowances payable to and 
the other terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees 
appointed for the purpose of this Act shall be such as may be prescribed. 
14C. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section  (3), the State Information 
Commissioner or any State Deputy Information Commissioner shall be 
removed from his office only by order of the Governor on the ground of 
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference 
made to it by the Governor has, on inquiry, reported that the State 
Information Commissioner or any State Deputy Information Commissioner, 
as the case may be, ought on such ground be removed. 
 (2) The Governor may suspend from office, and if deem necessary 
prohibit also from attending the office during inquiry. the State Information 
Commissioner or State Deputy Informat ion Commissioner in respect of 
whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub-section (l) 
until the Governor has passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme 
Court on such reference. 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) the Governor 
may .by order remove from office the State Information Commissioner or 
any State Deputy Information Commissioner if the Information 
Commissioner or a Deputy Information Commissioner, as the case may be,- 
 (a)  is adjudged an insolvent; or 
 (b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Governor, involves moral turpitude; or 
 (c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the 
duties of his office; or 
 (d) is, in the opinion of the Governor, unfit to continue in office by 
reason of infirmity of mind or body; or 
 (e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as an State Information Commissioner or a State 
Deputy Information Commissioner. 
 (4)  If the State Information Commissioner or any State Deputy 
Information Commissioner in any way concerned or interested in any 
contract or agreement made by or on be half of the Government of India or 
participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument 
arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in common with the other 
members of an incorporated company, he shall. for the purposes of sub-
section (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal of State 
Information 
Commissioner or State 
Deputy or State Deputy 
Information 
Commissioner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1908  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III B 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INFORMATION 
COMMISSIONS, APPEAL AND PENALTIES 
15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the Central 
Information Commission to receive an d inquire into a complaint from any 
person, –– 
 (a)  who has been unable to submit a re quest to a Central or State Public 
Information Officer, either by reason th at no such officer has been appointed 
under this Act, or because the Central or the State Assistant Public 
Information Officer has refused to accept his or her application for 
forwarding the same to the public authority or the appropriate Government; 
 (b) who has been refused access to an y information requested under this 
Act; 
 (c) who has not been given a response to a request for information or 
access to information within the time limits specified under this Act; 
 (d) who has been required to pay an amount of fee which he or she 
considers unreasonable; 
 (e) who believes that he or she has been given incomplete, misleading or 
false information under this Act; and 
 (f) in respect of any other matter relating to requesting or obtaining 
access to records under this Act. 
 (2) Where the Central Information Comm ission or the State Information 
Commission is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to inquire into the 
matter, it may initiate an inquiry in respect thereof. 
 (3) The Central Information Commission or the State Information 
Commission shall, while inquiring into any matter under this section, have 
the same powers as are vested in a ci vil court while trying a suit under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:- 
 (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and compel them 
to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce the documents or 
things; 
 (b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents; 
 (c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
 (d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or 
office; 
 (e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and 
 (f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 (4)  Notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in any other Act, of 
Parliament or the State Legislatur e, as the case may be, the Central 
Information Commission or the State Information Commission may, during 
the inquiry of any complaint under this Act, examine any record to which this 
Act applies which is under the control of the public authority, and no such 
record may be withheld from it on any grounds. 
16. (1) Any person who, does not receive a decision within the time specified 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers and functions of 
Central or State 
Information 
Commissions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeal. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in sub-section (l) or clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 7, or is aggrieved 
by a decision of the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public 
Information Officer, may within thirty days from the expiry of such period or 
from the receipt of such a decision pref er an appeal to such officer who is 
senior in rank to the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public 
Information Officer as the case may be in each public authority: 
 Provided that such officer may admit the appeal after the expiry of the 
period of thirty days if he or she is satisfied that the appellant was prevented 
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
 (2) A second appeal against the decision under sub-section  (1) shall lie 
within ninety days from the date on which the decision should have been 
made or was actually received, with the Central Information Commission or, 
as the case may be the State Information Commission: 
 Provided that the Central or the State Information Commission may 
admit the appeal after the expiry of the period of ninety days if it is satisfied 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
time. 
 (3) Where an appeal is preferred agains t an order made by the Central or 
the State Public Information Officer under section 11 to disclose third party 
information, the appeal by the concerned third party shall be made within 
thirty days from the date of the order. 
 (4) If the decision of the Central or the State Public Information Officer 
against which an appeal is preferred relates to information of a third party, 
the Central Information Commission or, as the case may be, the State 
Information Commission shall give a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
to that third party. 
 (5) In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial of a request 
was justified shall be on the public authority which denied the request. 
 (6) An appeal under sub-section  (1) or sub-section  (2) shall be disposed 
of within thirty days of the receipt of the appeal or within such extended 
period not exceeding a total of forty-five days from the date of filing thereof, 
as the case may be, for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
 (7) The decision of the Central or State Information Commission shall be 
binding. 
 (8) In its decision, the Central or State Information Commission has the 
power to,–– 
 (a) require the public authority to take any such steps as may be 
necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of this Act, including– 
 (i) by providing access to information, if so requested, in a particular 
form; 
 (ii) by appointing a Central or a State Public Information Officer; 
 (iii) by publishing certain information or categories of information; 
 (iv) by making necessary changes to its practices in relation to the 
maintenance, management and destruction of records; 
 (v) by enhancing the provision of training on the right to information for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 of  1923  
 
 
 
 
its officials; 
 (vi) by providing it with an annual report in compliance with clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section 4; 
 (b) require the public authority to compensate the complainant for any 
loss or other detriment suffered; 
 (c) impose any of the penalties provided under this Act; 
 (d) reject the application. 
 (9) The Central or the State Information Commission shall give notice of 
its decision, including any right of appeal, to the complainant and the public 
authority. 
 (10) The Central or the State Information Commission shall decide the 
appeal in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. 
 (11) An appeal against the decision of the Central or the State 
Information Commission shall lie in the High Court on any point of fact and 
law. 
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 20, where the Central 
Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, at the time of 
deciding any complaint or appeal is of the opinion that the Central or the 
State Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be has *** failed to provide information without any reasonable 
cause, within the period specified under sub-sectio n (I) of section 7, the 
burden of proving that he acted reasonably and diligently shall be upon him, 
the Central Commission or the State Commission shall * * * * * * * * * * file 
a complaint against such Central or State Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, before a Judicial Magistrate of First Class. 
 (2) Any Central or State Public Information Officer or State Public 
Information Officer, as the case may be, who is in default under sub-section 
(1) shall be liable on conviction to fine which may extend to rupees twenty-
five thousand or a term of imprisonment which may extend to five years, or 
with both. 
 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) the 
Central Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be may 
recommend for disciplinary action against the Central Public Information 
Officer under the service rules applicable to him. 
CHAPTER IV 
M
ISCELLANEOUS 
18. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to a be done under this 
Act or any rule made thereunder. 
19. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in th e Official Secrets Act, 1923, and any 
other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by 
virtue of any law other than this Act. 
20. No court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding in 
respect of any order made under this Act and no such order shall be called in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protection of action 
taken in good faith. 
 
 
Act to have overriding 
effect. 
 
 
Bar of Jurisdicition of 
courts.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
question otherwise than by way of an appeal under this Act. 
21.(1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the intelligence and 
security organisations specified in the Second Schedule, being t organisations 
established by the Central Government or any information furnished by such 
organisations to that Government: Provided that the information pertaining to 
the allegations of violation of human rights or corruption shall not be 
excluded under this sub-section. 
 (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
amend the Schedule by including therein any other intelligence or security 
organisation established by that Government or omitting therefrom any 
organisation already specified therein and on the publication of such 
notification, such organisation shall be deemed to be included in or, as the 
case may be, omitted from the Schedule. 
 (3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament. 
 (4)  Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and 
security organisations which may be specified, by a notification in the 
Official Gazette, by a State Government from time to time. 
 (5)  Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall be laid before the 
State Legislature. 
22. (1)  The Central Information Commission or the State Information 
Commission. as the case may be, shall, as soon as practicable after the end of 
each year, prepare a report on the implementation of the provisions of this 
Act during that year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government or 
the State Government. 
 (2) E a c h  M i n i s t r y  o r  D e p a r t m e n t  s h a l l ,  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o  t h e  p u b l i c  
authorities within their jurisdiction, collect and provide such information to 
the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission as 
the case may be, as is required to pr epare the report unde r this section and 
comply with the requirements concerni ng the furnishing of that information 
and keeping of records for the purposes of this section. 
 (3) Each report shall state in respect of the year to which the report 
relates: 
 (a) the number of requests made to each public authority; 
 (b) the number of decisions where applicants were not entitled to access 
to the documents pursuant to the requests, the provisions of this Act under 
which these decisions were made and the number of times such provisions 
were invoked; 
 (c) the number of appeals referre d to the Centra l Information 
Commission or, as the case may be, the State Information Commission for 
review, the nature of the appeals and the outcome of the appeals; 
 (d) particulars of any disciplinary action taken against any officer in 
respect of the administration of this Act; 
 (e) the amount of charges collected by each public authority under this 
Act; 
 
Act not to 
apply to certain 
organisations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring and 
reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (f) any facts which indicate an effort by the public authorities to 
administer and implement the spirit and intention of this Act: 
 (g) recommendations for reform including recommendations in respect of 
the particular public authorities, for the development, improvement, 
modernisation, reform or amendment to this Act or other legislation or 
common law or any other matter relevant for operationalising the right to 
access information. 
 (4) The Central Government or the State Government may, as soon as 
practicable after the end of each year, cause a copy of the report of the 
Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission 
referred to sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament or, as 
the case may be, before each House of the State Legislature where there are 
two Houses, and where ther e is one House of the State Legislature, before 
that House. 
 (5) If it appears to the Central Information or the State Information 
Commission that the practice of a public authority in relation to the exercise 
of its functions under this Act does not conform with the provisions or spirit 
of this Act, it may give to the authority a recommendation specifying the 
steps which ought in its opinion to be taken for promoting such conformity. 
23. (1) The approriate Government may, to the extent of availability of 
financial and other resources; - 
 (a) develop and organise educational programmes to advance the 
understanding of the public, in particular of disadvantaged communities as to 
how to exercise the rights contemplated under this Act; 
 (b) encourage public authorities to participate in the development and 
organisation of programmes referred to in clause (a) and to undertake such 
programmes themselves; 
 (c)  promote timely and effective dissemination of accurate information 
by public authorities about their activities: and 
 (d) train Central Information Officers or State Information Officers of 
public authorities and produce relevant training materials for use by the 
public authorities themselves. 
 (2) The appropriate Government shall, within eighteen months from the 
commencement of thus Act, compile in its official language a guide 
containing such information, in an easily comprehensible form and manner, 
as may reasonably be requ ired by a person who wishes to exercise any right 
specified in this Act. 
 (3) The appropriate Government shall, if necessary, update and publish 
the guidelines referred to in sub-section (2) at regular intervals which shall, in 
particular and without prcjudice to the generality of sub-section (2), include 
 (a) the objects of this Act; 
 (b) the postal and street address the phone and fax number and, if 
available, electronic mail address of the Central Public Information Officer or 
the State Public Information Officer of every public authority appointed 
under sub-section (1) of section 5; 
 (c) the manner and the form in which request for access to an information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appropriate Government 
to prepare programmes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shall be made to a public authority; 
 (d) the assistance available from and the duties of the Central Public 
Information Officer or the State Publ ic Information Officers of a public 
authority under this Act; 
 (e) the assistance available from the Central Information Commission or 
the State Information Commission; 
 (f) all remedies in law available regarding an act or failure to act in 
respect of a right or duty conferred or imposed by this Act including the 
manner of filing an appeal to the Central Information Commission or, as the 
case may be, the State Information Commission: 
 (g) the provisions providing for the voluntary disclosure of categories of 
records in accordance with section 4; 
 (h) the notices regarding fees to be paid in relation to requests for access 
to an information; and 
 (i) any additional regulations or circulars made or issued in relation to 
obtaining access to an information in accordance with this Act. 
 (4)  The appropriate Government must, if necessary, update and publish 
the guidelines at regular intervals. 
24. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely: 
 (a)  intervals at which matters referred to  in sub-clauses (i) to (xvii) of 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 shall . be published; 
(b) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the materials to be 
disseminated under sub-section (4) of section 4; 
(c) the fee payable under sub-section (l) of section 6; 
(d) the fee payable under sub-sections (1) and (5) of section 7; 
(e) the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees under sub-section (7) of section 
13; 
(f) the procedure to be adopted by the Commission in deciding the appeals 
under sub-section (10) of section 16; and (g) any other matter which is 
required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
25. (1) The competent authority may, by not ification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act, 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters. 
namely: 
 (i) intervals at which matters referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (xvii) of 
clause (b) of sub-section (l) of section 4 shall be published: 
 (ii) the cost of the medium or point cost price of the materials to be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make rules by 
appropriate 
Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make rules by 
competent authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 2003 
disseminated under sub-section (4) of section 4;  
 (iii) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 6;  
 (iv) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 7; and 
 (v) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
26. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
of one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following th e session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modifi ed form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 (2) Every rule made under this Act shall as soon as may be after it is 
made be laid before each House of th e State Legislature where there are two 
Houses and where there is  one House of the State Legislature before that 
House. 
27. (1) lf any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it 
to be necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty: 
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of 
two years from the date of the commencement of this Act.  
 (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
28. The Freedom of Information Act, 2002 is hereby repealed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laying of rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Repeal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sub-section (3) of section 13 and sub-section  
(3) of section 14B] 
 Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Central Information Commissioner/ State Information 
Commissioner or the Central Deputy Information Commissioner/State Deputy Information Commissioner 
 “I ....................., having been appointed Centra l Information Commissioner/State Information 
Commissioner/Central Deputy Information Commissioner/State Deputy Information Commissioner swear in 
the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the  
 Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, 
that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of 
my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that 1 will uphold the Constitution and the laws.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 21) 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ORGANISATION 
ESTABLISIIED BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
  1. Intelligence Bureau. 
  2. Research and Analysis Wing of the Cabinet Secretariat. 
  3. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence. 
  4. Central Economic Intelligence Bureau. 
  5. Directorate of Enforcement. 
  6. Narcotics Control Bureau. 
  7. Aviation Research Centre. 
  8. Special Frontier Force. 
  9. Border Security Force. 
10. Central Reserve Police Force. 
11. Indo-Tibetan Border Police. 
12. Central Industrial Security Force. 
13. National Security Guards. 
14. Assam Rifles. 
15. Special Service Bureau. 
16. Special Branch (CID), Andaman and Nicobar. 
17. The Crime Branch-C.I.D.- CB, Dadra and Nagar Haveli. 
18. Special Branch, Lakshadweep Police. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 In order to ensure greater and mo re effective access to information, the Government resolved that the 
Freedom of Information Act, 2002 enacted by the Parliament needs to be made more progressive, 
participatory and meaningful. The National Advisory Council deliberated on the issue and suggested certain 
important changes to be incorporated in the existing Act to ensure smoother and greater access to 
information. The Government examined the suggestions made by the National Advisory Council and others 
and decided to make a number of changes in the law. 
 The important changes proposed to be incorporated, inter alia, include establishment of an appellate 
machinery with investigating powers to review d ecisions of the Public Information Officers; penal 
provisions for failure to provide information as per law; provisions to ensure maximum disclosure and 
minimum exemptions, consistent with the constituti onal provisions, and effective mechanism for access to 
information and disclosure by authorities, etc. In view of significant changes proposed in the existing Act, 
the Government also decided to repeal the Freedom of Information Act, 2002. The proposed legislation will 
provide an effective framework for e ffectuating the right of information recognized under Article 19 of the 
Constitution of India. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
N
EW DELHI;        SURESH PACHOURI 
The l8th December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NOTES ON CLAUSES 
Clause 1  deals with the short title, extent and the commen cement of the legislation. The legislation will 
come into force on the one hundred and twentieth day of its assent by the President. 
Clause 2 defines various words and expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3 seeks to confer on the citizens a right of access to information held by public authorities. 
Clause 4 seeks to entrust a duty on every public authority to maintain records and publish manuals rules, 
regulations, instructions, etc. in its possession. 
Clause 5 provides for designation of Public Information Officers and Assistant Public Information Officers. 
Clause 6 specifies the manner in which requests may be made by a citizen to the authority for obtaining the 
information. It also provides for transferring the request to the other concerned public authority who may 
hold the information. 
Clause 7 lays down specific time limit with in which a public authority shall provide information and the 
fees to be paid for processing the request and for providing the information. 
Clause 8 deals with various categories of information which shall be exempted from disclosure. 
Clause 9 empowers the Public Information Officer to reject  a request for information where an infringement 
of a copyright subsisting in a person would be involved. 
Clause 10 enables the public authority to sever and provide partial information which falls partly under the 
exempted categories and partly under the non-exempted categories. 
Clause 11 provides for consultation with the third party where the request relates to or has been supplied by 
a third party and has been treated as confidential by that party. 
Clauses 12 to 15 provides for constitution of Central Information Commission, the terms and conditions of 
service and the powers of the Information Commissioners and the Deputy Information Commissioners. 
Clause 16 seeks to provides for first and s econd appeals, the first appeals lies  with the officer senior in rank 
to the Public Information Officer and the second appeal may be made to the Commission. 
Clause 17  provides for imposition of penalty on a Public Information Officer for persistently failing to 
provide information without any reasonable cause within the specified period. The Commission may 
authorise any officer of the Central Government to file  a complaint against such Public Information Officer 
before a Judicial Magistrate and on conviction, a penalty upto rupees twenty five thousand, or an 
imprisonment upto five years, or both, may be imposed. 
Clause 18 bars the institution of legal proceedings against any person for things done in good faith under the 
Act. 
Clause 19 seeks to make the legislation overriding in char acter so that the scheme is not subverted through 
the operation of other enactment. 
Clause 20 seeks to bar the jurisdiction of the subordinate courts. 
Clause 21 seeks to exempt certain intelligence and security organisations from the purview of the legislation 
but information pertaining to allegation of corruption, shall, without prejudice to the exemption, be provided. 
Clause 22 provides for preparation of an annual report by the Commission and laying of such report by the 
Central Government before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 23  seeks to cast an obligation on the Central Government to develop and promote schemes for 
advancement of the information regime. 

Clause 24 seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules so as to carry out the provisions of the 
legislation. 
Clause 25 seeks to empower the competent authority to make rules so as to carry out the provisions of the 
legislation. 
Clause 26 seeks to require the Central Government to lay the rules before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 27 empowers the Central Government to remove difficulties in giving effect to the provision of the 
legislation within a period of two years from the commencement of the legislation. 
Clause 28 seeks to repeal the Freedom of Information Act, 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
1.  Sub-clauses (1) and 2 of clause 12 provide for constituting the Central Information Commission which 
shall consist of a Information Commissioner and such number of Deputy Information Commissioners, not 
exceeding ten, as may be deemed necessary. 
2.  Sub-clause (7) of clause 13 provides for a ppointment of officers and employees for assisting the 
Information Commissioner and the Deputy Information Commissioners as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of their functions under the Act. 
3.  An estimated recurring expenditure of rupees one crore eighty-six lakhs is likely to be incurred on the 
salaries of the Informa tion Commissioner, Deputy Information Commissioners and other officers and 
employees of the Commission. 
4.  At this stage, it is not possible to give precise details of the expenditure to be incurred on material 
resources in terms of office accommodation, vehicles, telephones and other office equipments required by 
the Commission. Adequate provisions will have to be made in the annual grants of the Commission to meet 
this expenditure. 
5.  The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure. 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Sub-clause (2) of clause 21 of the Bill empow ers the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, to amend the Schedule for includi ng any other intelligence or security organisation 
established by the Central Government or omit therefrom any organisation already specified therein. 
 Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of the 
Act. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the matter with respect to which rules may be made under this 
clause. 
 These matters relate to, inter alia, the publishing of particulars of public authority, functions and duties 
of its officers, details of facilities available to citizens for obtaining information, fee payable to obtain an 
information from a public authority, salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees, procedure for disposal of appeals and the authority before whom 
an appeal may be preferred against the decision of Public Information Officer. 
 Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the competent authorit y to make rules to carry out the provisions of the 
Act. These matters relate to, inter alia  the fee payable for obtaining the information from the Public 
Information Officer of a public author ity; the appellate authority before whom an appeal may be preferred 
against the decision of the Public Information Officer and the procedure to be adopted by the Commission in 
deciding the appeals. 
 Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government by order to remove certain difficulties which 
may appear to it to be necessary or expedient in giving effect to the provisions of the Act with in a period of 
two years from the commencement of the Act. 
 The matters in respect of which rules and the order may be made are matters of administrative details 
and procedure and it is not practicable to make provisio ns for them in the Bill. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-E 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE 
Sl. Name of Witnesses Dates of 
No.  hearing
1. Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, 1.2.05, 1.3.05,2.3.05
 Public Grievances and Pensions  
2. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 1.2.05; 1.3.05, 2.3.05 
 (i) Shri T.K. Viswan athan, Secretary, Legislative Department 
 (ii) Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 
 (iii) Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary, 1.3.05, 2.3.05
      Department of Legal Affairs 
3. Representatives of Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS); 14.2.05
 (i) Smt. Aruna Roy, and 
 (ii) Shri Nikhil Dey 
4. Dr. Jean Dreze, Professor, Centre for Development Economics, 14.2.05
 Delhi School of Economics. 
5. Representatives of National Campaign for People’s 14.2.05
 Right to Information (NCPRI) 
 (i) Ms. Angela Rangad, and 
 (ii) Shri Shekhar Singh 
6. Sh. Prakash Kardaley, Social Activist; and 14.2.05
7. Sh. Anna Hazare, Social Activist 14.2.05
8. Shri Shailesh Gandhi, Fellow, Indian Institute of Management, 14.2.05
 Ahmedabad  
9. Representatives of the Commonwealth Human 14.2.05, 16.2.05
 Rights Initiative (CHRI), Delhi 
 (i) Smt. Maja Daruwala, Director, 
 (ii) Ms. Charmaine Rodridge, and 
 (iii) Shri Venkatesh Nayak  
10. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, Representative of the Non-Governmental 
Organisation ‘Lok Satta’ 
14.2.05 
11. Shri Arvind Kezriwal, Representative of the 14.2.05
 Non-Governmental Organisation ‘Parivartan’  
12. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Senior Counsel, Supreme Court of India 14.2.05
13. Shri Prakash Bhushan, Advocate, SC 14.2.05
14. Shri Harsh Mander, Civil Servant 14.2.05
 
 
 