 
          
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PERSONNEL, 
 
 
Rajya
August
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY TH
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED 
"SPECIFIC ASPECTS OF ELECTION PROCESS AND THEIR REFORM"
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
          PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
          RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
 PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY SECOND REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON THE SUBJECT  
"SPECIFIC ASPECTS OF ELECTION PROCESS AND THEIR REFORM"
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
          
COMMITTEE ON 
JUSTICE 
REPORT NO 
153 
REPORT OF THE 
"SPECIFIC ASPECTS OF ELECTION PROCESS AND THEIR REFORM" 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs  
 
 
 
  

3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                      4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                           5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                                   6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                           7 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                                       8-13 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                          14-23 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE 
MINISTRY  
 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                         24-30                    
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
MINISTRY AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
(IV) CHAPTER IV                                                                                                                         31                                        
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED   
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE*                                       32 
 
 
 
 
 
*to be appended at later stage 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
3. Ms. Swati Maliwal 
4. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
7. Shri C.Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. *Shri Sana Satish Babu 
10. **Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Arup Chakraborty 
14. Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandanagouda 
15. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
16. Shri Varun Chaudhary 
17. Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
18. Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
19. Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
20. Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
21. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
22. Shri Radhakrishna 
23. Shri A. Raja  
24. Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao 
25. Shri Saleng A. Sangma 
26. Shri Pushpendra Saroj 
27. Shrimati Manju Sharma 
28. Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri P. Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
3.  Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Siddharth, Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 07.01.2025 
**   Nominated w.e.f. 06.08.2025 

5 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred 
Fifty Third (153rd) on Action Taken on One Hundred and Thirty Second (132nd) 
Report of the Committee on "Specific aspects of election process and their reform" 
pertaining to the Ministry of Law & Justice.  
2. The One Hundred and Thirty Second Report of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 
Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha on 04th August, 2023 and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on the 04th August, 2023.  
3. Ministry of Law & Justice, Legislative Department and the Election 
Commission of India (ECI) furnished their Action Taken Replies on the One 
Hundred and Thirty Second Report of the Committee on 17th January, 2024. The 
Committee considered the draft One Hundred Fifty Third Report and adopted the 
same in its meeting held on 7th August, 2025. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi BRIJ LAL 
8th August, 2025                              Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
A.A.P Aam Admi Party 
B.L.Os Booth Level Officers 
C.E.O  Chief Electoral Officer 
C.P.I (M) Communist Party of India (Marxist) 
Cr. P.C. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
E.C.I Election Commission of India 
E.P.I.C  Elector Photo Identity Card 
E.V.Ms Electronic Voting Machines 
I.P.C Indian Penal Code, 1860 
M.C.C  Model Code of Conduct 
M.P  Member of Parliament 
R.O  Returning Officer 
R.P.A The Representation of the People Act 
S.C Supreme Court of India 
S.E.Cs State Election Commissions 
 
 
  

7 
 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Law & Justice on the recommendations / observations of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its 
One Hundred and Thirty Second (132nd) Report on "Specific aspects of election process and 
their reform”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 04th August, 2023 and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on the 04th August, 2023. 
2. The Committee had made 28 recommendations/observations in its 132nd   Report. 
Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized under four chapters 
on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have been categorized as 
follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Ministry, i.e. in respect of paras 1.48, 1.49, 1.55, 1.56, 1.57, 2.30, 2.31, 
2.32, 2.34, and 2.38 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that 
the Department has accepted those recommendations (Total- 10). 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry, i.e. in respect of paras 
1.50, 1.51, 1.52, 1.53, 1.54, 2.33, 3.20, 3.21, 3.22, 3.24 and 3.25 of the 
Report. The Committee is satisfied with the explanations advanced by the 
Department and does not wish to pursue those as of now (Total-11).  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry, i.e. with regard to paras 2.28, 2.29, 
2.35, 2.36, 2.37, 2.39 and 3.23 of the Report. The Committee does not 
accept the reasons given by the Department and reiterates the same (Total-
7). 
Chapter – IV: Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received  
-Nil- 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by 
the Committee in Chapter – III of this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e. of 132nd 
Report) have been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
 
--- 

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1.  The Committee while extending its appreciation to the Election Commission of 
India for their diligent efforts in conducting free and fair elections in the country and 
recommends that citizens should have greater transparency when it comes to the 
Common Electoral Roll and the integration of Aadhaar with EPIC. However, it is 
important to note that linking Aadhaar with Voter ID is voluntary and not obligatory. 
(Para 1.48)   
 
Action Taken 
 
1.2 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it may be stated that the said 
recommendation pertains to the ECI and they have submitted the comments as 
under:-  
1.3 Comments received from the ECI: “The Commission vide its letter no. 
23/inst/2022-ES dated 04.07.2022 has issued instructions to the CEOs of all the states 
and UTs for starting a programme to collect the Aadhar Number of the existing 
electors. A new Form 6B has been devised for electors who have already been 
enrolled in the electoral roll for providing their Aadhar details voluntarily. Further, 
the process of linking of Aadhaar with voter id has not been started yet. Further, the 
Commission is also considering amendments and modifications to the relevant 
provisions related to linking of Aadhar with Voter ID and enrolment Forms in view 
of Hon'ble Supreme Court's direction in the matter. It has been emphasised that the 
linking of Aadhaar with voter ID should be voluntary and not obligatory.” 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.4.  During discussions, some members of the Committee raised doubts about the 
linking of Aadhaar with EPIC of non-citizens, which led the Committee to suggest 
that the ECI should establish a legal provision or an alternative mechanism to ensure 
that non-citizens with Aadhaar are not included in the voter list. Additionally, citizens 
who have not yet linked their Aadhaar should be assured that they can still exercise 
their legal right to vote. The Committee emphasized the importance of these 
clarifications in addressing concerns related to the implementation of a Common 
Electoral Roll (Para 1.49) 

9 
 
Action Taken 
1.5 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it may be stated that the said 
recommendation pertains to the ECI and they have submitted the comments as under:-  
1.6 Comments received from the ECI: “As per Section 16 of RP Act, 1950 a non-
citizen is disqualified for registration in an electoral roll. Therefore, a non-citizen is 
not allowed to enroll even if he possesses Aadhaar card. Aadhar is not a citizenship 
document. Further, under Section 31 of the RP Act, 1950 making false declaration in 
connection with the preparation, revision or correction of an electoral roll or the 
inclusion or exclusion of any entry in or from an electoral roll is a punishable offence 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine or both. 
Hence, there is already legal provision available in the present election law to prevent 
a non-citizen from enrolment. 
1.7 For registration as an elector in an Assembly or Parliamentary Constituency, 
person must not be less than 18 years (on the qualifying date prescribed by law) and 
citizen of India having ordinarily resident in the constituency concerned. 
1.8 Further, vide Commission's letter dated 04.07.2022; it has been made amply 
clear that submission of Aadhaar by electors is voluntary and their names cannot be 
struck off from the electoral database merely because of their inability to furnish 
Aadhaar.” 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.9  The Committee recommends that the Legislative Department and the Election 
Commission collaborate to examine the effects of the delimitation process, especially 
in challenging terrains. The Election Commission lacks the authority to direct State 
Election Commissions or appraise the performance of State Election Commissioners. 
The Committee draws the attention of ECI to the fact that treating all regions in India 
as identical can pose a significant risk. It is therefore imperative to recognize this 
reality and take appropriate measures to address it. (Para 1.55) 
Action Taken  
1.10 Comments received from the ECI: “The recommendations of the Committee 
have been noted for future reference.” 
1.11 Comments of this Department: The recommendations of the Committee have 
been noted for future reference. 
 

10 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1.12 The Committee has taken note of the potential benefits that could be derived 
from the creation of a Common Electoral Roll through the collaborative participation 
of officials who serve in both the Election Commission of India and State Election 
Commissions. However, it stresses the importance of proper constitutional and 
statutory authorization before the Election Commission takes charge of creating or 
managing electoral rolls for State Election Commissions. The Committee suggests 
that States may continue to utilize the electoral roll of the Election Commission until 
necessary legal changes have been made. Furthermore, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the Election Commission of India and the Legislative Department 
collaborate to preserve the rights of both State Election Commissions and State 
Governments when preparing the Common Electoral Roll. (Para 1.56) 
Action Taken  
1.13 Comments received from the ECI: “In this connection, it is informed that ECI 
facilitates State Election Commissions by sharing its electoral roll data with them 
upon their request in the manner and form as requested, on which SECs carry out 
their amendments or marking of ward boundaries. 
1.14 So far, Election Commission of India has shared its Electoral roll data with 32 
State Election Commissions.” 
1.15 Comments of this Department: It is stated that the recommendations of the 
Committee have been noted by this Department. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1.16.  The Committee suggests that the Election Commission and Legislative 
Department collaborate to encourage States to utilize the Election Commission's 
electoral roll when creating their own until there is a change in constitutional and 
statutory provisions. The Committee strongly emphasizes the significance of 
preserving the rights of State Election Commissions and State while taking action. 
(Para 1.57) 
  

11 
 
Action Taken  
1.17 Comments received from the ECI: “The ECI facilitates State Election 
Commissions by sharing its electoral roll data with them upon their request in the 
manner and form as requested, on which SECs carry out their amendments of 
marking of ward boundaries. So far, Election Commission of India has shared its 
Electoral roll data with 32 State Election Commissions.” 
1.18 Comments of this Department: It is stated that the recommendations of the 
Committee have been noted by this Department. Further, it is stated that the reply to 
paragraph 4 may be again referred to.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1.19  The Committee observes that it is important to involve stakeholders in the 
process of creating fair regulations for defining reasonable declarations in election 
affidavits. This is crucial to protect innocent individuals and distinguish fraudulent 
declarations from unintentional mistakes. To ensure fair and effective elections, it is 
necessary to address the challenges faced by political parties and candidates. (Para 
2.30) 
Action Taken  
1.20 Comments received from the ECI: “Political parties may be asked to provide 
their views in the matter. Ministry of Law & Justice may please consider.” 
1.21 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee to address the challenges 
faced by the political parties and candidates during filing of the election affidavits. It 
is further stated that the recommendations of the Committee would be referred in 
future as and when electoral reforms are carried out on the issue. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1.22  The Committee strongly recommends that the RP Act of 1951 needs to have a 
clear definition of what constitute a false declaration/affidavit which is presently 
mentioned under Section 123(4) that covers corrupt practices, and concealment of 
information specified under Section 125A which specifies penalties for filing false 
affidavits respectively, so as to establish fair practices in election process. (Para 2.31) 
  

12 
 
Action Taken 
1.23 Comments received from the ECI: “Noted in the Commission. 
Further, the Commission vide letter no. 3/1/2011/5DR dated 3rd February, 2011 
(Annexure-B) (Reiterated in April, 2012) had already proposed an amendment to Sec 
125 A of 1951 Act, providing for punishment of 2 years imprisonment for filing of 
false affidavits by the candidates (Affidavit in Form 26) and to include this in sub-
section (1) of section 8 so that conviction will automatically lead to disqualification.” 
1.24 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has noted the recommendation of the Committee and whenever the proposals for 
electoral reforms are taken up by the Government the ECI’s proposal for amending 
the provision regarding false declaration shall also be considered. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1.25  The Committee also recommends that the penalties associated with these 
actions should be based on their severity of the act committed and be included as a 
separate provision in addition to or in place of the existing Section 125A that deals 
with penalties for false declarations. (Para 2.32) 
Action Taken 
1.26 Comments received from the ECI: “For providing different penalties, based on 
severity of the act committed, the information provided in the affidavit is required to 
be categorized. Ministry of Law & Justice may take a view.” 
1.27 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It is further stated that the 
recommendations of the Committee would be referred in future as and when electoral 
reforms are carried out on the above mentioned issue. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1.28  The Committee also recommends that if a candidate is found to have provided 
false Information, under the updated/new provision proposed by the Committee, they 
should be deemed ineligible for any benefits resulting from such election. This 
measure is aimed at ensuring a level playing field for all candidates and upholding 
the integrity of the election process. (Para 2.34) 
  

13 
 
Action Taken 
1.29 Comments received from the ECI: “The Commission has already proposed to 
include filing of false declaration/ affidavit in connection with election in sub-section 
(1) of section 8 so that conviction will automatically lead to disqualification.” 
1.30 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It is further stated that the 
recommendations of the Committee would be referred in future as and when electoral 
reforms are carried out on the above mentioned issue. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1.31  The Committee also recommends the removal of the phrase “with the intent to 
be elected in an election” from the section 125A as it creates legal ambiguity in 
finalizing the penalty. (Para 2.38)  
Action Taken 
1.32 Comments received from the ECI:  “Noted in the Commission.” 
1.33 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It is further stated that the 
recommendations of the Committee would be referred in future as and when electoral 
reforms are carried out on the above mentioned issue. 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2.1.  Due to the significant delays in addressing electrol reforms and the lack of 
progress made since the Election Commission of India proposed the Common 
Electoral Roll to the Prime Minister in 1999 and 2004, resulting in a delay of about 
20-23 years, the Committee recommends that the ECI develop a comprehensive plan 
that considers all the factors involved in implementing a Common Electoral Roll 
before making any changes to the current regulations. (Para 1.50) 
Action Taken 
2.2 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it may be stated that the said 
recommendation pertains to the ECI and they have submitted the comments as 
under:-  
2.3 Comments received from the ECI: “In this regard, it is submitted that 
comprehensive plan for implementation of Common Electoral Roll would be devised 
in due course of time after the required amendment in law. The following major 
factors are required to be addressed before conceiving any such comprehensive plan: 
 Uniform system of preparation of electoral rolls by State Election 
Commissions (SECs) as well as uniform qualifying date. 
 
 Sections details within polling stations under a constituency needs to be 
prepared as per extent of the ward area of Panchayat and Municipal Council 
Elections. 
 
 Delimitation of Panchayat and Municipal Council wards which is done 
frequently at the time of elections or after every census would require to aligned with 
the delimitation of the assembly constituency. 
 
 Use of same system of nomenclature and numbering of Ward in rural and 
urban areas across all States.” 
  

15 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.4  To ensure a fair and effective implementation, the Committee recommends that 
extensive consultations be held with the Legislative Department and with the various 
States Governments and Political Parties, including those who use their own electoral 
rolls for local body elections. Through these consultations, proposal can be finalized 
that take into account the various perspectives and concern of all stakeholders 
involved.  (Para 1.51) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.5 Comments received from the ECI: “This is for the Govt. of India to act upon. 
Further, the Commission from time to has consulted with all the stake holders and 
agrees for further consultation of any kind needed for any reforms.” 
 
2.6 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has taken note of the recommendations of the Committee. This Department generally 
consults and coordinates with various stakeholders including the ECI before bringing 
any Electoral Reforms. Further, it is stated that the issue of Common Electoral Roll is 
closely interlinked with the issue of ‘One Nation, One Election’. The Government of 
India found it desirable to constitute a High Level Committee under the chairmanship 
of Shri Ram Nath Kovind (former President of India) vide Resolution dated 2nd 
September, 2023 to examine the feasibility of ‘One Nation, One Election’. In the 
terms of reference of the Committee at point 4(g) it is stated that the Committee shall 
“examine and recommend the modalities of use of a single electoral roll und electoral 
identity cards for identification of voters in elections to the House of the People (Lok 
Sabha), State Legislative Assemblies, Municipalities and Panchayats.” Hence, it is 
submitted that a comprehensive plan for implementation of Common Electoral Roll 
would be devised in due course of time after considering recommendations of the 
High Level Committee on the issue of ‘One Nation, One Election’. The views of this 
Committee with respect to electoral rolls would also be placed before the High Level 
Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.7  The Committee points out two important issues.  Firstly, on the present legal 
framework and the Constitutional regulations that governs the creation of electoral 
rolls by ECI, and the conduct of local body polls. Secondly, the Committee expressed 
concern about the potential impact on State powers, mentioned under Chapter IX and 

16 
 
IX A of the Constitution of India. The Committee therefore suggests that the ECI 
before taking up the responsibility of preparing the Common Electoral Roll may give 
due consideration to the constitutional provisions and powers of the States. The ECI 
may also keep in mind the principles of federalism enshrined under the constitution 
and the powers reserved for the State Election Commissions under List II Entry 5. 
(Para 1.52) 
Action Taken  
2.8 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it may be stated that the said 
recommendation pertains to the ECI and they have submitted the comments as 
under:-  
2.9 Comments received from the ECI: “The Commission always work within its 
domain and always gives due consideration to the constitutional provisions and 
powers of States or other electoral authority provided under the Constitution.” 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.10  The Committee observes that implementing a Common Electoral Roll, as 
proposed by the Central Government and ECI, is presently outside the scope of 
Article 325 of the Constitution. This article stipulates that separate electoral rolls 
must be used for elections to Parliament and the State Legislatures. To ensure that all 
actions are in line with the Constitution, the Committee suggests consensus shall be 
made in line with Article 325. The Committee advises the government to proceed 
with caution, adhere to the principles of federalism enshrined in the Constitution, and 
carefully assess the potential consequences before taking any actions. (Para 1.53) 
Action Taken  
2.11 Comments received from the ECI: “This is for the Ministry of Law and Justice 
to act upon.” 
2.12 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is to state that the reform 
regarding Common Electoral Roll would be brought after studying various legal 
aspects in this regard, including the Constitutional Provisions as well as the statutory 
provisions. However, on perusal of article 325 it is seen that there is to be one general 
electoral roll for every territorial constituency for election to either Houses of 
parliament or to the House or either Houses of the State Legislature. It is seen that 
although a different general electoral roll is required for every territorial constituency 
but the article does not necessarily provide for different electoral rolls for elections to 
the House and State Legislative Assembly and State Legislative Councils. Further, it 

17 
 
is stated that the issue of Common Electoral Roll is closely interlinked with the issue 
of ‘One Nation, One Election’ which is currently under the consideration of a High 
Level Committee constituted in the matter. Hence, it is submitted that a 
comprehensive plan for implementation of Common Electoral Roll would be devised 
in due course of time after considering recommendations of the High Level 
Committee on the issue of ‘One Nation, One Election’ and the views of this 
Committee would also be taken in consideration then.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2.13  According to Article 243D (1) and (6) and Article 243T (1) and (6) of the 
Constitution, it is the responsibility of the individual State Governments to reserve 
seats for the Scheduled Classes and Scheduled Tribes (SCs/STs) in the Municipality 
and Panchayat Elections. Some Members of the Committee have raised concerns 
about the nature of power proposed to be conferred to the Election Commission of 
India for preparing the Common Electoral Roll. The Committee suggests that the 
Election Commission should be careful and avoid overstepping its boundaries into 
the State's domain. Instead, the Commission should aim to propose a solution that 
benefits both parties involved. (Para 1.54) 
Action Taken 
2.14 Comments received from the ECI: “ECI is an autonomous Constitutional body 
and always works within its domain. The Commission has already communicated a 
solution in the matter to the Ministry of Law and Justice. In the regard, Commission's 
D.O. No. 3/ER/2004 Dated: July 5, 2004 (Annexure-A) may be referred to.” 
2.15 Comments of this Department: This recommendation pertains to the ECI. 
However, it is stated that the ECI vide the above mentioned letter i.e. D.O. No. 
3/ER/2004 dated July 5, 2004 had suggested that if there are common rolls for all 
elections, and the Parliamentary and Assembly rolls are used for local bodies 
elections also, by being adopted and rearranged, by the method of ‘Cut and Paste’ 
according to the wards and polling areas of the local bodies. It is pertinent here to 
mention that the issue of Common Electoral Roll is closely interlinked with the issue 
of ‘One Nation, One Election’ which is currently under the consideration of a High 
Level Committee constituted in the matter.  
 
  

18 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.16  The Committee suggests that the Election Commission should bear the primary 
responsibility of taking legal action against false declarations/affidavits instead of 
placing the burden on the general public. (Para 2.33) 
Action Taken  
2.17 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it may be stated that the said 
recommendation pertains to the ECI and they have submitted the comments as 
under:-  
2.18 Comments received from the ECI: “Under the law, the contesting candidate 
has to submit his affidavit before the concerned Returning Officer and not before the 
Commission. Returning Officer is a quasi judicial authority, who has the power to 
either accept or reject a nomination paper after scrutiny. 
2.19 However, the Commission was receiving various complaints regarding filing 
of false affidavit. In view of this and after several deliberations in the matter, the 
Commission unanimously took the following decision in 2020:- 
2.20 "Commission has been receiving complaints regarding furnishing of false 
information in the affidavits of some candidates. As per the extant provision, 
individuals are filing such complaints in the competent court under section 125A of 
the Representation of People Act. 1951. Now, Commission has reviewed this position 
and decided that, in pursuit of a level playing field, it will take cognizance of 
complaints, which indicate serious omission on the part of the candidate, and refer 
such matters to the relevant investigating authorities on a case-to case basis." 
2.21 This decision was publicized on the Commission's website vide press note 
dated 16.06.2020 (Annexure-C)” 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2.22 The Committee has noted that reducing the minimum age requirement for 
candidacy in elections would give young individuals equal opportunities to engage in 
democracy. This viewpoint is reinforced by a vast amount of evidence, such as global 
practices, the increasing political consciousness among young people, and the 
advantages of youth representation. (Para 3.20) 
  

19 
 
2.23  After examining various countries' practices, such as Canada, the United 
Kingdom, and Australia, the Committee has noted that the minimum age for candidacy 
in national elections needs is 18.  These nations' examples demonstrate that young 
individuals can be reliable and responsible political participants. (Para 3.21) 
2.24  The Committee also observes that surveys indicate that youth globally have 
significant political awareness and knowledge. This is evident through youth-led 
movements such as Fridays for Future and March for Our Lives, highlighting their 
capacity to rally and champion critical social and political concerns. (Para 3.22) 
Action Taken 
2.25 Comments received from the ECI: “No suggestion and recommendation has 
been made in the Para 3.20, 3.21 and 3.22 of the report and action on the Para 3.23 of 
the report pertain to Government of India.” 
2.26 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that the 
recommendations of the Committee at Paragraphs 3.20, 3.21 and 3.22 of the report 
are general observations of the committee and hence, require no action and thus, do 
not warrant a specific reply by this Department. It is further, stated with respect to 
recommendation at paragraph 3.23 of the Committee Report it is stated that this 
Department concurs with the view of Election Commission on the above mentioned 
issue which has been stated in the following in Paragraph 3.11 at page 47 of the 
report and reads as under:- 
2.27 “According to the Election Commission of India, unless compelling reasons 
exist to alter a provision of the Constitution, it should remain unchanged. The 
Commission believes that this principle falls under the age requirement for eligibility 
to join Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, Legislative Assemblies, and Legislative Councils. 
The Commission has already considered the issue of aligning the minimum age for 
voting and contesting elections to Parliament, State Legislature, and local bodies and 
has found that it is unrealistic to expect 18-year-olds to possess the necessary 
experience and maturity for these responsibilities. Therefore, the minimum age for 
voting and contesting elections is appropriate. The Commission does not favour 
reducing the age requirement for membership of Parliament and State Legislatures 
and still maintains this view.”  
 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
 
2.28 Hence, in view of the Department this recommendation of the Committee does 
not appear to be feasible. 
 

20 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.29  The Committee suggests that both the Election Commission and the 
Government should prioritize providing comprehensive civic education programs to 
equip young people with the knowledge and skills necessary for political 
engagement. They can consider successful models from other countries, like 
Finland's citizenship education, and adapt them accordingly. (Para 3.24) 
2.30  The Committee urges Governments, political parties, and youth organisations to 
work together towards enabling greater youth participation in decision-making processes. 
This can be achieved through collaborations between governments and youth 
organisations and by promoting youth-led initiatives such as candidate training programs 
and mentorship schemes. By embracing the potential of its youth and creating an inclusive 
democratic process, India can foster a dynamic and diverse political arena that empowers 
young Individuals to contribute towards the country's development. (Para 3.25) 
Action Taken   
2.31 Comment for Para 3.24 and 3.25 of the report as received from the Election 
Commission of India: “SVEEP is designed according to the socio-economic, cultural 
and demographic profile of the state as well as history of electoral participation in 
previous rounds of elections. SVEEP works on the three-pronged strategy of 
Information, Motivation & Facilitation (IMF). The care interventions like Situation 
Analysis through Knowledge, Attitude and Practices (KAP) Surveys and existing 
data, chalking out targeted interventions like urban apathy, youth, women. PwD 
voters, inclusive, accessible and ethical elections etc. both communication and 
facilitation related, monitoring and evaluation, some of the recent and past initiatives 
taken towards improving voter experience and voter participation in the electoral 
process are as follows:- 
 1.  ECI Song Main Bharat Hoon-Hum Bharat ke Matdata Hain': The song 
is a depiction of the strength of the largest, most vibrant Indian Democracy 
which is unified by the power of Vote. The song 'Main Bharat Hoon- Hum 
Bharat ke Matdata Hain' is based on the philosophy that every voter of India 
represents the Country and its diversity, thus voters participation makes Indian 
Elections, inclusive. The ECI song produced by Election Commission of India 
was released on 13th National Voters Day, 2023. The song has been sung by 
about forty leading singers from different parts of the Country. The song was 
released in Hindi and Multi-lingual versions. This song is an attempt to enthuse 
a feeling of participation in the democratic process and educate voters 
regarding their rights and responsibility towards strengthening democracy. 

21 
 
 2.  National Voters' Day (NVD) celebration 2023:- NVD was started in 
2011 and since then, NVD has been institutionalized as an annual feature to 
celebrate democracy and electoral participation in the country. NVD which 
marks the Foundation Day of Election Commission of India, is celebrated on 
25th January. On National Voters Day, people across India celebrate their right 
to vote by celebrating democracy, exercising their civic duty, and participating 
in the democratic process. The celebrations take place at over ten lakh 
locations across the country, including polling stations areas, sub divisions, 
divisions, district and state headquarters. The theme for this year's NVD was 
"NOTHING LIKE VOTING, I VOTE FOR SURE". 
 3.  Matdata Junction: Matdata Junction is a year-long voter awareness 
programme which aimed to address the apathy of the urban population towards 
voting and creates awareness about the importance of elections and the safety 
of democracy. Matdata Junction series was launched on 7 October 2022 jointly 
by the Election Commission of India (ECI) and All India Radio (AIR). This 
radio series has a total of 52 episodes and this initiative taken for the creation 
of a link between the voters and ECI through creative storytelling over the 
medium of radio. Every episode is broadcast in 23 languages, including Hindi, 
English, and other regional languages. The programme has received a 
widespread response from the listeners. 
The programme is highly interesting and utilizes various formats of 
engagement for listeners including quiz, whereby every winner during the 
episode is rewarded with a certificate and ECI merchandise. 
 4.  National Level launch programme of Special Summary Revision-2024 
Special Summary Revision is an important annual activity of ECI whereby, 
enrolment of eligible young voters, de- duplication activities and purification 
of electoral rolls is ensured. It's an important event of its kind, as purification 
of electoral rolls, enable ECI in conduct of Free, Fair and Inclusive elections, 
in the country. 
 5.  Celebration of International Day for Old Persons: On the occasion of 
International Day of Older Persons (1st October 2023), the Election 
Commission had asked CEOs of all States and UTs to celebrate the occasion 
and to facilitate senior citizens (80+ age group) appropriately. 
 6.  National Voter Awareness Contest: The Contest was launched on NVD 
2022 with an aim of unleashing the potential and creativity of young minds 
while also strengthening democracy via voter participation. With 12.5 lakh 

22 
 
entries across all contest streams, the contest experienced unprecedented 
participation. This was followed by comprehensive screening procedure at the 
CEO/DEO and ECI levels. The winners have been felicitated on the 13th NVD 
by the CEOs of the state. 
 7.  EPIC Kit for newly registered voters: The Commission has designed this 
letter along with a Voter Guide giving out complete details of the Voting 
Process, EVM & VVPAT Information, COVID Protocols & BLO details 
among other important information. It also includes a feedback option to 
receive first hand inputs from young voters. 
 8.  Pocket size-Voter Guide Booklet: A pocket size version of the voter 
guide is being provided to every household in Poll Going States for ease of 
information on election related queries like searching name in the voter list, 
information on EVM VVPAT, helpline numbers, Assured Minimum Facilities 
at polling stations and COVID safety measures amongst others. 
 9.  Electoral Literacy Clubs: On the 8th National Voters Day of January 25, 
2018, the Election Commission of India (ECI) took a landmark step towards 
the cause of electoral literacy with its initiative ‘Mainstreaming of Electoral 
Literacy through Educational Institutions, Organizations and Communities in 
India', under its Systematic Voters Education & Electoral Participation 
(SVEEP) Programme. Formed in schools & colleges (Electoral Literacy 
Clubs), Communities (Chunav Pathshalas) and organizations (Voter 
Awareness Forums) across the country, these clubs of learning taught the value 
of democracy and one’s role in it through hands on experience to develop and 
strengthen the culture of electoral participation. As reported by the States/UTS, 
till now 9, 07,938 ELCs have been established across the country. 
 10.  Voter Awareness Forum: Voter Awareness Forums (VAFs) are informal 
forums for generating discussions and awareness around the electoral process, 
on the how, what and where of registration & voting, through the medium of 
real-time activities. Through VAFs in Government Departments, Government 
& Non-Government Organizations, Industrial establishments etc. The Election 
Commission of India creates to spread voter awareness and facilitate voter 
education. 
 11.  Chacha Chaudhary aur Chunavi Dangal:- To spread awareness and 
motivate today's young voter, Pran's Features have published a comic book 
"Chacha Chaudhary aur Chunavi Dangal" of 62 pages with Pran's popular 
cartoon characters Chacha Chaudhary, Sabu, Raaka, Dhamaka Singh and 

23 
 
Billoo. The comic book has same action and adventure along with a social 
message to vote. It contains ten episodic stories and a quiz covering a wide 
range of topics on Voter awareness by the Election Commission of India. 
 12.  Engagement of National Icon: - ECI associates itself with renowned 
Indians from various fields and designates them as ECI's national icons to 
motivate voters for participation in the festival of democracy. Last year, the 
Commission recognised famous actor Mr. Pankaj Tripathi as the National Icon 
and in year 2023, Sh. Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar, Cricketer & Sh. Rajkummar 
Rao, Actor have been engaged as National Icon. 
 13.  Turnout Implementation Plan (TIP): In order to enhance voter turnout, 
the Commission has introduced a concept of Assembly Constituency wise 
Turnout Implementation Plan (TIP), as a SVEEP Intervention/ strategy across 
the Country. In this, CEOs/ DEOs to compile a comprehensive gap analysis 
template, and accordingly prepare targeted SVEEP intervention for the 
concerned Assembly Constituency. These templates serve as the foundation for 
developing the TIP i.e. SVEEP interventions for the area. 
 14.  MoU with Ministry of Education:- The Commission has signed an MoU 
with Ministry of Education to attract the young minds studying in classes 6-12 
and at the college level towards understanding the democratic electoral 
process, teach them the specific details of the constitutional and legal regime of 
our electoral system, the core values and processes of Inclusive, accessible and 
ethical elections and the range of election technologies as a means of 
empowering the citizen through ease of registration and ease of participation as 
a voter, besides also strengthening the school and college campus system for 
facilitating registration of newly eligible voters. 
Apart from abovementioned initiatives, the Commission also use various 
multimedia platforms for voter awareness i.e. Digital Media, Print Media, 
Electronic Media through various campaigns. The Commission also directs 
States/UTs to take voter awareness initiatives at their level for maximum 
participation of the voters in electoral process.” 
2.32 Comments of this Department with regards to Para 3.24 and 3.25 of the report: 
In this regard, it is stated that this Department always collaborates with the ECI with 
respect to voter awareness programmes for the youth. 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1.  For elections to be truly free and fair, it is crucial to ensure that accurate 
information is provided to voters. The Supreme Court recognizes this importance and 
this Committee emphasizes the need to define what is considered a False 
Declaration/affidavit and when penalties, criminal action, or disqualification are 
warranted. It's important to note that minor factual errors should not be treated as 
significant enough to require penalization. (Para 2.28) 
Action Taken 
3.2 Comments received from the ECI: “Sec 125A of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951 defines false declaration in connection with an election. Section 
125A provides that: 
"A candidate who himself or through his proposer, with intent to be elected in an 
election:- 
(1) fails to furnish information relating to sub-section (1) of section 33A; or 
(ii) gives false information which he knows or has reason to believe to be false; or 
(iii) conceals any information, in his nomination paper delivered under sub-section 
(1) of section 33 or in his affidavit which is required to be delivered under sub-
section (2) of section 33A, as the case may be, shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time be in force, be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months or with fine, or with both. 
3.3 It is for the Ministry of Law & Justice to define as to what constitute false 
information.” 
  

25 
 
Further recommendation/observation: 
3.4 The Committee notes that while the existing legal provision under Section 
125A does address the issue of false declarations, the lack of clarity and 
standardisation in interpreting “false information” continues to create 
ambiguity in enforcement. The ECI’s response, though legally valid, is 
procedurally insufficient, as it does not reflect a proactive approach in aiding 
legislative clarity or suggesting improvements in the operational framework.  
ECI, being the nodal authority on election administration, is best positioned to 
recommend technical and procedural refinements, offer a detailed proposal and 
assist the Ministry to frame clear provision, in this regard. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.5  The Committee proposes that candidates who provide false information in their 
affidavits should be disqualified or declared ineligible, depending upon the severity 
of the action committed, regardless of whether they win the election.  The Committee 
believes this is essential to uphold the integrity of the democratic processes in 
accordance with the Constitutional mandate. The Committee recommends that the 
government sets up a verification process for affidavits and promptly informs the 
Election Commission of any false data to ensure adherence to regulations. (Para 2.29) 
Action Taken  
3.6 Comments received from the ECI: “It is for the government of India to take action.” 
3.7 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that the 
recommendation of the Committee at Paragraph 11 of chapter seven of the report 
mentioned above are general observations of the committee and thus, do not warrant 
a specific reply by this Department. Further in response to paragraph 12 of chapter 
seven it is stated that in view of the principle of separation of powers enshrined in the 
Constitution and to ensure free and fair election it would not be appropriate for the 
Government of India to be involved in verifying the Affidavits filed by the candidates 
fielded by the various political parties.  
Further recommendation/observation: 
3.8 The Committee's recommendation is a well-reasoned proposal to address 
a systemic gap to create a transparent and reliable affidavit verification 
mechanism. This would enhance electoral integrity and strengthen public trust 
in the democratic process.  However, both the ECI and the Department’s 
responses seems to be evasive and non-committal. The ECI shifts responsibility 

26 
 
to the government without offering any initiative or alternative mechanism. The 
Department, on the other hand, rejects the recommendation outright by 
invoking the principle of separation of powers, without exploring collaborative 
or independent institutional solutions.  This reflects a missed opportunity for 
reform, where instead of working together to design a verification framework 
involving independent agencies or third-party audits, both institutions have 
chosen to maintain the status quo. The Committee reaffirms that ensuring 
truthful disclosures in candidate affidavits is a shared institutional responsibility 
and requires a coordinated and accountable approach.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Government should use technology and data 
analytics for cross verification of affidavits with Govt. records in real-time. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
3.9  The Committee observes that the current punishment, which is only six months 
under section 125A, is insufficient and should be increased. The severity of 
punishment should be based on the severity of the offence committed. The 
Committee suggests that if someone files a false affidavit, their offence level should 
be taken into account and may be added to the list of offences under section 8(1) that 
lead to disqualification. (Para 2.35) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.10 Comments received from the ECI: “Comments against Para 2.31 of the report 
may please be referred to.” 
3.11 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has noted the recommendation of the Committee and the reform of amending the 
provision regarding false declaration is currently under examination of the 
government. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
3.12 The Committee strongly emphasizes that filing false affidavits undermines 
the sanctity of the electoral process and deceives voters, which should be treated 
as a grave electoral offence. Mere acknowledgement that the matter is under 
examination, without any definite timeline or indication of progress will not 
solve the problems.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that punishment 
under Section 125A be enhanced to act as a deterrent, and that the nature and 
impact of the falsehood should guide the degree of punishment. The Committee 

27 
 
also urges that serious instances of deliberate misrepresentation in affidavits 
should be included as grounds for disqualification under Section 8(1) of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951.  The Committee expects the Department 
to expedite the examination of this issue and furnish a detailed status report 
within a reasonable timeframe. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.13  The Committee suggests that in order to ensure fair elections and to protect 
citizens' rights according to Article 19(1)(a), punishment under section 125A should 
be increased to a maximum of two years in prison and a fine. However, this penalty 
should only be applied in exceptional cases, and not for minor errors or unintentional 
mistakes. Under the new provision, submitting a false affidavit should be considered 
a violation of constitutional provisions, and an election may be invalidated under sub-
Section 1(d) (iv) of section 100 of the Act. (Para 2.36) 
Action Taken  
3.14 Comments received from the ECI: “The Commission has already sent a 
proposal in this regard to Government of India vide its letter dated 
03/02/2011(Annexure-B).” 
3.15 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It is further stated that the 
recommendations of the Committee would be referred in future as and when electoral 
reforms are carried out on the above mentioned issue. Moreover, it is stated that the 
Law Commission in its 244th Report on Electoral Disqualifications also considered 
the issue and the report of the Law Commission is under consideration of the 
government. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
3.16 The Committee notes with concern that despite earlier recommendations 
from the Election Commission of India and observations made in the Law 
Commission’s 244th Report, there has been no concrete progress or timeline 
provided by the Department.  The Committee, therefore recommends that the 
Department should submit a detailed status report on the present stage of 
examination of these proposals, including any inter-ministerial consultations 
held, drafts prepared, or timelines envisioned for legislative action. 
  

28 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.17  Further, the Committee proposes that intentionally disregarding other 
requirements, such as the furnishing of information outlined in section 33A of the RP 
Act, 1951, as listed in section 125A, should be considered a "Corrupt Practice" under 
section 123 of the RP Act, 1951, for the case of filing election petitions. (Para 2.37) 
Action Taken  
3.18 Comments received from the ECI:  “Noted in the Commission.” 
3.19 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that this Department 
has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. Moreover, it is stated that 
the Law Commission in its 244th Report on Electoral Disqualifications also 
considered the issue and the report of the Law Commission is under consideration of 
the government. 
Further recommendation/observation:  
3.20 The Committee urges Government to act on the recommendation without 
awaiting consideration of the Law Commission’s report. Government should 
consult ECI and other relevant stakeholders to introduce appropriate 
amendments to Section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, so 
that deliberate violations of Section 33A are brought within the ambit of 
"corrupt practices". It is also impressed upon that a status report should be 
submitted to the Committee indicating specific steps taken and timeline 
proposed for the required legislative or regulatory measures. The Committee 
reiterates that transparency in candidate disclosures is fundamental for free and 
fair elections, and any failure to ensure enforceability of such provisions 
seriously impacts the integrity of electoral democracy. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.21  The Committee also recommends empowering the Commission of India with 
the authority to review and make a verdict on the falsification of affidavits based on 
referral from the Returning Officer. The Committee also suggests expediting the 
resolution of disqualification cases, as prolonged litigation undermines the intended 
purpose of the legal provisions. (Para 2.39) 
  

29 
 
Action Taken 
3.22 Comments received from the ECI:  “This has been noted in the Commission.” 
3.23 Comments of this Department: It is stated that this recommendation of the 
Committee has been noted in the Department. Further, it is stated that the delay in 
court cases are beyond the purview of this Department and the Government cannot 
direct the courts to take action. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
3.24 The Committee’s recommendation addresses a major structural 
deficiency in enforcement of electoral laws and attempts to streamline resolution 
of such cases and reduce reliance on slow-moving judicial processes by 
emphasizing that ECI be given adjudicatory powers to decide on false affidavit 
cases referral by RO. However, the Committee observes that response of both 
ECI and Department is not committal. Merely “noting” the recommendation, 
without evaluating feasibility or proposing a legislative mechanism will not 
suffice to tackle electoral fraud. Also, while judicial delays may indeed lie 
outside executive control, government may legislate or propose special fast-track 
mechanisms or tribunals, to decide on candidate disqualification.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendations the given its 132nd report 
of the Committee and also suggests for expediting the matter through active 
institutional collaboration and prompt legislative follow up. 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.25  The Committee suggests reducing the minimum age requirement for Assembly 
Elections candidacy. The Committee believes that this measure can promote a wider 
range of viewpoints in policy deliberations and results. Additionally, younger 
candidates can help connect different generations, facilitating discussions and 
cooperation. This can boost the credibility and faith in the political process. (Para 
3.23)  
Action Taken  
3.26 Comments received from the ECI: “No suggestion and recommendation has 
been made in the Para 3.20, 3.21 and 3.22 of the report and action on the Para 3.23 of 
the report pertain to Government of India.” 
3.27 Comments of this Department: In this regard, it is stated that the 
recommendations of the Committee at Paragraphs 3.20, 3.21 and 3.22 of the report 
are general observations of the committee and hence, require no action and thus, do 

30 
 
not warrant a specific reply by this Department. It is further, stated with respect to 
recommendation at paragraph 3.23 of the Committee Report it is stated that this 
Department concurs with the view of Election Commission on the above mentioned 
issue which has been stated in the following in Paragraph 3.11 at page 47 of the 
report and reads as under:- 
3.28 “According to the Election Commission of India, unless compelling reasons 
exist to alter a provision of the Constitution, it should remain unchanged. The 
Commission believes that this principle falls under the age requirement for eligibility 
to join Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, Legislative Assemblies, and Legislative Councils. 
The Commission has already considered the issue of aligning the minimum age for 
voting and contesting elections to Parliament, State Legislature, and local bodies and 
has found that it is unrealistic to expect 18-year-olds to possess the necessary 
experience and maturity for these responsibilities. Therefore, the minimum age for 
voting and contesting elections is appropriate. The Commission does not favour 
reducing the age requirement for membership of Parliament and State Legislatures 
and still maintains this view.”  
 
[Emphasis Supplied]  
 
3.29 Hence, in view of the Department this recommendation of the Committee does 
not appear to be feasible. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
3.30 The Committee recommends that the Department reconsider the proposal 
in view of evolving democratic trends and international practices that 
increasingly encourage youth participation in governance. For this, a 
comprehensive consultation process should be initiated, involving youth 
organizations, constitutional experts, and civil society stakeholders. 
Additionally, the feasibility of a phased or limited reduction in the minimum 
age, such as lowering it to 21 years, may be explored through a structured 
impact study to assess potential implications and benefits. 
 
 
 
  

31 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MINUTES 

33 
 


34 
 


35 
 
 
 
  


36 
 
 
  


37 
 
 
  


38 
 
 
  


39 
 
 
  


40 
 
  


41 
 
  


42 
 
  


43 
 
  


44 
 
  


45 
 
  


46 
 
  


47 
 
 
 
