 
 
                               
 
 
          PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
          RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022 / Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
120 
 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED TENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
"PENSIONER'S GRIEVANCES - IMPACT OF PENSION ADALATS AND CENTRALIZED 
PENSION GRIEVANCES REDRESS AND MONITORING SYSTEM (CPENGRAMS)" 
PERTAINING TO 
THE DEPARTMENT OF PENSION & PENSIONERS' WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 

 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 

 3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   5              
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                           6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                  8 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                               9 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                  13 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                 23                                                                                      
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
5.   RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                              28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. *Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
__________________________ 
* Nominated in place of Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary w.e.f. from 16.11.2022  

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this One Hundred Twentieth Report (120th) on Action Taken on One 
Hundred Tenth (110th) Report of the Committee on "Pensioners Grievances - 
Impact of Pension Adalats and Centralized Pensioners Grievance Redress and 
Monitoring System (CPENGRAMS)" pertaining to the Department of Pensions 
& Pensioners’ Welfare  (Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions). 
2. The 110th Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was 
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 10 th 
December, 2021.  
3. The Department of Pensions & Pensioners’ Welfare, of the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished their Action Taken 
Replies (except for one para ; para no. 3.28) on the 110th Report of the 
Committee on 14th March, 2022 and on para no. 3.28 of the Report on 6 th June, 
2022. The Committee considered the draft 120th Report and adopted the same in 
its meeting held on 22nd November, 2022. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
Dt. 22nd November, 2022 SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                      Law and Justice 
 

 6 
ACRONYMS 
AIS    All India Services 
 
ASI    Archaeological Survey of India 
 
BSF    Border Security force 
 
BPL    Below Poverty Line 
 
CAG  Comptroller and Auditor General 
 
   CAPF  Central Armed Police Forces 
 
CCS   Central Civil Services 
 
CGA  Controller General of Account 
 
CGDA  Controller General of Defence Accounts 
CGHS  Central Government Health Scheme 
 
CGEGIS  Central Government Employees' Group Insurance Scheme 
 
CGWB  Central Ground Water Board 
 
CISF  Central Industrial Security Force 
 
CPAO  Central Pension Accounting Office 
 
CPC   Central Pay Commission  
 
CPPC  Centralised Pension Processing Centres 
CPGRAMS Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
 
CPENGRAMS Centralized Pensioners Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
 
CRPF  Central Reserve Police Force 
CS(MA)               Central Services Medical Attendant 
CWC  Central Warehousing Corporation 
DDO  Drawing And Disbursing Officer 
DLC  Digital Life Certificate 
DoPPW  Department of Pensions and Pensioners' Welfare 
DoPT  Department of Personnel and Training 
EPS   Employees’ Pension Scheme 
EPFO  Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation 

 7 
FMA  Fixed Medical Allowances 
GPF   General Provident Fund 
GSI   Geological Survey of India 
HOD  Head of Department 
ITBP  Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force 
JKGAD  Jammu and Kashmir General Administrative Department 
IPPB  India Post Payments Bank 
   MACP  Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme 
   MeitY  Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MHA  Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIB   Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
NPCI  National Payment Corporation of India 
NSSO  National Sample Survey Office 
OPD  Out Patient Department 
PAO  Pay and Accounts Office 
PPO   Pension Payment Order 
PSB   Public Sector Banks 
PSU   Public Sector Undertakings 
RBI   Reserve Bank of India 
SMS  Short Message Service` 
SSB   Sashastra Seema Bal 
UIDAI  Unique Identification Authority of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 8 
R E P O R T  
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken 
by the Department of Pensions & Pensioners’ Welfare (Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions ) on the recommendations / observations of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred Tenth (110th) Report on 
"Pensioners Grievances - Impact of Pension Adalats and Centralized Pensioners 
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPENGRAMS) ", which was 
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 1 0th 
December, 2021. 
2. The Committee had made 28 recommendations/observations in its 110th 
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized 
under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies 
have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations ( 5) which have been accepted 
by the Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.12, 3.12, 3.23, 3.31 
and 4.7 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the 
Department has accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations (16) which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 3.3, 3.4, 3.10, 3.13, 3.19, 
3.20, 3.21, 3.22, 3.28, 3.35, 4.9, 4.14, 4.15, 5.11, 5.12  and 5.16 
of the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the explanations 
advanced by the Department and does not wish to pursue those 
as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations ( 7) in respect of which 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. 
with regard to paras 2.10, 2.16, 2.212, 2.30, 2.33, 3.37, and 4.13 
of the Report. The Committee does not accept the reasons given 
by the Department and reiterates the same. 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and 
detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further 
Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in 
the succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report 
(i.e. of 11 0th Report) have been  mentioned at the end of each 
recommendation/observation.   
--- 

 9 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CPENGRAMS AND PENSION ADALATS - WAY FORWARD 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.0 The Committee notes the fact that the Department has identified  core grievance prone 
areas which account for a large number of complaints lodged on CPENGRAMS portal. It 
appears to the Committee  that majority of grieva nces lodged on CPENGRAMS portal are 
related to  Delay or incorrect sanction of pension/family pension and other retirement  
benefits, Non-payment of arrears of pension, Revision of pension/family pension/pension 
payment Order, Issues related to medical  facilities and Other service -related issues such as 
fixation of pay, MACP.  The Committee recommends the Department to rope in Quality 
Council of  India and enable the agencies involved in Pension authorization, sanctioning, 
processing and disbursement to streamline their systems so as    to mitigate the volume of 
grievances and also to ensure citizen satisfaction. (2.12) 
Action Taken 
1.1 As advised by DRPSC, DoPPW has already roped in independent third parties vi z, 
Quality Council of India as well as Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) at 
different intervals to enable the agencies involved in Pension authorization, sanctioning, 
processing and disbursement to streamline their systems so as    to mitiga te the volume of 
grievances and also to ensure citizen satisfaction. This effort shall be continued. 
Further observation 
1.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the efforts of the 
Department in this regard.  
GRIEVANCES PERTAINING TO PENSION POLICY, PENSION STRUCTURE AND 
OTHER RETIREMENT BENEFITS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 The Committee desires that retirees should not be regarded as recipients of welfare 
dole but as the claimants of their rightful entitlements. As per the extant i nstructions laid 
down under Rule 64 of the CCS (Pension) Rules,1972, the payment of provisional pension 
will initially continue for a period not exceeding six months from the date of retirement. The 
period of provisional pension may be further extended, in  exceptional cases, with the 
concurrence of PAO and after approval by the Head of Department. However, the total period 
of provisional pension shall, in no case, be more than one year from the date of retirement. 
The Committee believes that every retiree s hould have a basic right to get “provisional” 
pension till their regular Pension Payment Order (PPO) is issued and other procedural 
formalities are completed. The Committee recommends that the Government may consider 
payment of “Provisional Pension” until the final pension is sanctioned to the retired 
Government servant. (3.12) 
 

 10 
Action Taken 
1.4 The recommendation of the Committee has been complied vide DoPPW’s OM No. 
12(9)/2020-P&PW(C)/E-6450 dated 23rd February, 2022.  
Further observation 
1.5 The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the prompt action taken 
by the Department in implementing the recommendation of the Committee in this 
regard. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6 The Committee notes that the Central Government provides health  care facilities for 
both, serving as well as, retired employees. However, the  Committee observes that serving 
employees of central government are covered under the Central Service (Medical 
Attendance) Rules, 1944 (CS  (MA) Rules), which provides facilities for a vailing medical 
facilities outside  CGHS covered areas. However, these Rules are not applicable to          
pensioners, and instead pensioners residing outside CGHS covered area are  entitled to Fixed 
Medical Allowance (FMA). The Committee is of the view  that non-applicability of CS 
(MA) Rules to pensioners residing outside CGHS areas has placed them at disadvantaged 
position vis -à-vis serving  employees. Accordingly, the Committee feels that either the 
provisions for medical facilities available to serving employees also needs to be extended                                                                  
to pensioners or instead of increasing FMA year after year, DoPPW may  moot a proposal for 
introducing cashless health insurance facilities for such   pensioners in nearby Private Health 
Centers in lieu of FMA on voluntary basis. (3.23) 
 
Action Taken 
1.7 Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is the administrative Department concerned 
with providing health and medical facilities to the serving Government se rvants as well as 
pensioner retired from Central Civil service. Therefore, the matter was taken up with that 
Ministry. 
1.8 Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that Central Government 
pensioners, not residing in a CGHS city have the option to a vail the CGHS facility for both 
IPD (indoor) and OPD (outdoor) treatment by paying the required CGHS contributions. The 
pensioners availing the CGHS facility for both IPD (indoor) and OPD (outdoor) treatment 
can have OPD treatment from a CGHS dispensary in  a nearby city and indoor medical 
treatment in any Government hospital and empanelled private hospitals in the cities covered 
by CGHS.   They can also get indoor medical treatment in any private hospital in emergent 
circumstances.  
1.9 Alternatively, Central Government pensioners not residing in a CGHS city can avail 
CGHS facility for IPD (indoor) treatment by paying the required CGHS contributions and 
also receive Fixed Medical Allowance in lieu of the OPD (outdoor) treatment.  
1.10 Those pensioners who ar e residing in a non -CGHS area and do not choose to avail 
CGHS facility by paying the required CGHS contributions are entitled to receive monthly 
Fixed Medical Allowance. At present, the amount of Fixed Medical Allowance is Rs. 1000/ - 

 11 
per month. Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare has separately mooted a proposal 
for increasing the amount of Fixed Medical Allowance in pursuance of the recommendation 
No.3.21 in the 110th Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
1.11 Thus, the pensioners have the option to avail CGHS facility while residing in a non -
CGHS area. Since serving Government servants residing in non -CGHS areas do not have the 
option to avail CGHS facility, they are covered by CS (MA) Rules. 
Further observation 
1.12 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.13 The Committee is of the view that Pensioners’ associations play an instrumental role 
in promoting Pensioners’ Welfare besides providing a platform for the retirees to project their 
grievances to the conc erned agencies/authorities for their overall welfare. The Committee is 
satisfied with the reply of the Department and hopes that additional funds will be provided to 
deserving associations based on their previous performance and fund utilization. (3.31) 
Action Taken 
1.14 DoPPW has decided to provide the additional funds to deserving associations. 
Accordingly a proposal for increase of Grant -in-Aid to Pensioners’ Associations from Rs. 
75000/- p.a. to Rs. 5,00,000/- has been submitted to IFD. 
Further observation 
1.15 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the government in providing additional 
funds to the deserving associations.  
GRIEVANCES PERTAINING TO AUTHORIZATION, SANCTION AND 
PROCESSING OF PENSION AUTHORIZATION, SANCTION AND PROCESSING 
OF PENSION 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.16 The Committee is of the view that end-to-end digitization of the  pension process, 
right from the stage of submission of pension papers by the retiring Government servant to 
Head of Office to the stage of forwarding of PPO and Special seal of Authority to the Pension 
Disbursing authority by Central Pension accounting Office will smoothen the pension process 
further, arrest the minutes of delays besides significantly bringing  down the volume of 
grievances being registered on CPENGRAMS. The Committee recommends the Department 
to apprise it whether Bhavishya software renders end-to-end digitization of the whole pension 
process possible in its Action Taken Replies. The Department may also inform the  
Committee about the status of implementation of Bhavishya Software by non-civil Ministries 
in its Action Taken Replies. (4.7) 
 
 
 

 12 
Action Taken 
1.17 Bhavishya software enables online filling of Pension forms and digitized till 
generation of e-PPO which may further be stored in DigiLocker of the retiree. 
1.18 M/o Defence after introduction of  SPARSH Portal, D/o Telecommunication with 
SAMPANN Portal, Railways with ARPAN software and D/o Posts with SAP module have 
made considerable headway in digitization of the pension settlement of their employees.  
Further observation 
1.19 The Committee appreciates the digitalization push by the Government in the 
matters of pension.  
 
--- 
  

 13 
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN 
BY THE MINISTRY 
GRIEVANCES PERTAINING TO PENSION POLICY, PENSION STRUCTURE AND 
OTHER RETIREMENT BENEFITS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 The Committee is of the view that the benefits provided by social security  systems 
should improve quality of life, support independence and compensate  for the loss of income 
after retirement. As regards CGEGIS, the Committee  notes that the monthly deduction as 
well as the insurance amount have remained unchanged since 1990. In the present context, 
the insurance cover provided by CGEGIS seems to be too meagre to be commensurate with 
the elevated cost of living.  Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government  to 
implement the recommendations of Seventh Central Pay Commission and  increase the 
Insurance amount to Rs. 50,00,000, Rs.25,00,000 and Rs.15,00,000  for Group 'A', 'B' and C 
officers/ staff respectively with commensurate enhancement in monthly contribution of 
Rs.5000, Rs.2500 and Rs.1500 for respective Groups of officers/ staff. (3.3) 
 
Action Taken 
2.1 Reference has been made to Department of Expenditure vide OM dated 21 December 
2021. 
Further observation 
2.2 The Committee takes note of the reply. The DPPW is expected to pursue the 
matter actively with the Department of Expenditure.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3 The Committee takes note of the fact that India has been undergoing rapid 
demographic changes over the last three decades. The mortality and morbidity rates have also 
changed remarkably. The Committee also notes that the 'Table of Benefits' published by the 
Ministry of Finance is based on the mortality rate of 3.75 per thousand per annum upto 
31.12.1987 and 3.60 per thousand per annum thereafter. Therefore, the Committee is of the 
opinion that there is a need to review the current mortality rate and accor dingly revise the 
apportionment between the Savings and Insurance funds. The Committee agrees with the 
observation made by the Seventh Central Pay Commission in  this regard and recommends 
that the ratio of Savings Fund to Insurance Fund  be modified from the present 70:30 to 75:25 
at the earliest. (3.4) 
 
Action Taken 
2.4 Reference has been made to Department of Expenditure vide OM dated 21 December 
2021. 

 14 
Further observation 
2.5 The Committee takes note of the reply. The DPPW is expected to pursue the 
matter actively with the Department of Expenditure.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6 The Committee is appreciative of the remedial action taken by the  Department of 
Pension and Pensioners' Welfare to resolve GPF related  grievances of pensioners vide their 
OM dated 17 th July, 2020 and expects  that the same would help in the regular updation of 
GPF account and in  addressing the issue of missing credit. The Committee further observes 
that in this era of digitization and online banking, Government accounting system operates as 
an integrated unit. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the extant practice of 
opening multiple GPF accounts by an employee in transferable establishment should be done 
away with and  that only single GPF account should be in operation throughout the duration 
of his/ her service. Further, if a Government servant is posted in an Establishment where GPF 
Rules are not applicable, the monthly deposit  in the Fund should be made from the salary of 
the subscriber and transferred by the borrowi ng organization to his/ her parent department  
where his/her GPF account is maintained through electronic mode under  intimation to the 
subscriber.(3.10) 
 
Action Taken 
2.7 Reference has been taken up with Comptroller General of Accounts (CGA ) Vide ID 
Note dated 03.02.2022. 
Further observation 
2.8 The Committee takes note of the reply. The DPPW is expected to pursue the 
matter actively with the CGA.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.9 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that on -going pandemic  has further 
caused delay in disbursal of pensionary benefits to employees  who got retired during this 
pandemic as they faced difficulties in submitting their Pension Forms to the Head of Office 
or furnishing the hard copy of Claim Form along with Service Book to the concerned Pay and 
Accounts Office in time. The retiree belonging to Central Armed  Police Forces (CAPFs) 
who usually are posted at different locations and  whose Heads of Offices sit in offices of 
cities different from where their Pay  and Accounts Office is located, faced more difficulties 
during this period. The  Department should intervene in the matter and come up with a 
viable solution and apprise the Committee in this regard. (3.13) 
 
Action Taken 
2.10 After Inter -departmental consultations, the Department will come -up with a viable 
solution and apprise the Committee in this regard. 
 
 

 15 
Further observation 
2.11 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects the Department to pursue the 
matter actively. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.12 The Committee notes that despite favorable decision of apex Court in a number of 
cases, all the expenditure incurred by a beneficiary of Central Government Health Scheme on 
his or her treatment in non - empanelled Private Hospitals should be reimbursed to t he 
beneficiary, the Government has not yet issued any general instructions in this regard and the 
pensioners/beneficiaries have to approach the Court of law for justice by spending a lot of 
money and time. The Committee believes that rules and procedures a re just a means to 
achieve a larger goal i.e. welfare of pensioners and they should not become an end in 
themselves. Strict adherence and conformity to norms, rules and procedures might lead to a 
situation where strictly following these norms, rules and pr ocedures instead of being means, 
become ends in themselves which create stumbling blocks in achieving mandated 
objectives/ends. The Committee is of the view there may be exigencies when the old age 
pensioners may directly approach non - empanelled hospitals  for treatment without first 
approaching a Government hospital. They should not be deprived of their rightful 
entitlements under any circumstances. The Committee recommends the Department to play a 
pro-active role and pursue the matter with the Ministry of Health and Family welfare.  
 
2.13 The Committee also recommends  the Department to seek details of action taken by 
the Ministry of Health and Family  Welfare on the judgments  of the Apex  Court in this 
regard and furnish them to the Committee in its Action Taken Replies. (3.19) 
 
Action Taken 
2.14 Inter-departmental consultations with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare will be 
held in this regard.  
2.15 In so far as, the action taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the 
judgements of the Apex  Court in this regard is concerned, it has been informed by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have been complied with and a high powered committee was constituted vi de MoHFW’s OM 
dated 22.05.2018. The judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case WP(C) No. 
694 of 2015, Hon’ble Supreme Court of India clarified that the order for reimbursement of 
balance amount is in respect of that particular case only. 
Further observation 
2.16 The Committee t akes note of the reply. The DPPW is expected to pursue the 
matter actively with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.17 The Committee is in agreement with the views of Pensioners’ Associations that 
CGHS should not confine its operations to metro cities, state capitals and a few large urban 
centres only. The Government may explore opening of CGHS centres at district location s or 

 16 
designate already functional Government hospitals in district headquarters as CGHS Centres 
to provide treatment to CGHS beneficiaries. The Government may also include settlement of 
medical facility related grievances of pensioners on the portal of CPE NGRAMS as requested 
by pensioners and the DoPPW should work in tandem with Health Ministry in this regard. 
(3.20) 
Action Taken 
2.18 Inter-departmental consultations with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare will be 
held in this regard.  
Further observation 
2.19 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects the Department to pursue the 
matter actively. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.20 The Committee takes note of the fact that Fixed Medical Allowance is  granted to 
pensioners who reside outside  the CGHS areas for meeting expenditure on day -to-day 
medical expenses (OPD) that do not require  hospitalization. The Committee also takes note 
of the request of Pensioners’ Associations for enhancement of Fixed Medical Allowance 
from Rs.1000 to Rs.3000 per month as most pensioners are suffering from  different diseases 
at old age and are unable to manage with meager pension as CGHS hospital is not available in 
every town. The Committee recommends DoPPW to take up this issue of enhancement of 
Fixed Medical Allowance with the Finance Ministry as Rs.1000 is a very meager amount for 
an old age pensioner and apprise the views of the Finance Ministry to  the Committee in its 
Action Taken Replies. (3.21) 
 
Action Taken 
2.21 DoPPW will take -up the issue of enhancemen t of Fixed Medical Allowance with the 
Finance Ministry. 
Further observation 
2.22 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects the Department to pursue the 
matter actively. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.23 The Committee takes note of the difficulties faced by pensioners in surrendering their 
Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) and getting FMA Surrender Certificate to avail CGHS 
indoor & outdoor (OPD) facilities,  and, accordingly, recommends DoPPW and CGA that the 
procedural loopholes coming in this way should be plugged and ensure that all such  
pensioners should get FMA Surrender Certificates in a hassle free manner  through online 
mode under intimation to the bank concerned and a timeline should be fixed in this  regard. 
(3.22) 
 
 

 17 
Action Taken 
2.24 Matter will be examined with the Controller General of Accounts (CGA). 
Further observation 
2.25 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects the Department to pursue the 
matter actively with the CGA. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.26 The Committee is very much cognizant of the social churning taking  place in our 
society over the years.  The joint family system is breaking  down giving way to nuclear 
families. The growth of nuclear families due to  geographical and social mobility have further 
led to rise in individualism  and individualistic thinking and the generation who want to live 
away from  shackles of joint families and patronage of elderly parents or grandparents.  
According to one estimate, by  2050, the share of population over the age of  60 is likely to 
increase significantly in the country.  In view of such changes  at societal level, we need to 
have a robust pension system for elderly which  can help them survive in this world without 
being a b urden on anyone. The  Committee is of the view that the Government should 
sympathetically consider the demand of Pensioners’ Associations for 5% additional quantum 
of Pension on attaining the age of 65 years, 10% on 70 years, 15% on 75 years and 20% on 80 
years to the Pensioners. The Committee recommends DoPPW to pursue vigorously with 
Finance Ministry and apprise the Committee of the outcome. (3.28) 
 
Action Taken 
2.27 On the basis of the recommendation of the Committee, before the proposal was 
moved to Department of Expenditure, the CPAO (in respect of civil pensioners), Railway 
Board (in respect of Railway Pensioners), Department of Posts ( in respect of Postal 
pensioners) and CGDA/PCDA (in respect of Defence civilian pensioners) were requested 
vide letter dated 20.01.2022 to furnish the information relating to number of pensioners and 
monthly pension disbursement to these age groups of pensioners (from 65 -70, 70-75 and 75-
80 years) to work out additional quantum of pension to be involved for these age groups. 
2.28 Accordingly, after working out the financial implications in this regard, the proposal 
was sent to Department of Expenditure (DOE) on 21.03.2022 for seeking their concurrence to 
the proposal. 
2.29 Department of Expenditure vide their ID Note dated 05.04.2022 advised as under: 
"DOPPW has not stated as to how the additional financial implications would be 
met by the Government. Hence, it is advised to first seek the comments of Budget 
Division of Department of Economic Affairs and then refer the proposal to DOE". 
2.30 Therefore, the matter was referred to Budget Division of Department of Economic 
Affairs on 07.04.2022 for seeking their comments on the proposal as advised by DOE. 
2.31 Department of Economic Affairs vide their OM dated 02.05.2022 observed as under: 
(i) The Government's pension liabilities on account of old pension scheme are not only 
huge (Rs. 2.07 lakh  crore in BE 2022 -2023), but also increasing year after year. 

 18 
Further increase in these liabilities on account of present proposal will put significant 
pressure on the Govt. finances, which may not be desirable, when, Govt. focus is to 
provide higher resou rces for productive investment while adhering to the path of 
fiscal consolidation. Further, with the improvement in health infrastructure and 
demographic changes, the overall life expectancy is expected to further go up. 
(ii) Govt. has taken a policy decision to implement NPS for new entrants in the Govt. 
Service, which is based on the principle that, the Govt. won't have to bear pension 
liabilities of the Govt. employees covered under NPS, after their retirement. 
Therefore, the present proposal needs to be eva luated with careful consideration of 
the above fact/policy. 
(iii)  Further, the current proposal, if accepted is also likely to have a cascading effect on 
the State Finances since similar demand will arise from the retired State Govt. 
employees. 
(iv)  Therefore, from fiscal perspective, such proposal may not be desirable. 
2.32 The matter was re-examined in the Department and with reference to the justifications 
given in the 110 th Report of the Committee itself and the grounds given in the 6 th CPC 
recommendation for ad ditional pension to pensioners/family pensioners of 80 years and 
above, the proposal was again sent to Department of Expenditure to consider the proposal for 
grant of 5% additional quantum of Pension on attaining the age of 65 years, 10% on 70 years, 
15% on 75 years and 20% on 80 years to the pensioners/family pensioners vide note dated 
19.05.2022. 
2.33 However, Department of Expenditure vide their ID Note dated 01.06.2022 has stated 
that the proposal has been examined in that Department and in line with th e views offered by 
Budget Division of DEA considering the fiscal perspective of the Govt., the proposal is not 
agreed to. This has the approval of the Finance Secretary & Secretary Expenditure. 
Further observation 
2.34 The Committee takes note of the reply  and do not wish to pursue this matter for 
now in wake of the reply of the Department. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.35 The Committee feels that DoPPW should pursue the matter of implementation of 
MACP w.e.f 1 st January, 2006 with DoPT as it will  give relief to pensioners retiring in the 
intervening period i.e. from January, 2006 to August, 2008 as all other benefits were given to 
them from January 2006 as per 6th CPC recommendations. The Committee also recommends  
DOPPW to consider the case of Pensioner s’ who retired on 30 th June and  were denied the 
increment on the plea that next date of retirement is 1st July. (3.35) 
 
Action Taken 
2.36 As advised by DRPSC, the DoPPW  pursued the matter with DOPT vide OM dated 
19.01.2022 who, in turn, have informed that t he issue of effective date of implementation of 
MACPS has been addressed by Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in its Order dated 
28.04.2021 in Civil Appeal No. 1579/2021 [arising out of SLP (C) No. 15572/2019] of Union 
of India V/s R. K. Sharma & Others wherein the Apex Court has upheld that date of 
implementation of the MACP Scheme is from 01.09.2008.  In its order, the Hon’ble Court 

 19 
has also overturned the earlier decision in Balbir Singh Turn case and held that benefits under 
the MACPS cannot be claimed from 1.1.2006.  Instructions have been issued to 
Ministries/Departments vide DoP&T OM No. 35034/3/2015 -Estt. (D) dated 13.07.2021 to 
defend all matters and dispose of rep resentations based on Order dated 28.04.2021 of Apex 
Court. 
2.37 It is mentioned that the subject -matter of increment and retirement age/date are 
administered by DOPT. Therefore, the reference in this regard was made to DOPT who have 
examined the matter and declined the request with the following grounds: 
(i) In terms of the provisions of Rule 40 of CCS (Leave) Rules, 1972, the 
Government servants who are on Earned Leave/Commuted Leave/Half Pay 
Leave/Leave Not Due etc.  on the due date of their increment, a re not granted 
the benefit of annual increment till they join duty on expiry of such leave.  
Accordingly, in the present case since the employees have retired from 
Government service on 30 th June and therefore not on duty as on 1 st July, the 
annual increment cannot be released on 1st July to these employees. 
(ii) Further, as per the provisions of FR 9 (21), 9 (6), 17 (1), 22, 26 (a), 56 (a) and 
Rule 14 of Pension Rules, as person is entitled for pay, increment and other 
allowances only when he is entitled t o receive pay out of Consolidated Fund of 
India and continues to be in Government Service.  Accordingly, a person who 
retires on the last working day would not be entitled for any increment falling 
due on the next day and also payable on the next day there after as he shall cease 
to be in Government Service.  Granting him the increment earlier than the date 
on which it falls due and becomes payable, shall imply that he has been granted 
increment in the same month in which he has retired, i.e. one month earli er.  
Thus, the official will not complete the necessary qualifying service required for 
earning an increment, which shall be in contravention of the extant provisions. 
(iii) Further, Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad in its judgement in 
the c ase of C. Subbarao in the year 2005 (WP No. 22042 of 2003) had also 
observed that “as per Rule 14 of the Pension Rules, a person who retires on the 
last working day would not be entitled for any increment falling due on the next 
day and payable next day th ereafter, because he would not answer the tests in 
these Rules.” 
Further observation 
2.38 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
GRIEVANCES PERTAINING TO AUTHORIZATION, SANCTION AND 
PROCESSING OF PENSION  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.39 The Committee notes that CPAO’s web responsive Pensioners’ service offers a single 
point web solution for pensioners to obtain comprehensive information relating to status of 
pensions and pension payments. However, the Committee observes that this web portal needs  
more publicity. The Committee is of the view that the success of any initiative depends upon 
the extent of its reachability to the targeted population  groups. The Committee also 

 20 
emphasizes that CPAO should publicise the portal through all possible means including the 
print and electronic media so that the benefits of the portal reach targeted      beneficiaries. (4.9) 
 
Action Taken 
2.40 Reference has been made to CPAO vide OM dated 09.03.2021. 
Further observation 
2.41 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects the Department to pursue the 
matter actively with the CPAO. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.42 The Committee is of the view that Head of Office in a Ministry/Department may 
consider obtaining the forms/ pension papers from the retiring Government servant one year 
instead of six months before his or her date of retirement and determining the amount of 
Government dues (like House Building Advance & other advances, excess  payment of pay 
and allowances,  etc.) to be recovered from the gratuity and intimating  the same to Pay & 
Accounts Office. Besides, in cases of authorization of Family Pension on death of a serving 
Government servant, the concerned Ministry/Department may keep a record of dependents of  
serving employees in a descending order in terms of their eligibility as it will help fast 
pace verification and decision in regard to the eligible claimant for family pension. (4.14) 
Action Taken 
2.43 Earlier, the work of preparation of pension papers was required to be undertaken two 
years before a Government servant was due to retire on superannuation. This period of two 
years was considered to be on a higher side. The rules were, therefore, amended o n 
29.08.2014 and as per the amended rules, the work of verification of service, determination of 
qualifying service and emoluments and assessment of outstanding dues against the retiring 
Government servant is required to be undertaken one year before the d ate of his retirement. 
The period of one year provided in the existing rules for this purpose is also in line with the 
recommendation of the Committee.  
2.44 With the introduction of Bhavishya, the online pension sanction and tracking system, 
the period of  six months provided in the existing rules for submission of pension papers by 
the retiring Government servant is considered to be adequate. 
2.45 A serving Government servant is required to submit the details of all members of 
his/her family in Form 4 of t he CCS (Pension) Rules, 2021. Similarly, the retiring 
Government servant is also required to submit the details of all members of his/her family in 
Form 4 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 2021. This Form is kept in the pension file of the retired 
Government ser vant and the family pension file of the deceased Government 
servant/pensioner. Thus, the details of all members of the family are already being kept in 
record and the same are used for determining the eligibility of family members for family 
pension as and when the need arises. 
Further observation 
2.46 The Committee takes note of the reply and does not wish to further pursue the 
matter in light of reply furnished by the Department.  

 21 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.47 The Committee also expresses its concern with regard to discontinuation/ delay in 
disbursement of Family Pension, especially in the  case of pensioners and family pensioners 
of paramilitary forces based in rural areas due to various reasons. Further, as per the existing 
instructions, the last plac e of posting is considered as place of pension  disbursement leading 
to harassment of family pensioners of paramilitary  forces who have laid their life in the line 
of duty. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that for the benefit of pensioners/family 
pensioners’ of paramilitary forces, the Battalion Headquarter should be  made place of 
pension’s disbursement, instead of last place of posting.  Further, the Committee also feels 
that Department needs to explore the  feasibility of giving a choice to pensioners to choose 
place of pension disbursement in case of transferable job. (4.15) 
Action Taken 
2.48 Meeting with Ministry of Home Affairs and all CAPFs will be convened in this 
regard. 
Further observation 
2.49 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects the Department to pursue the 
matter actively with the CAPFs. 
GRIEVANCES PERTAINING TO DISBURSEMENT OF PENSION 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.50 The Committee is highly appreciative of the Department for leveraging advanced 
technology to the maximum possible extent and for leaving no stone unturned in redressing 
pensioners’ grievances and promoting their welfare. Infact, the Committee wishes that e ach 
Ministry and Department of the Government should work with similar conviction in public 
interest. The Committee recommends the Department to gradually expand the scope of DLC 
from Home project, Doorstep Banking and submission of DLC through postal agen t to all 
major cities and towns. The  Committee recommends the Department to ensure that Video 
based Customer Identification Process and Facial recognition technologies are  
operationalized on a wider scale at the earliest. (5.11) 
Action Taken 
2.51 DoPPW will comply with the recommendations. 
2.52 Video based Customer Identification Process to submit Life Certificate has been 
implemented by some of the Banks like State Bank of India (SBI), Punjab National Bank 
(PNB), UCO Bank.  
2.53 Further, Face Authentication Technology has been launched by Hon’ble MOS(PP) on 
29.11.2021 to submit Life Certificate in which one can submit Life Certificate with Android 
Mobile without any external device. 
 
 

 22 
Further observation 
2.54 The Committee takes note of the reply and do es not wish to further pursue the 
matter in light of reply furnished by the Department.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.55 The Committee is of the view that elderly people, especially those  aged 70 and above 
and those with physical infirmities experience   inconvenience in withdrawing their pension 
amount from the Bank. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Department to take up the 
matter with Reserve Bank of India and Ministry of Finance and assess the  feasibility of 
utilizing the Business Correspondent network to enable senior  citizens to  withdraw their  
pension amount from the comfort of their homes. (5.12) 
Action Taken 
2.56 As advised by DRPSC, DoPPW will take up the matter with RBI and M/o Finance. 
Further observation 
2.57 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects the Department to pursue the 
matter actively with the RBI and M/o Finance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.58 The Committee notes that Central Pension Processing Centres (CPPC) had been 
established as the central repository of data to fa cilitate data management and processing in a 
centralised manner. The intention was that the CPCC, one for each bank, would function as a 
back office to  support the functioning of the large number of pension paying branches.  The 
pension paying branches were to continue to be interface with individual pensioners. The 
Committee notes that pension paying branches,  instead of resolving issues raised by the 
pensioners, either direct the pensioners to approach the CPPC or pass on the responsibility for 
delays and inaccuracy in payment to the CPPC. The Committee takes cognizance  of the 
difficulties faced by Banks in processing family pension cases but  also feels that Bank 
officials need to be properly sensitised about their role  and to appreciate the special needs of 
senior citizens. The Committee also  recommends the Department to discuss the matter with 
RBI and Ministry of Finance and assess the feasibility of appointing a Pensioner Ombudsman 
on the lines of Bank Ombudsman for resolving grievances arising out of  disbursement of 
pensions and apprise the Committee regarding the same in  its Action Taken Replies. (5.16) 
Action Taken 
2.59 As advised by DRPSC, DoPPW will take up the matter with RBI and M/o Finance. 
Further observation 
2.60 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects the Department to pursue the 
matter actively with the RBI and M/o Finance. 
--- 
  

 23 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY 
THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CPENGRAMS AND PENSION ADALATS - WAY FORWARD 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1 The Committee is concerned to note that, on an average 20% of grievances are not 
being disposed of within the stipulated time limit of 60 days. The Committee recommends 
the Department to instruct the Ministries/Departments of Central Government to constitute 
social audit panels to identify core grievance prone areas and streamline their systems 
accordingly. The Committee further recommends DoPPW to ta ke up the matter with higher 
authorities of the concerned Ministries/Departments and impress upon them to resolve the 
grievances within the prescribed time limit. (2.10) 
Action Taken 
3.2 As advised by DRPSC, Department of Pension & Pensioners’ Welfare (DoP PW) will 
instruct all Ministries/Departments of Central Government to constitute social audit panels to 
identify core grievance prone areas and streamline their systems accordingly. 
3.3 DoPPW has identified the Ministry/Department where delays have been ob served in 
disposal of grievances and regular Inter -Ministerial Review meetings are being held with 
them. 
3.4 DoPPW has issued an advisory vide OM dated 6.08.2021  to all 
Ministries/Departments stipulating that every Nodal Officer undertake a weekly review o f 
pending grievances in the portal and that the responsibility lies of the concerned 
Ministry/Department to follow up the matter with subordinate/attached units for an early 
resolution/disposal of the pension grievance. 
Further observation 
3.5 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Department. Of late there has been 
a trend that Grievances are not accorded priority they deserve by various Ministries/ 
Departments/ Organizations. Firstly the grievances are not addressed on time and the 
quality of redres sal is also a matter of concern. Thus, there is a need for a system of 
reward and punishment while dealing with the grievances, especially pensioners 
grievances. Otherwise the guidelines and instructions issued by the DPPW will remain 
only on paper and the  individuals/organizations will be violating them with impunity. 
There is also a need to sensitise the officials dealing with grievances by providing them 
right training in order to make them mindful of the citizen's grievances. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.6 The Committee notes that there is a steep increase in the number of  re-registered 
grievances over the years. This, coupled with the feedback  given by the aggrieved, drives 
home the point that the quality of grievance redressal is not satisfactory. The Department may 

 24 
put an accountability mechanism in place and explore the feasibility of holding the grievance  
redressal authorities concerned answerable for summarily disposing of grievances without 
appropriate qualitative action. (2.16) 
 
Action Taken 
3.7 An Appeal module to attend such grievances/cases which have been summarily 
disposed of without appropriate qualitative action has been introduced in CPENGRAMs. In 
cases where wilful lapses for summarily disposing of grievances without appropriate 
qualitative action are observed, the concerned departments are free to take disciplinary action. 
Further observation 
3.8 As suggested above, the Department should devise a mechanism to punish erring 
officials by imposing monetary cost or recommending disciplinary a ction against them. 
It should not be left to the concerned organisation.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.9 The Committee acknowledges the consistent efforts being made by the Department 
to improve the effectiveness of grievance redressal machinery. The Committee in its 100th 
Report recommended the Department to strengthen the Grievance Redressal mechanism and 
make it more citizens friendly. The Committee desired that there should be a nodal  authority 
in the department to whom complaints against the orders/decisions of individual 
Ministries/Departments can be made. The  Committee hopes that the appellate mechanism 
shall be operationalized at  the earliest. The Department may apprise the Committee about 
the status      of appellate mechanism in its Action Taken Replies. (2.21) 
 
Action Taken 
3.10 There is already an Appellate Authority for each Ministry/Department who may take 
an appropriate decision on the appeal filed by the dissatisfied Petitioner. 
Further observation 
3.11 The Committee takes note of the reply. However, the appellate authority should 
be of appropriate seniority and he/she should also be empowered to recommend action 
as deem fit against those officials who are habitually responsible for delayed action or 
summary disposal of grievances without any qualitative action.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.12 The Committee is pleased to note that Pension Adalat has emerged as an effective 
platform for the redressal of pension grievances. The Committee recommends the 
Department to harness video conferencing technology and hold Virtual All India Pension 
Adalats on a half -yearly basis so that the grievances which could not be resolved through 
CPENGRAMS during the six -month period and beyond can be redressed at once. The 
Committee urges the Department to ensure that pension Adalats cover all 
Ministries/Departments having long pending grievances on a rotational basis so that no 
Ministry/ Department is left out. Further, the Committee impresses upon individual 

 25 
Ministries/Departments to ensure that pension adalats should be presided over by officers of 
appropriate level and reasonable seniority having sufficient knowledge of  current as well as 
past rules and procedures. (2.30) 
Action Taken 
3.13 DoP&PW is convening a Nation-wide Pension Adalat in third week of March, 2022, 
by each Ministry/Department/Organization/Field formation through Video Conferencing. 
Further observation 
3.14 Considering the effectiveness of Pension Adalats in disposing off the grieva nces 
of the pensioners, the frequency of conducting it should be increased. The Department 
should explore the feasibility of holding Pension Adalats regularly and more frequently. 
Further, as per the experience gained during COVID times, the practice of ho lding 
Pension Adalats through video conferencing should be promoted. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.15 The Committee believes that denial of timely justice amounts to denial of justice 
itself. The Committee is of the considered view that the  elderly should not be forced to 
approach Courts to claim their rightful  entitlements. The Committee accordingly 
recommends the Department to  explore the feasibility of institutionalizing an alternative 
dispute resolution mechanism such as pre -litigation conciliation to r esolve the grievances of  
pensioners at pre-litigation stage itself. (2.33) 
 
Action Taken 
3.16 DoPPW will consult Department of Legislative Affairs and informed the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
Further observation 
3.17 There are about 310 cases relatin g to pension matters pending in various 
Courts/Tribunals. It is very disheartening to note that the pensioner, who also happens 
to be senior citizens, have to take recourse to litigation for claiming their post 
retirement entitlements. Litigation somewhere  is a pointer towards failure of grievance 
redressal mechanism. Litigation is a long drawn and costly process and considering the 
old age of the pensioners, the Committee recommends that the DPPW should explore 
the feasibility of resolving disputes between  the pensioners and the Government by way 
of ADR mechanisms like Mediation etc., which is a cost effective and efficient system of 
dispute resolution. The Department may consult the Department of Legal Affairs and 
try to institutionalize pre-litigation Mediation.  
GRIEVANCES PERTAINING TO PENSION POLICY, PENSION STRUCTURE AND 
OTHER RETIREMENT BENEFITS 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.18 The Committee feels that widows of paramilitary/ civilian govt. servants should not 
be discriminated  against widows of Defence forces Personnel and recommends that the 
Government should sympathetically  consider the plight of such women and explore the 

 26 
feasibility of amending  Central Civil Services Pension rules to enable widows of 
Paramilitary/Civil Government Servants to get ful l liberalized pension at par with widows of  
defence personnel even after their remarriage. (3.37) 
Action Taken 
3.19 Central Government Civil Employees who sustained injury or contract diseases or die 
or a disabled or in capacitated on account of causes which are accepted as attributable to or 
aggravated by Government Service are eligible for special benefits under CCS ( EOP) Rules, 
1939. Families of Central Government civilian employees paid from civil estimates who 
sustain injuries or contract diseases and die on account of causes which are accepted as 
attributable to or aggravated by Government services, are eligible fo r an extraordinary family 
pension under the CCS (Extraordinary Pension Rules). The rates of extraordinary family 
pension and disability pension under the EOP Rules are higher than the normal family 
pension and invalid pension under the CCS (Pension) Rules. 
Further observation 
3.20 The Paramilitary Forces have to face hardship in the line of their duty. They 
have also been kept outside the old pension scheme and thus on death or disability on 
active duty the family pensioner do not get sufficient amount of p ension to sustain their 
lives. The Committee therefore feels that Government should have a liberal view and 
consider the case of widows of Paramilitary Personnel to get full liberalized pension at 
par with the widows of defence personnel.  
GRIEVANCES PERTA INING TO AUTHORIZATION, SANCTION AND 
PROCESSING OF PENSION AUTHORIZATION, SANCTION AND PROCESSING 
OF PENSION 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.21 The Committee recommends the Department to instruct the Ministries/Departments of 
the Central Government to be proactive, reach  out to the family pensioners and also assist 
them in claiming family pension. 
3.22 The Committee  notes that the procedure of obtaining  medical certificate/disability 
certificate by children of a deceased Government Servant is Kafkaesque and needs to  be 
simplified. (4.13) 
Action Taken 
3.23 DoPPW will instruct  the Ministries/Departments of the Central Government to be 
proactive, reach out to the family pensioners and also assist them in claiming family pension.  
Obtaining medical certificate/disability certificate by children of a deceased Government 
Servant has been simplified. One can obtain disability certificate from:  
(i) an authority competent to issue disability certificate in accordance with the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016), the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Rules, 2017 and the guidelines and notifications issued by the Central 
Government or a State Government or a Union territory administration; or 

 27 
(ii)  a Medical Board comp rising of a Medical Superintendent or a Principal or a Director 
or Head of the Institution or his nominee as Chairman and two other members, out of 
which at least one shall be a Specialist in the particular area of disability including 
mental retardation. 
Further observation 
3.24 Family pensioners have to face many hurdles to get their pension on time. On 
one hand they have to grapple with the loss of the breadwinner and on other hand they 
struggle to procure all the documents to get their pension started. Accordingly, the 
Departments/Organizations should be sensitive and forthcoming in dealing with family 
pension cases.   
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 28 
 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 02:00 PM on 22.11.2022 in 
Committee Room No. 4 , Block -A, Parliament  House Annexe Ext. Building, 
New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shri Sanjay Raut 
(vi) Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
(vii) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(viii) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(ix) Shri P. Wilson 
 
 Lok Sabha 
(x) Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
(xi) Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
(xii) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(xiii) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xiv) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xv) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xvi) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
 

 29 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee. He then apprised that the Committee will first consider and adopt 
two reports followed by *                          *                                         * 
3. The Committee then considered and  unanimously adopted the 1 20th 
Report on Action taken on 11 0th Report of the Committee on 'Pensioner' 
Grievances - Impact of Pension Adalats and Centralised Pension Grievances 
Redress and Monitoring System and 121st Report on Action Taken on 11 3th 
Report of the Committee on Demand for Grants (2022 -23) pertaining to the 
Department of Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances & 
Department of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare. 
4. *                                                      *                                                   * 
5. *                                                      *                                                    * 
6. *                                                       *                                                   *  
7. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 8. The meeting adjourned at 04.05 PM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
22nd November, 2022                                                                       DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
*relates to other matters 
 