Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY FIFTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
The Representation of the People
(Second Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013
REPORT NO. 
65


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY FIFTH REPORT
The Representation of the People
(Second Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-128

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 3—8
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 9— 17

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2013)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Smt. Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chaterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Sixty-fifth Report of the Committee on the Representation of the People (Second
Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013 . The Bill seeks to amend Section 8(4) of the Representation of
People Act, 1951 in order to nullify the Supreme Court Judgment on the 10
th July, 2013 in the Lilly
Thomas Vs. Union of India and Others case.
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committees, Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
30
th August, 2013 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 27 th September, 2013 for examination
and report.
3. In the meantime, on the 24 th September, 2013, the Representation of People (Amendment and
Validation) Ordinance, 2013 was placed before Hon’ble President of India for assent by the Government
to give effect to the provisions of the above-mentioned Bill since the said Bill remained pending in the
Rajya Sabha after the adjournment of the 229
th Session of the Rajya Sabha. However, on the
2nd October, 2013, a Cabinet Decision was taken and the said Ordinance was withdrawn by the
Government. On 27 th November, 2013, the Law Minister had given notice of his intention to move
for leave to withdraw the Representation of People (Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013, during the
230
th Session of Rajya Sabha.
4. In the event of the above circumstances, the Committee considered the notice of motion for
the withdrawal of the Bill which stands automatically referred to it in view Rules 275 read with 118
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) in its
meeting held on the 5
th December, 2013 and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the
6th December, 2013.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the opinion of the Committee has been printed
in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
New Delhi; Chairman,
December 6th, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
Agrahayana 16, 1935 ( Saka) on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice

(iv)

1
REPORT
The Representation of the People (Second Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013, as introduced
in the Rajya Sabha on 30 th August, 2013 was referred for examination and report within 2 (two)
months to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice on the 27
th September, 2013. A copy of the Bill is enclosed (Annexure-I).
2. The Bill seeks to amend Section 8(4) of the Representation of People Act, 1951 in order to
nullify the Supreme Court Judgment dated the 10 th July, 2013 in the Lilly Thomas Vs. Union of India
and Others case. That Section provides for a window to the legislators convicted of criminal offences
to file an appeal or revision against their conviction and further permit them to retain their membership
until the appeal or revision is disposed of. The said judgement has held that the Parliament has no
power to enact sub-section (4) Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and declared
that the said provision is ultra-vires of the Constitution.
3. The amendment proposed in the Representation of the Peoples (Second Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2013, inter alia , is to substitute sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the Act, so as to
provide that the disqualification in view of conviction under sub-section (1), (2) or (3) of the said
Section in respect of a Members of Parliament or the Legislature of a State shall not take effect, if
an appeal or application for revision is filed in respect of the conviction and sentence within the period
of ninety days from the date of conviction and such conviction or sentence is stayed by a Court, and
further to provide that after the date of conviction and until the date on which the conviction is set
aside by the Court, the member shall neither be entitled to vote nor draw salary and allowances, but
may continue to take part in the proceedings of the Parliament of the Legislature of the State, as the
case may be.
4. In the meantime, on the 24
th September, 2013, the Representation of People (Amendment and
Validation) Ordinance, 2013 was placed before Hon’ble President of India for assent by the Government
to give effect to the provisions of the above-mentioned Bill since the said Bill remained pending in
the Rajya Sabha after the adjournment of the 229
th Session of the Rajya Sabha. However, on the
2nd October, 2013, a Cabinet Decision was taken and the said Ordinance has been withdrawn by the
Government.
5. On November 27, 2013, the Union Law Minister vide his letter No. H.11019/7/2013/Leg.II
addressed to the Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha (Annexure-II) has given notice of his intention to
move for leave to withdraw the Representation of People (Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013,
during the ensuing Session of Parliament.
6. The Committee in its meeting held on the 5
th December, 2013, considered the Notice given by
the Minister of Law and Justice conveying his intention to withdraw the Representation of People
(Second Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013, in the forthcoming Session of Parliament.
7. The Committee notes the fact that Government had withdrawn the Representation of
People (Second Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2013. The said Ordinance is similar to
the Bill referred to this Committee for examination and report. The Committee feels that as
the said Ordinance and the Bill are dealing with the same subject and the Government has
already withdrawn that Ordinance, it would now be appropriate for the Committee to agree to
the Notice given by the Minister of Law and Justice to withdraw the Bill under consideration
of the Committee.

MINUTES

5
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 5 th December, 2013 in Main Committee, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Anu Aga
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shir P.C. Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Arjun Meghwal
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Shri S. Semmalai
12. Shrimati Meena Singh
13. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
14. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
15. Shri Suresh Kashinath Tawar
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
2. Chairman welcomed the Members present and made brief highlights on the agenda for
consideration. He informed that the Union Law Minister had given a Notice of his intention to move
for leave to withdraw the Representation of the People (Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013 which
was referred to the Committee for examination and report on the 27
th September, 2013. He also drew
the attention of the Members to the relevant rules of the Rule of Conduct of Business in the Council
of States relating to such instances, i.e. Rule 275 which States that in other respects (matters not
specified in the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee), rules

6
applicable to Select Committee on Bills in the Council shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Department-
related Standing Committee. As per the first proviso to Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure, a notice
for withdrawal of a Bill which has been referred to the Select Committee automatically stands referred
to that Committee for expressing its opinion, and after the Committee has expressed its opinion in a
report to the Council on the motion for withdrawal is listed in the list of Business.
2. Thereafter, Members expressed that in view of the Representation of the People (Amendment
and Validation) Ordinance, 2013, which was proposed to be promulgated to give effect to the subject
matter of the Bill having already been withdrawn by the Government, it would only be appropriate to
agree to the Notice of the Minister of Law and Justice for withdrawing of the Bill.
3. The Committee then decided to meet the next day, Friday, the 6
th December, 2013 for
consideration and adoption of its report on the said Notice.
4. The meeting adjourned at 3.20 P.M.

7
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 6 th December, 2013 in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shir P.C. Gaddigoudar
7. Shri D.B.Chandre Gowda
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Arjun Meghwal
10. Shri Pinaki Misra
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
13. Shri S. Semmalai
14. Shrimati Meena Singh
15. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
16. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
17. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite,  Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
2. Chairman welcomed the Members present and informed them of the sad demise of Mr. Nelson
Mandela, South Africa’s first democratically elected President and recipient of Nobel Peace Prize. The
Chairman made obituary reference to Mandela and extolled his anti-apartheid revolution, his steadfast
drive for democracy and a free society and his philanthropic doctrines. Thereafter, Members of the
Committee observed two minutes silence as a mark of respect to the departed soul.
7

8
3. The Committee then considered the draft Sixty-fifth Report on the Representation of the People
(Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013 and adopted the same.
4. The Committee decided to present the Report to both Houses of Parliament on the
9th December, 2013. It also authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
to present the Report to Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar and in his absence, Shri Abhijit
Mukherjee to lay the same in Lok Sabha.
5. The meeting adjourned at 10.20 
A.M.

9
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
30 Aug., 2013
Bill No. LXII of 2013
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(SECOND AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People
(Second Amendment and V alidation) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the
10th day of July, 2013.
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in section 8,
for sub-section ( 4), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“( 4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section ( 1), sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3), a disqualification
11
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 8.
43 of 1951.

12
under any of the said sub-sections shall not, in the case of a
person who on the date of the conviction is a member of
Parliament or the Legislature of a State, take effect, if an appeal
or application for revision is filed in respect of the conviction
and sentence within a period of ninety days from the date of
conviction and such conviction or sentence is stayed by the
court:
Provided that after the date of the conviction and until the
date on which the conviction is set aside by the court, the
member shall neither be entitled to vote nor draw salary and
allowances, but may continue to take part in the proceedings of
Parliament or the Legislature of a State, as the case may be.”.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree
or order of any court, tribunal or other authority, the provisions of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, as amended by this Act, shall
have and shall be deemed always to have effect for all purposes as
if the provisions of this Act had been in force at all material times.
Validation.
43 of 1951.

13
13
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 provides for the
conduct of elections of the Houses of Parliament and the House or
Houses of the Legislature of each State, the qualifications and
disqualifications for membership of those Houses, the corrupt practices
and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the
decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with
such elections.
2. Section 8 of the said Act provides that a person convicted
of an offence mentioned in the said section shall be disqualified from
the date of conviction and the disqualification is to be continued for
such period as specified in that section. Sub-section ( 4) thereof carves
out an exception providing that the disqualification under sub-
sections ( 1), ( 2) or ( 3) of the said section shall not take effect in the
case of a sitting member of Parliament or the Legislature of a State
until three months being elapsed from the date of conviction or, if
within that period an appeal or application for revision is brought in
respect of the conviction or the sentence, until that appeal or application
is disposed of by the court.
3. The saving provision, provided in sub-section ( 4) of section 8
of the said Act, was challenged by way of public interest litigation
before the Supreme Court in Lilly Thomas Vs. Union of India and
others [W.P. (Civil) No. 490 of 2005]. A Division Bench of the
Supreme Court, by its judgment dated 10th July, 2013 has held in the
said case that Parliament has no power to enact sub-section ( 4) of
section 8 of the said Act and declared that the said provision is ultra
vires the Constitution and the judgment be given prospective effect.
4. The Government has examined the said judgment of the
Supreme Court and has filed a petition for review of the same in
consultation with the Learned Attorney-General for India. Further, the
Government is of the view that without waiting for the outcome of
the said review petition, there is a need for suitably addressing the
situation arising out of the said judgment of the Supreme Court.
Therefore, it has been proposed to amend the said Act.
5. The amendment proposed in the Representation of the People
(Second Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013, inter alia, is to substitute
sub-section ( 4) of section 8, so as to provide that the disqualification
in view of conviction under sub-sections ( 1), ( 2) or ( 3) of the said
section in respect of a member of Parliament or the Legislature of a
State shall not take effect, if an appeal or application for revision is
filed in respect of the conviction and sentence within a period of
ninety days from the date of conviction and such conviction or
sentence is stayed by a court, and further to provide that after the

14
date of conviction and until the date on which the conviction is set
aside by the court, the member shall neither be entitled to vote nor
draw salary and allowances, but may continue to take part in the
proceedings of Parliament or the Legislature of a State, as the case
may be.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; KAPIL SIBAL
The 23rd August, 2013

15
15
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE R EPRESENTATION OF THE P EOPLE A CT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
* *** *
8. (1) * * * * *
(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), sub-section (2)
or sub-section (3) a disqualification under either sub-section shall not,
in the case of a person who on the date of the conviction is a member
of Parliament or the Legislature of a State, take effect until three
months have elapsed from that date or, if within that period an appeal
or application for revision is brought in respect of the conviction or
the sentence, until that appeal or application is disposed of by the
court.
Explanation.—In this section,—
(a) “law providing for the prevention of hoarding or
profiteering” means any law, or any order, rule or notification
having the force of law, providing for—
(i) the regulation of production or manufacture of
any essential commodity;
(ii) the control of price at which any essential
commodity may be brought or sold;
(iii) the regulation of acquisition, possession, storage,
transport, distribution, disposal, use or consumption of
any essential commodity;
(iv) the prohibition of the withholding from sale of
any essential commodity ordinarily kept for sale;
(b) “drug” has the meaning assigned to it in the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, 1940;
(c) “essential commodity” has the meaning assigned to it
in the Essential Commodities Act, 1955;
(d) “food” has the meaning assigned to it in the Prevention
of Food Adulteration Act, 1954.
* *** *
Disqualification
on conviction
for certain
offences
23 of 1940.
10 of 1955.
37 of 1954.

16
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Law and Justice )

17
ANNEXURE-II
ea=h
dkuwu ,oa U;k;
,oa
lapkj ,oa lwpuk çkS|ksfxdh
Hkkjr ljdkj
MINISTER
LAW AND JUSTICE
&
COMMUNICATIONS AND IT,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
dfiy flCcy
KAPIL SIBAL
No.H.11019/7/2013-Leg.II The 27 th November, 2013.
To,
The Secretary General,
Rajya Sabha,
New Delhi.
Sir,
I give notice of my intention to move for leave to withdraw the Representation of People
(Second Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2013, during the ensuing Session of Rajya Sabha and also
to withdraw the Bill.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/
(Kapil Sibal)
Office: 402, ‘A’ Wing, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-110001, Tel. : 011-23384567/23386615, Fax : 011-23384241

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.