Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO. 
82
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  2016)16th March,
Action Taken Replies of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Seventy-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Law and Justice
EIGHTY SECOND REPORT
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTY SECOND REPORT
Action taken Replies of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Seventy-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Law and Justice
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 16th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 16th March, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
SS (P & L) - 163


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1-18
Chapter I – Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry ........................................................................................... 2-7
Chapter II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry....... 8-13
Chapter III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Committee has
not accepted replies of the the Ministry ................................................ 14-16
Chapter IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies of
the Ministry have not been recived ....................................................... 17
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 18-20
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 21-24
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 25 -30

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappam — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Adv. Sharad Bansode
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
16. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary
17. Adv. Joice George
18. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
19. Shri Santosh Kumar
20. Shri Bhagwant Mann
21. Shri Anoop Mishra
22. Shri B.V. Nayak
23. Shri Vincent H. Pala
24. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri M. Udhayakumar
29. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
30. Dr. Anshul Verma
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Eighty-second Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Seventy-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of
the Ministry of Law and Justice.
2. The Seventy-fifth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 28th April, 2015.
3. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice and Legislative Department) furnished the
Action Taken Replies on the Seventy-fifth Report of the Committee on 27th July, 2015 and 16th September,
2015 respectively. The Action Taken Replies of Department of Legal Affairs have not yet been received. The
Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 14th March, 2016.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NA TCHIAPPAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
14 March, 2016 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel Public Grievances,
Law and Justice Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
A2J : Action to Justice
A2J-NEJK : Access to Justice –NE and J&K
ADR : Alternate Dispute Resolution
AIJS : All India Judicial Service
ATR : Action Taken Report
BCI : Bar Council of India
BEL : Bharat Electronics Limited
COS : Committee of Secretaries
CPC : Central Project Coordinators
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
CSR : Computer Server Room
CSS : Centrally Sponsored Scheme
ECI : Election Commission of India
ECIL : Electronics Corporation of India Limited
EPIC : Electoral Photo Identity Cards
EVMs : Electronic V oting Machines 
FACT : Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited
FLC : First Level Checking
HLMC : High Level Monitoring Committee
HRD : Ministry of Human Resource Development.
ICADR : International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution
ICPS : Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies
ICT : Information and Communication Technology
IIIDEM : India International Institute of Democracy and Election Management
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
ILDR : Institute of Legislative and Drafting Research
(iv)

ILI : Indian Law Institute
ITAT : Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
JSC : Judicial Service Centre
LAN : Local Area Network
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MNREGA : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
NALSA : National Legal Services Authority
NHPC : National Hydroelectric Power Corporation
NIC : National Informatics Centre
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
NJA : National Judicial Academy
OLW : Official Language Wing
SLP : State Litigation Policy
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
SVEEP : Systemic V oters’ Education and Electoral Participation
TFC : Thirteenth Finance Commission
UNDP : United Nations Development Programme
UC : Utilization Certificates
VVPAT : V oter V erifiable Paper Audit Trail
WAN : Wide Area Network
WCD : Women and Child Development
(v)

1
1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Law and
Justice on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its Seventy-fifth Report on the Demands for Grants
(2015-16) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
the 28th April, 2015.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Department of Justice and Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned
Report, vide, their communication dated 27
th July and 16th September, 2015 respectively. The Action Taken
Replies of Department of Legal Affairs have not yet been received. Replies of Legislative Department and
Department of Justice have been categorised as follows:
Chapter – I : The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry i.e., in
respect of paras 3.6, 3.9, 6.12, 6.28, 6.29, 6.42, 6.61, 6.6 and 6.62  of the Report. The Committee is
pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted these recommendations.
Chapter – II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies given by the Ministry i.e., in respect of paras 3.11, 3.16, 6.20, 6.23, 6.52, 6.58 and 6.9
of the Report. The Committee is convinced with the explanations advanced by the Ministry and does not
wish to pursue them as of now.
Chapter – III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted
replies given by the Ministry i.e., with regard to paras 6.33, 6.40, 6.48 and 6.55 of the Report. The Committee
expresses its concern for not accepting the recommendations of the Committee dealt with in Chapter – III
of this Report and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these
recommendations.
Chapter – IV  :  The recommendations/observations on which final replies of the Ministry of Law
and Justice have not been received. The Committee desires that Ministry should furnish action taken notes
in respect of recommendations categorised in Chapter – IV .
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its Seventy-fifth Report, the ATRs furnished
by the Ministry and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been dealt with in the
succeeding Chapters.

2
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative  Department
Systematic V oters Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP)
Recommendation/observation  of  the  Committee
1. The Committee appreciates the SVEEP programme undertaken by the Commission and hopes that
this programme will help in reaching out to maximum number of voters, especially the youth and the
marginalised sections, so as to bring more and more voters to participate in electoral process. Accordingly,
the Committee recommends for a review of the budgetary allocation made for the purpose at the RE stage
so that programme does not suffer because of lack of funds. [Para 3.6]
1.1. The Committee appreciates the activities of IIIDEM in promoting democracy by training election
officials, both domestic and international, which helps promote India’s soft power in countries of Asia and
Africa. The Committee feels that the amount allocated to IIIDEM may be reviewed at RE stage, so that a
permanent campus/building for the Institute may get constructed quickly for effective performance of its
activities. [Para 3.9]
Reply/ ATR of the Commission:
1.2. The Commission is grateful to the Parliamentary Standing Committee for their appreciation of the
activities under SVEEP and IIIDEM. In this connection, it is stated that the demand for additional funds
under the relevant sub-heads for the purpose will be sent to the Ministry of Finance at the time of submission
of Revised Budget Estimates of the Commission for the current Financial Year, 2015-16.
Committee’s further observation
1.3. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.
Department  of  Justice
Recommendation/observation  of  the  Committee
2. The Committee notes the submission made by Director, NJA and hopes that the Ministry would
ensure allocation of adequate funds for the construction of residential quarters for faculty and staffs of the
NJA in the current financial year. [Para 6.12]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
2.1. The recommendation made by Committee has been noted and would be duly considered as and
when the proposal in this regard is received from National Judicial Academy, Bhopal.
2

3
Committee’s further observation
2.2. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.
Recommendation  of  the  Committee
3. The Committee notes that for the year 2015-16, an allocation ` 562.99 crore has been made
towards CSS for development of subordinate courts against the allocation of ` 1095 crore for the year
2014-15. The Committee also notes from the written reply to the questionnaire by the Department that
allocation for this year has been made keeping in view the revision of funding pattern of central assistance
under CSS from 75:25 to 50:50 in view of the higher devolution to states. The Committee feels that the
scheme has to a great extent helped in the development of infrastructure in subordinate courts. The
Committee hopes that in the proposed revised pattern, the states would continue to have adequate financial
resources to implement the scheme. The uneven allocation to different states over the last few financial
years is a matter of concern and Committee would like Department to look into the causes of wide
fluctuation in funds sanctioned to States in different years with a view to make consistent allocations to
the States.  [Para 6.28]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
3.1. The primary responsibility of infrastructure development for the subordinate judiciary rests with the
State Governments. The Central Government augments the resources of the State Governments by releasing
financial assistance under a centrally sponsored scheme for the development of judicial infrastructure. The
scheme has been in place since 1993-94, and was revised in 2011. It covers the construction of court
buildings and residential accommodation of judicial officers of district and subordinate courts. As of March,
2015, the Central Government had released an amount of ` 3,131 crore to the State Governments and UT
Administrations under the revised funding pattern from 2011-12 to 2014-15. This represents a significant
increase over the sum of ` 1,245 crore that was provided by the Central Government in the initial phase of
the scheme from 1993-94 to 2010-11. During the last financial year (2014-15), an amount of ` 933 crore
was released to the States.
3.2. Funds under the centrally sponsored scheme for development of infrastructural facilities for
judiciary are released to the States after obtaining the utilization certificates for the grants released in the
previous years as per the guidelines of the scheme. While examining the proposals received from the State
Governments, the projections made at the time of the revision of the scheme in 2011 for requirement of
funds for judicial infrastructure in the State for a time span of five years are also kept in view. The overall
release of funds during the financial year, however depends on the budgetary allocations made for the
scheme.
3.3. The Joint Conference of Chief Ministers of States and Chief Justices of High Courts was
convened on 5
th April, 2015 to discuss the broad agenda of judicial reforms. With the enhanced
devolution of funds to the States on the recommendations of the 14 th Finance Commission it now
falls on the State Governments to increase investment in justice sector. It was accordingly resolved
that Chief Justices and Chief Ministers shall institute a mechanism for regular communication among
themselves to resolve issues particularly those relating to infrastructure and manpower needs and
facilities for the judiciary.

4
Committee’s further observation
3.4. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.
Recommendations  of  the  Committee
4. The Committee is of the view that upgraded and modern judicial infrastructure will add to productivity
of the judiciary and help in quicker delivery of justice and reduction of arrears. The Committee hopes the
States would take full benefit of the scheme to upgrade and modernise the infrastructure in the subordinate
courts of the State. [Para 6.29]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
4.1. As per the information collected from the High Courts, as of June, 2014, there were 15,419 court
halls / court rooms available for district and subordinate courts. In addition to these, 1003 court rooms were
available in rented premises. Comparing these figures against the working strength of about 15,634 judges
as on 31
st December, 2014 reported by these High Courts, it may be seen that adequate infrastructure is
available for the current judicial manpower. Further, there are about 2,251 additional court rooms under
construction in States and UTs to take care of immediate increase in the working strength of judges in
district and subordinate courts on account of filling up of vacancies.
Committee’s further observation
4.2. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.
Recommendation  of  the  Committee
5. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry is developing National Judicial Grid in the country
so as to make details of cases and judgments readily available on real-time basis to any person anywhere.
Committee feels that NJG will help in avoiding duplication of work and saving time and money of the court
and litigants. The Committee recommends that the High Courts of Gujarat, Delhi and Madhya Pradesh be
included in the Grid at the earliest. [Para 6.42]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
5.1. NJDG data will also help the judiciary in judicial monitoring and management and the Government to
get data for policy purposes. The High Courts of Delhi, Gujarat and MP will also start uploading data on
NJDG upon successful installation of CIS v2.0, which will be launched soon. Further, the national e-Courts
portal (http://www.ecourts.gov.in) has become operational. The portal provides online services to litigants
such as details of case registration, cause list, case status, daily orders, and final judgments. Currently,
litigants can access case status information in respect of over 5 crore pending and decided cases in more
than 13,000 courts.
Committee’s further observation
5.2. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.

5
Recommendations  of  the  Committee
6. Article 348 provides for the use of Scheduled languages, other than English, with the consent of the
Governor of the State. The diversity of languages spoken and enumerated in the Constitution of India clearly
brings out the importance of different languages of the country. The Committee, accordingly, feels that,
scheduled languages other than English may be permitted to be used in the High Courts, provided it is
demanded by the concerned State Government. The Committee is further of the view that the consultation
process with judiciary is not required as the Constitutional provisions are amply clear on the use of Scheduled
Languages in the High Courts and accordingly, the use of Scheduled Languages should be decided as per
mandate of Article 348. [Para 6.61]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
6.1. As per allocation of Business Rules, 1961, obtaining prior approval of the President for authorizing
the limited use of language other than English in the proceedings of High Court is a subject matter of
Department of Official Languages, Ministry of Home Affairs. Although the Constitution does not require
consultation with CJI, this has been the tradition in the light of a Cabinet decision taken fifty years ago.
Hon’ble Minister for Law & Justice has requested Hon’ble Home Minister on 11.06.2015 to consider review
of decision of the Cabinet Committee which approved recommendations made by the conference of the
Chief Justices of the High Court that “it might also be desirable to adopt a convention whereby the CJI could
be consulted before the President”.
Committee’ s further observation
6.2. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.
Recommendations  of  the  Committee  
7. The Committee appreciates the importance of the role of the National Mission for Justice Delivery
& Legal Reforms in tackling the flaws of the justice delivery system. A project with far reaching objectives
such as this requires a firm and reliable financial support. The Committee, therefore desires that the
Ministry may ensure that there are no financial constraints in implementing this important programme.
[Para 6.6]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
7.1. The Observations and Suggestions of the Committee have been noted.
Committee’ s further observation
7.2. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.
Recommendations  of  the  Committee
8. As regards the Bombay, Madras & Calcutta High Courts, the Committee is of the view that the names
of these High Courts may be respectively changed to the new names, viz. Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata, to
bring them in consonance with the new name of the States as also changes made in the names of other
institutions like Police, Municipalities and Subordinate Courts in the concerned States.
[Para 6.62]

6
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
8.1. For changing the name of High Courts, the proposed legislation is being redrafted in consultation
with Legislative Department to make it more simple and concise in the form of a general law which will
address all issues relating to the alteration of names of High Courts.
Committee’s further observation
8.2. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.
Recommendation  of  the  Committee
9. The Committee is concerned to note the uneven expenditure patterns, which reveals non-utilisation
of funds by the Department since 2013-14. The allocation/utilisation of funds has progressively gone down
since 2013-14 to 2014-15 in e-courts mission mode project. The Committee, however, appreciates the
progress made with over 95% completion of all activities of Phase I of e-Courts Mission. The Committee
also takes note of the new initiative e-Court Mission mode project-Il and hopes that the new project will
overcome the lacunae/bottlenecks of the phase-I. However, similar to the phase-I of the project, Committee
notes progressive reduction in allocation from BE (2014-15) to RE (2014-15). The Committee hopes that
Department will take quicker decision in future to prevent non-utilisation of allocation made to it. The
Committee also hopes that the Department would take all necessary steps to implement these important
initiatives in a time bound manner. [Para 6.40]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
9.1. The Phase I of e-Courts Mission Mode Project was approved to be completed by 31st March, 2015.
However, some of the approved activities could not be completed. The primary reason for non-completion
of balance activities was non-supply of computer hardware by vendors at the contracted rate due to almost
40% depreciation of the Indian Rupee against the US Dollar and the equipment having a significant proportion
of imported parts. National Informatics Centre (NIC), the implementing agency of the project, sent a proposal
for procurement at enhanced rate using Exchange Rate Variation (ERV) as the basis. However, Ministry of
Finance declined to consider a relaxation of the GFR condition for an upward price revision in the contracted
price in the light of absence of an exchange variation clause in the contract. Hence NIC initiated re-tendering
process for completion of balance activities. However, NIC has not approved the tender on account of
unreasonable price quoted, due to which Purchase Orders could not be issued.
9.2. To enhance the activities taken up in Phase I of the project, the Phase II was proposed based on the
Policy and Action Plan Document approved by the eCommittee of Supreme Court of India. The proposal
was submitted and the Cabinet has approved Phase II of the project at the cost of Rs.1670 crores for the
duration of four years or till the completion of the project, whichever is later, in its meeting held on 16th July,
2015
Committee's further observation
9.3 The  Committee  notes  the  reply.
Recommendation  of  the  Committee
10. The Committee is concerned with the large number of vacancies in various Courts. The Committee
feels that the Ministry should develop a mechanism under which vacancies are calculated in advance and the

7
process to fill them up is initiated well before the occurrence of the vacancy. The Committee hopes that
National Judicial Appointment Commission will take necessary measures to bring the gap between occurrence
of a vacancy and its filling to less than a month. [Para 6.55]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
10.1. As on 15.07.2015, there are 381 vacancies in High Courts and 3 vacancies in the Supreme Court.
There is already a mechanism to maintain court-wise data of vacancies which would arise in future. Section
4 of the National Judicial Appointments Commission Act, 2014 prescribes the procedure for intimating
vacancies to Commission from time to time.
Committee's further observation
10.2. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.

8
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative  Department
Systematic V oters Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP)
1. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of Commission to introduce VVPAT and feels that the
introduction of VVPAT in elections will go a long way in resolving the doubts created in the mind of the
voters about the authenticity of EVMs and in turn will deepen the participation of people in the electoral
processes. The Committee expresses its concern over the inadequate budget allocation made towards
procurement of VVPAT & replacement of EVMs. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Law
Ministry to ensure that Election Commission of India’s programme does not suffer on account of financial
constraint. [Para 3.11]
Reply/ ATR of the Commission:
1.2. The Commission is grateful to the Parliamentary Standing Committee for their appreciation of the
ECI’s initiatives on VVPAT. In this connection, it is stated that presently, the budget provision for the
purpose lies with the Ministry of Law & Justice under their Budget Grant (Grant No.-64). The matter
regarding inadequate budget allocation made towards procurement of VVPAT & replacement of EVMs, the
Commission has already taken up the issue with the Ministry of  Law & Justice for allocation of sufficient
funds (copy enclosed). However, the Ministry of Law & Justice may again be requested to send demand for
additional funds under the relevant sub-head for the purpose to the Ministry of Finance at the time of
submission of Revised Budget Estimates for the current Financial Year, 2015 16.
Committee’s further observation
1.3. The  Committee  feels  that  Legislative  Department  should  allocate  additional  funds  to  the
ECI for successful implementation of important initiative like VVPAT keeping in view the Legislative
Assembly elections due in this year in Assam, Kerala, T amil Nadu, Sikkim West Bengal and Union
Territory  of  Pondicherry. Accordingly,  the  Committee  recommends  that  the  Department  should
take  necessary  steps  to  ensure  that  there  is  no  fund  shortage  under  the  VVPAT  Scheme.
Recommendation/observation  of  the  Committee
2. The Committee appreciates the work of Election Commission of India in creating a Web Portal of 84
crores of registered voters which has been launched on 25
th January, 2015. Such an attempt would reduce
multiple entries of electors at different places and resultant chances of bogus voting. All the voters have been
requested by the Election Commission of India to delete their multiple entries for the sake of authenticity of
8

9
the voter list. The Committee notes that the Election Commission of India has launched this programme for
purification and authentification of voters list on 3 rd March, 2015 for the sake of free and fair election. As
defective Electoral roll vitiates the election process and the results, there is need for maintaining accurate
and authentic voters list. The Committee feels that the onus lies equally on Election Commission of India,
State Election Commissions, Political parties as well as voters. The Committee is of the view that, the
State Election Commissions should in co-ordination with the ECI update the voter database already available
online. It would be proper if the same electoral roll is used for elections to PRIs and Municipalities. The
Committee accordingly impresses upon the Election Commission of India and the State Election
Commissions to conduct various elections from local bodies to Parliament on the basis of a common
electoral roll. [Para 3.16]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
2.1. The electoral rolls for the Assembly and Parliamentary Constituencies are prepared under the provisions
of Sections 15 and 13D of the Representation of the People Act, 1950. The Provisions of the Representation
of the People Act, 1950 and the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960, made there under are applicable with
respect to all matters relating to the preparation of electoral rolls for assembly/parliamentary constituencies.
2.2. The responsibility of preparation of electoral rolls of panchayats/municipalities elections rests with
the State Election Commission of the State concerned under Articles 243K and 243ZA of the Constitution of
India. In the current system, the Election Commission prepares electoral rolls for Parliamentary and Assembly
constituencies, and the State Election Commissions prepare electoral rolls for local bodies’ elections. However,
preparation of common electoral rolls involves the following issues:
(i) The States/UTs have their own separate state laws and amendment/modification in the same
will also be required to adopt the electoral rolls of the Election Commission of India, for
creation of common electoral roll. (While some States have coordinated their electoral rolls
with those prepared by the Election Commission, there are still some States that significantly
modify them). Some States even have different qualifying dates for the rolls got prepared by
SECs and those got prepared by the Election Commission of India.
(ii) There is no uniform system for preparation of rolls by SEC in all States.
(iii) Present database control tables pertaining to the ECI have the particulars of administrative
units of rural and urban area, extent of assembly/parliamentary constituency, elector’s details
as well as EPIC details. Fields, table name and description of tables are already fixed. These
control tables are populated and updated before any change in the existing database of the
rolls.
(iv) Sections details within polling stations under a constituency needs to be prepared as per
extent of the ward area of Panchayat and Municipal Council Elections.
(v) Delimitation of Panchayat and Municipal Council wards is done frequently at the time of
elections or after every census. Whereas, change in the extent of assembly constituency
take place after 25-30 years.
(vi) Even, collection of information about the ward no. and name from the existing electors
would not serve the purpose as in many cases electors themselves may not be able to

10
indicate such details for want of knowledge, since number and name of ward keeps on
changing very frequently.
Committee’s further observation
2.3. The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee is of the view that some common
mechanism  may  be  worked  out  between  the  Election  Commission  of  India  and  State  Election
Commissions  for  the  creation  of  common  electoral  roll  so  as  to  check  bogus  voters’  identity
cards.
Department  of  Justice
Recommendation  of  the  Committee
3. The Committee notes the progressive increase in allocations to NALSA from Financial Year 2013-14
onwards and an allocation of 
 145 crore in BE (2015-16) which is the same as projected demand. The
Committee notes the role of NALSA in legal awareness, legal aid and legal education in the country to cater
to the needs of various sections of the society, especially poor and marginalised. It also exposes judicial
officers to ground realities while implementing the NALSA schemes which in turn impacts justice delivery.
The Committee hopes that NALSA will further tone up its programmes so that benefits reach targeted
persons effectively and in time . [Para 6.20]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
3.1. The observations and suggestions of the Committee have been noted.
Committee’s further observation
3.2. The Committee feels that the scope of NALSA needs to be expanded, especially in legal aid
delivery, so that its real objective can be fulfilled. Accordingly, the Committee may be apprised of
the proposals, if any, by the Department to expand NALSA ’s working area.
Recommendation  of  the  Committee
4. The Committee hopes that NJAC when constituted, will work for prompt filling of vacancies in
higher judiciary, reduction in pendency of cases, transparency in appointment of judges, transfer and improve
the functioning of the judicial system in the country. This in turn would enhance trust of public in the
judiciary. The Committee further directs Ministry to ensure that sufficient funds are made available to NJAC
so that it starts working at the earliest. [Para 6.23]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
4.1. The National Judicial Appointments Commission Act, 2014 alongwith the Constitution (Ninety-
Ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 has come into force w.e.f. 13th April, 2015. However, constitutional validity
of both Acts have been challenged in the Supreme Court and the matter is sub-judice. The Court has
reserved its judgment. Further action in the matter will be taken as per the judgement of the Supreme Court.
Adequate funds to NJAC will be provided once it becomes operational.

11
Committee’ s further observation
4.2. The  Committee  takes  note  that    the  National  Judicial Appointments  Commission    was
constituted to bring in transparency in appointment of judges of superior courts  in lieu  of present
collegium.  However ,  the  National  Judicial Appointments  Commission  (NJAC) Act,  2014  and  the
99th  Constitutional Amendment  has  been  struck-down  on  16
th  October,  2015  by  the Apex  Court
which  has  created  the  problem  of  delay  in  filling-up  vacancies  in  those  courts.  The  Ministry  may
apprise  the  Committee  of  the  steps  taken  to  fill  up  the  vacancies.
Recommendations  of  the  Committee
5. The Committee takes note that the Fourteenth Finance Commission targeted pendency reduction
through fast tract courts, family courts, Lok Adalats etc. and for which substantial allocation has been
recommended. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will utilize the funds earmarked under various heads
during the stipulated period fixed by the Commission. It further hopes that the Department would effectively
monitor the implementation of the schemes and not be just a mere funding agency. [Para 6.52]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
5.1. The Department of Justice in the Union Government submitted a comprehensive proposal to the
14th Finance Commission, which covers areas like reduction in pendency of cases, redesigning existing
court complexes to make them more litigant friendly, enhancing access to justice and capacity building of
personnel. The 14th Finance Commission noted that the proposal amounting to ` 9,749 crore had been
arrived at after an extensive consultation process with the States. The Commission in its report has endorsed
the proposal of the Department and urged State Governments to use the additional fiscal space provided by
the commission in the tax devolution to meet such requirements. It is now for the States to utilize the funds
devolved to them for the proposals endorsed by the 14th Finance Commission.
Committee’ s further observation
5.2. The  Committee  hopes  that  financial  allocations  made  by  the  14th  Finance  Commission
will  augment  resources  at  the  disposal  of  State  Governments  and  would  help  in  justice  delivery
system.  The  Committee  urges  the  Department  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  obligation
entrusted  to  State  Governments  by  the  14th  Finance  Commission  and  report  the  same  to  the
Committee.
Recommendations  of  the  Committee
6. The Committee is concerned with the large pendency of cases in both higher judiciary and also
in subordinate judiciary. The Committee feels that there exists a close nexus between the existing
vacancies in Higher Judiciary and subordinate courts and the level of modernization of the court
infrastructure and pendency of cases. The Committee feels that unless, the vacancies of judges are
filled-up and infrastructure at courts is upgraded and modernized, it would be difficult to bring down
the pendency of cases and therefore desires that Ministry should address these issues seriously.
[Para 6.58]

12
Action Taken  by  the  Ministry/Department
6.1. The problem of shortage of judges is being addressed through a two pronged strategy. Firstly, by
filling up the large number of existing vacancies in the judiciary and secondly, increasing the sanctioned
strength of judges. It would be pertinent to note that as per the Constitutional framework the selection and
appointment of judges in subordinate courts is the responsibility of State Governments and High Courts. On
account of the concerted efforts made by all stakeholders there has been a gradual increase in the sanctioned
strength of the subordinate judiciary over the past few years. It has increased from 17,715 at the end of
2012 to 20,214 in December, 2014.
6.2. In case of the High Courts, the Chief Justice of India gave an ‘in principle’ concurrence in April,
2014 to the joint recommendation of the Chief Ministers and Chief Justices Conference to increase the
sanctioned strength of High Courts by 25 per cent. Several States have already accepted this proposal, as a
result of which the sanctioned strength of High Courts has increased to 1017 judges as of June, 2015, as
against 906 in March, 2014. The judge-population ratio in the country, taking into account judges at all levels
now stands at about 17 judges per one million of the population.
6.3. However , it is noted that despite the gradual increase in sanctioned strength, there still remain
a large number of vacancies in subordinate courts. As of 31st December, 2014, there were 4,580
vacancies in the posts of judicial officers, representing about 22.66 per cent of the sanctioned strength.
Recently, in the Conference of Chief Justices held on 3rd and 4th April, 2015 it was resolved that the
Chief Justices of the respective High Courts shall take effective and speedy steps to fill up the
existing vacancies.
6.4. Department of Justice had submitted a comprehensive proposal to the 14th Finance Commission
which inter-alia  provided for setting up of additional courts in districts with high pendency of cases, re-
designing existing court complexes to make them more litigant friendly, enhancing access to justice and
capacity building of judicial manpower. Commission noted that proposal amounting to ` 9,749 crore has
been arrived at after an extensive consultation process with the State Governments. The Finance
Commission has endorsed the proposal and urged the State Governments to use the additional fiscal
space provided by them in the tax devolution to meet the requirement of additional infrastructure and
manpower for judiciary. 
6.5. As a result of concerted efforts made by various stakeholders the increasing trend of pendency of
cases in subordinate courts has been checked and the overall pendency in subordinate courts has declined
from 2.77 crore in 2010 to 2.64 crore in 2014.
Committee’s further observation
6.6. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in reducing pendency in Subordinate
Courts. With the increase of 25 per cent strength of judges in High Courts, the sanctioned strength
of judges has increased to 1056, out of which 465 posts are lying vacant. The Committee urges the
Department  to  take  proactive  measures  in  consultation  with  Supreme  Court  and  High  Courts  to
fill-up  the  vacancies  and  reduce  pendency  in  those  courts.  The  Committee  also  reiterates  its
recommendations  contained  in  its  Thirty-ninth  Report  on  Demands  for  Grants  (2010-11),  that  the
retirement age of judges of High Courts be increased to 65 years to bring it at par with the retirement
age  of  judges  of  Supreme  Court  of  India  by  effecting  amendment  to  the  Constitution  and  related
legislation(s).

13
Recommendation  of  the  Committee
7. The Committee is happy to note that the Department proposes to set up atleast one family court in
every district or the country. The Committee would like the Department to achieve its objective in a time
bound manner preferably in next two years and constraints, if any, in achieving it may be brought to the
notice of the Committee. [Para 6.9]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
7.1. As per the Family Courts Act, 1984, Family Courts are established by the State Governments in
consultation with the respective High Court as per their need.
7.2. Government submitted a proposal to the 14th Finance Commission inter alia for funding setting up
of Family Courts so as to provide for at least one Family Court in each district in the country. The number
of Family Courts required to be established in a State was arrived at so as to provide for, on an average, at
least one Family Court in each district in that State or the number of districts without Family Courts reported
by the respective High Court, whichever was higher. Thus it was proposed to provide funds for setting up
of 235 Family Courts in various states in the country as indicated in the statement at Annexure-I. The
Finance Commission endorsed the proposal to strengthen the judicial system in States which includes, inter-
alia, establishing 235 Family Courts at a cost of `541.06 crore for the period of five years. The State
Governments are urged to use the additional fiscal space provided by the Commission in the tax devolution
to meet such requirement.
7.3. A statement indicating the number of family courts functioning in the country, State-wise, as per
information available is enclosed as Annexure-II.
Committee’ s further observation
7.4. The Committee feels that establishment of additional Family courts may reduce the burden
on regular courts and will go a long way in justice delivery system in the country.

14
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Department  of  Justice
Recommendations  of  the  Committee
1. The Committee appreciates the initiative of National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms.
The Committee however notes that only a token amount of ` 1 lakh has been made for it in BE (2015-16)
which implies that Ministry is still in the process of finalizing details of the Mission. The Committee finds it
rather shocking that a Mission started in 2011 with a time frame of five years has still not taken off. The
Committee desires the Ministry to ensure that the Mission is taken seriously and implemented in a time
bound manner and objectives of the Mission are achieved. [Para 6.33]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
1.1. National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms was set up in August, 2011 with the twin
objectives of increasing access by reducing delays and arrears in the system and enhancing accountability
through structural changes and by setting performance standards and capacities. The Mission has been
pursuing a co ordinated approach for phased liquidation of arrears and pendency in judicial administration,
which, inter-alia, involves better infrastructure for courts including computerisation, increase in strength
of subordinate judiciary, policy and legislative measures in the areas prone to excessive litigation, re-engineering
of court procedure for quick disposal of cases and emphasis on human resource development. 
1.2. The Mission has taken several steps in each of the strategic areas towards fulfilment of its objectives.
All States have formulated their Litigation Policies with a view to reduce the Governmental litigation. State
Governments have been requested to make an assessment of the impact of the State Litigation Policies on
controlling proliferation of litigation by State agencies. Department of Legal Affairs have formulated National
Litigation Policy, 2015, which is under active consideration of the Government.
 1.3. An Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) was constituted to suggest necessary amendments to the Negotiable
Instruments (NI) Act along with other policy and administrative measures to check increasing litigation
relating to cheque bounce cases. The IMG has suggested a number of measures including procedural and
legislative changes to reduce number of cheque bounce cases. Policy and legislative changes have also been
recommended to tackle the large number of cases that are arising under the provisions of Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 (MV Act). A Plan Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms is being implemented
to inter-alia promote action research on judicial reforms. Five projects of Action Research have been sanctioned
so far under the scheme.
1.4. An important aspect of the judicial reforms relates to re-engineering court procedures and court
processes for early disposal of cases. Process service has been identified as a major bottleneck for timely
14

15
delivery of justice. A research note was prepared and circulated to High Courts for improving the process
service in civil and criminal matters. A positive response has been received from several High Courts on the
suggestions made in the research note. The subject matter of re-engineering of court process and case
management is also under active consideration of the National Court Management System (NCMS) of the
Supreme Court. Process re-engineering exercise is being carried out under e-Courts Mission Mode Project.
For promotion of alternative methods of dispute resolution, mediation centres are being set up in court
complexes at District and Taluka levels. Government agencies are being encouraged to include arbitration /
mediation clauses in government contracts.
1.5. Shortage of judicial officers / judges in district and subordinate courts is one of the main causes
for backlog and pendency of cases in courts. The National Mission has regularly pursued this matter with
the State Governments and the High Courts. As a result of the concerted efforts of all the stakeholders,
the sanctioned strength of judicial officers / judges in district and subordinate courts has increased from
17,715 at the end of 2012 to 20,214 in December, 2014. The mission is pursuing the matter with the High
Courts for filling up the existing vacancies. Emphasis is also being laid on proper training of all court
functionaries.
1.6. The primary responsibility of infrastructure development for the subordinate judiciary rests with the
State Governments. The Central Government augments the resources of the State Governments by releasing
financial assistance under a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for development of judicial infrastructure.
Until 2011, the Central and State Governments used to contribute an equal share under the scheme but from
2011-12 onwards the fund-sharing pattern has been revised with the Central Government contributing 75%
of the funds. In case of States in the North-Eastern region, the Central Government provides 90% of the
funding. Central funding is, however, subject to budgetary allocation for the Scheme. As of March, 2015,
the Central Government has released an amount of `3131 crore to the State Governments and UT
administrations under the revised funding pattern from 2011-12 to 2014-15. This represents a significant
increase over the sum of `1,245 crore that was provided by the Central Government in the initial phase of
the scheme from 1993-94 to 2010-11.
1.7. Pendency reduction campaign was initiated for the first time in 2011. High Courts were requested to
prioritise disposal of cases that had been pending for a long duration, particularly those relating to senior
citizens and marginalised sections of society. In 2012 the focus of the campaign was to make the judicial
system free of cases that were over five years old. Pendency reduction campaign in 2013 focused on
weeding out ineffective and infructuous cases from the judicial system. In 2014 emphasis was laid on filling
up of vacancies of judicial officers and organization of Mega Lok Adalats. As a result of concerted efforts
made by various stakeholders the increasing trend of pendency of cases has been checked and the overall
pendency in subordinate courts has declined from 2.77 crore in 2010 to 2.64 crore in 2014. 
1.8. The establishment expenditure on National Mission is being met from the non-plan budget specifically
provided for the purpose. The budget head for National Mission Action Plan Implementation was created to
inter-alia undertake policy research activities to support the initiatives of National Mission. A technical
support cell was created for the National Mission under Access to Justice project being implemented in
partnership with UNDP. The budget for this purpose has been earmarked at `60.00 lakh under this project.
As such only a token provision of `1 lakh was made under the above budget head for the current financial
year. However the expenditure on e-Courts, construction of courts and residences for judges is also part of
the judicial reforms being undertaken by the Mission.

16
Committee’s further observation
1.9. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.  The  Committee  fails  to  understand  that  when  there  is
enough  amounts  earmarked  for  the  National  Mission,  why  only  a  token  sum  of `````  One  lakh  was
made for the purpose. The Committee feels that earmarked amounts allocated during each financial
need  to  be  spent  otherwise  it  will  show  the  tardiness  of  the  Department  in  implementing  the  said
Mission.
Recommendations  of  the  Committee
2. The Committee expresses its concern at the slow pace of establishment of Gram Nyalayas in different
States. It desires that the Department should review the entire issue in the light of experience gained and
expeditiously devise ways so that justice could be delivered to people at their door steps which is the basic
purpose of Gram Nayalayas Act, 2008. It may also focus on setting up of Gram Nayalayas in Talukas where
regular Courts have not been set up as decided in the Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts and Chief
Ministers of the States. [Para 6.48]
Action T aken  by  the  Ministry/Department
2.1. In terms of Section 3 (1) of the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008, it is for the State Governments to
establish Gram Nyayalayas in consultation with the respective High Courts. The issues affecting
operationalization of the Gram Nyayalayas were discussed in the Conference of Chief Justices of High
Courts and Chief Ministers of the States on 7th April, 2013. It was decided in the Conference that the State
Governments and High Courts should decide the question of establishment of Gram Nyayalayas wherever
feasible, taking into account their local problems. The focus is on setting up Gram Nyayalayas in the Talukas
where regular courts have not been set up.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The  Committee  notes  the  reply.  The  Committee  feels  that  leaving  the  decision  to  establish
Gram Nyalayas entirely in the hands of State and concerned High Courts is a good step, which is a
step towards strengthening the federal structure of the Constitution. However , the Committee also
notes that it has led to uneven development/establishment of Gram Nyalayas in different  States in
the country and not a single Gram Nyalayas are operational in North Eastern States. Accordingly,
the  Committee  impress  upon  the  Department  to  explore  new  mechanisms/options  so  that  Gram
Nyalayas can be successfully established in various parts of the Country. The Committee recommends
that regular monitoring should be made to ensure that the States establish/operationalise, especially
in the North –Eastern States as not a single Gram Nyalayas are operational in these States.

17
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Department of Legal Affairs
Committee’ s further observation
1. The Committee would like to bring into notice that, since no Action T aken Replies from the
Department  of  Legal Affairs  was  received  despite  reminders,  no  further  observations  of  the
Committee has been made. The Committee is not happy with the casual approach of the Department
in furnishing ATRs of the Department and accordingly, feels such casual approach would not happen
again  in  future.
17

18
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE—AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDA TIONS / OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative  Department
Systematic Voters Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP)
1. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.3, 2.2, 3.4, 4.2, 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2, 9.3, 10.3)
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
2. The  Committee  feels  that  Legislative  Department  should  allocate  additional  funds  to  the
ECI for successful implementation of important initiative like VVPAT keeping in view the Legislative
Assembly elections due in this year in Assam, Kerala, T amil Nadu, Sikkim West Bengal and Union
Territory  of  Puducherry. Accordingly,  the  Committee  recommends  that  the  Department  should
take necessary steps to ensure that there is no fund shortage under the VVPAT Scheme.      (Para 1.3)
3. The Committee notes the reply. However , the Committee is of the view that some common
mechanism  may  be  worked  out  between  the  Election  Commission  of  India  and  State  Election
Commissions  for  the  creation  of  common  electoral  roll  so  as  to  check  bogus  voters’  identity
cards. (Para 2.3)
4. The Committee feels that the scope of NALSA needs to be expanded, especially in legal aid
delivery, so that its real objective can be fulfilled. Accordingly, the Committee may be apprised of
the proposals, if any, by the Department to expand NALSA ’s working area. (Para 3.2)
5. The  Committee  takes  note  that    the  National  Judicial Appointments  Commission    was
constituted to bring in transparency in appointment of judges of superior courts in lieu of present
collegium.  However ,  the  National  Judicial Appointments  Commission  (NJAC) Act,  2014  and  the
99th  Constitutional Amendment  has  been  struck-down  on  16th  October ,  2015  by  the Apex  Court
which  has  created  the  problem  of  delay  in  filling-up  vacancies  in  those  courts.  The  Ministry  may
apprise  the  Committee  of  the  steps  taken  to  fill  up  the  vacancies. (Para 4.2)
6. The  Committee  hopes  that  financial  allocations  made  by  the  14th  Finance  Commission
will  augment  resources  at  the  disposal  of  State  Governments  and  would  help  in  justice  delivery
system.  The  Committee  urges  the  Department  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  obligation
18

19
entrusted  to  State  Governments  by  the  14th  Finance  Commission  and  report  the  same  to  the
Comm ittee. (Para 5.2)
7. The  Committee  appreciates  the  efforts  of  the  Department  in  reducing  pendency  in
Subordinate  Courts.  With  the  increase  of  25  per  cent  strength  of  judges  in  High  Courts,  the
sanctioned strength of judges has increased to 1056, out of which 465 posts are lying vacant. The
Committee urges the Department to take proactive measures in consultation with Supreme Court
and  High  Courts  to  fill-up  the  vacancies  and  reduce  pendency  in  those  courts.  The  Committee
also reiterates its recommendations contained in its Thirty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11), that the retirement age of judges of High Courts be increased to 65 years to bring it at
par with the retirement age of judges of Supreme Court of India by effecting amendment to the
Constitution  and  related  legislation(s). (Para 6.6)
8. The Committee feels that establishment of additional Family courts may reduce the burden
on regular courts and will go a long way in justice delivery system in the country. (Para 7.4)
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
9. The  Committee  notes  the  reply.  The  Committee  fails  to  understand  that  when  there  is
enough  amounts  earmarked  for  the  National  Mission,  why  only  a  token  sum  of `````  One  lakh  was
made for the purpose. The Committee feels that earmarked amounts allocated during each financial
need  to  be  spent  otherwise  it  will  show  the  tardiness  of  the  Department  in  implementing  the  said
Mission.  (Para 1.9)
10. The Committee notes the reply. The C ommittee feels that leaving the decision to establish
Gram Nyalayas entirely in the hands of State and concerned High Courts is a good step, which is
a  step  towards  strengthening  the  federal  structure  of  the  Constitution.  However,  the  Committee
also  notes  that  it  has  led  to  uneven  development/establishment  of  Gram  Nyalayas  in  different
States  in  the  country  and  not  a  single  Gram  Nyalayas  are  operational  in  North  Eastern  States.
Accordingly,  the  Committee  impress  upon  the  Department  to  explore  new  mechanisms/options
so  that  Gram  Nyalayas  can  be  successfully  established  in  various  parts  of  the  Country.  The
Committee recommends that regular monitoring should be made to ensure that the States establish/
operationalise, especially in the North –Eastern States as not a single Gram Nyalayas are operational
in  these  States. (Para 4.2)
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
11. The Committee would like to bring into notice that, since no Action T aken Replies from the
Department  of  Legal Affairs  was  received  despite  reminders,  no  further  observations  of  the

20
Committee has been made. The Committee is not happy with the casual approach of the Department
in furnishing ATRs of the Department and accordingly, feels such casual approach would not happen
again  in  future. (Para 1)

21
MINUTES

23
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 14th March, 2016 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shrimati Rajani Patil
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
5. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri P.P . Chaudhary
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Dr. A. Sampath
11. Shri M. Udhayakumar
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the consideration
and adoption of the draft 81st, 82nd and 83rd Reports of the Committee on (i) the Role of Ministry of Law
and Justice in Framing/Approving the Provisions of International Covenants/Multilateral/Bilateral treaties or
Agreements (ii) Action Taken Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the 75th Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and (iii)  Action
Taken Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained in the 76th Report of
the Government on the Recommendations/Observations Contained in the 76th Report on Demands for
Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension. Hon’ble Members deliberated
on the Reports, and thereafter, the Reports were adopted with minor editorial amendments.
3. The Committee decided to present the 81st Report to both Houses of Parliament on the 15th March,

24
2016. It authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Bhupender Yadav to present the Report to
Rajya Sabha and Shri P.P. Chaudhary and in his absence, Adv. Joice George to lay the same in Lok
Sabha. The Committee also decided to present the 82nd and 83rd Reports to both Houses of Parliament on
the 16th March, 2016. It authorized Shri K.T.S. Tulsi and in his absence, Smt. Rajani  Patil to present the
Report to Rajya Sabha and Dr. A. Sampath and in his absence, Shri M. Udhayakumar to lay the same in Lok
Sabha.
4. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.

25
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
Number of Family Courts to be Established
Sl.No. Name of the State/UT Number of Family Courts to be
established
1              2 3
1 Andhra Pradesh 0
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0
3 Assam 24
4 Bihar 5
5 Chhattisgarh 8
6 Chandigarh 0
7 Delhi 0
8G o a 0
9 Gujarat 16
10 Haryana 15
11 Himachal Pradesh 0
12 Jammu and Kashmir 0
13 Jharkhand 3
14 Karnataka 13
15 Kerala 0
16 Lakshadweep 0
17 Madhya Pradesh 20
18 Maharashtra 22
19 Manipur 5
20 Mizoram 4
21 Meghalaya 0
22 Nagaland 9
27

28
23 Odisha 14
24 Punjab 22
25 Puducherry 0
26 Rajasthan 5
27 Sikkim 2
28 Tamil Nadu 18
29 Telangana 0
30 Tripura 5
31 Uttar Pradesh 0
32 Uttarakhand 8
33 West Bengal 17
34 Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu 0
35 Daman & Diu 0
36 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 0
T
OTAL      235    
1              2 3

29
ANNEXURE-II
Number of Family Courts Functional
(As on 22.7.2015)
Sl.No. Name of the State Number of Family Courts
functional in the State
1                2 3
1 Andhra Pradesh + Telangana 27
2 Arunachal Pradesh -
3 Assam 04
4 Bihar 33
5 Chhattisgarh 20
6 Delhi 15
7G o a -
8 Gujarat 17
9 Haryana 06
10 Himachal Pradesh -
11 Jammu and Kashmir -
12 Jharkhand 21
13 Karnataka 24
14 Kerala 28
15 Madhya Pradesh 38
16 Maharashtra 25
17 Manipur 01
18 Meghalaya -
19 Mizoram 04
20 Nagaland 02
21 Odisha 17
29

30
1                2 3
22 Punjab -
23 Puducherry 01
24 Rajasthan 28
25 Sikkim 04
26 Tamil Nadu 14
27 Tripura 03
28 Uttar Pradesh 75
29 Uttarakhand 08
30 West Bengal 02
T
OTAL  417 

31
31Printed  at:  Bengal  Offset  Works,  16/335,  Khajoor  Road,  Karol  Bagh,  New  Delhi-110005.