PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 18
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
ON
ELECTORAL REFORMS
(DISQUALIFICATION OF PERSONS FROM
CONTESTING ELECTIONS ON FRAMING OF
CHARGES AGAINST THEM FOR CERTAIN OFFENCES)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 MARCH, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 15 MARCH, 2007)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 MARCH, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 15 MARCH, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
ON
ELECTORAL REFORMS
(DISQUALIFICATION OF PERSONS FROM CONTESTING ELECTIONS
ON FRAMING OF CHARGES AGAINST THEM FOR CERTAIN OFFENCES)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 15 TH MARCH, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 15 TH MARCH, 2007)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-35

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—12
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 13—14
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 15—28
6. A NNEXURE — Letter received from the Ministry of Law and Justice
regarding proposed Amendment in the representation of the People
Act, 1951 .............................................................................................................................. 2 9—31

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Dr. P.C. Alexander
9. Shri Tarlochan Singh
10. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
12. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
13. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Dr. C. Krishnan
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
18. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
19. Prof. M. Ramadass
20. Shri Vishvendra Singh
21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
22. Shri Raj Babbar
23. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
24. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
*25. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
26. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
27. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)
*Died on 4th March, 2007.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Eighteenth Report of the Committee on the Electoral Reforms (Disqualification of Persons from
Contesting Elections on Framing of Charges Against them for Certain Offences).
2. The Committee considered the issue in 6 sittings held on 16th November, 28th December, 2006,
18th, 25th January, 2nd, 20th February, 2007.
2.1 In its sitting held on 2nd February and 20th February, 2007, the Committee heard the oral
evidence of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice on the issue.
2.2 The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs;
Law and Justice; and the Election Commission of India at its meeting held on 20th February, 2007.
2.3 The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the subject in its sitting held
on 27th February, 2007.
3. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the following papers/
documents:—
(i) Background note on the subject from the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) The Representation of the People Act, 1951; and
(iii) Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 27, 2007 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice

1
REPORT
DISQUALIFICATION OF PERSONS FROM CONTESTING ELECTIONS
ON FRAMING OF CHARGES AGAINST THEM FOR CERTAIN OFFENCES
1. Recently the Chairman, Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice received a letter (Annexure–I) from Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Union
Minister of Law and Justice informing that the Chief Election Commissioner of India has written
to the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 27th October, 2006 that in the view of the Election Commission,
there is a lurking danger that persons like Md. Abu Salem, Dawood Ibrahim to become Members
of the august Houses of Parliament and State Legislatures, unless the law is amended. He has
suggested amendment in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to disqualify any person
accused of an offence punishable by imprisonment for five years or more, from contesting
elections even when trial is pending, provided charges have been framed against him by a
competent court and the Hon’ble Prime Minister has now desired that Union Minister of Law and
Justice may ask the Hon’ble Committee to first take up the issue of disqualification on framing of
charges for certain offences and give its recommendations separately and at the earliest.
Accordingly he requested the Hon’ble Committee to bestow its urgent consideration on the
aforesaid proposal as to electoral reforms and enlighten this Ministry, at the earliest.
2. The Committee held preliminary discussion on the request of the Minister of Law and
Justice in its meeting held on 28th December, 2006. It is pertinent to note that the Committee has
been requested to examine a proposal to amend the Election Laws before introducing or rather
drafting the amending Bill despite the fact that rule 273 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in the Rajya Sabha provides that the Committee shall examine only such Bills as
introduced in either of the Houses as are referred to it by the Chairman or the Speaker as the case
may be. However the Committee considered the request of the Government as “proposal” and
decided to examine the issue and hear views of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of
Law and Justice.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 25th January, 2007 heard the Secretary, legislative
Department who in his deposition submitted as under:—
‘...we have prepared one draft and proposed Section 8(b) of the Representation of the
People, Act, 1951 which will broadly take care of keeping away from elections those
persons who are alleged to have been having criminal background. It says, “A person
against whom charges have been framed in criminal proceedings concerning heinous
offences by a court of competent jurisdiction, at least, six months prior to the date on
which his nomination has to delivered under Sub-Section (1) of Section 33, shall be
disqualified till his acquittal in such case as the case may be.” This is the first part.
“Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply in respect of any criminal
proceeding concerning a heinous offence which is stayed by an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction.” What we have attempted here is that we have identified heinous
offences. Heinous offences are those which are mentioned in three chapters of the IPC, and
they are mentioned here in this draft. In fact, offences under four sections of the NDPS
and offences relating to terrorist activities, either under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act, or under the POTA, or under the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act,
all are mentioned here in the draft. Sir, all these offences are those where the crime is a
heinous crime and the punishment is for seven years or more, except in certain exceptional
cases like offences against women. So, we have identified those cases and this list can be
expanded further. At least those persons who are involved in offences under sections 121,

2
123 or 302 of the IPC, offences in regard to counterfeit currency to have committed
heinous crimes. We have identified the list of those offences which should be considered
as heinous offences and where the chargesheet has been framed, or, where a prima facie
case has been made out’.
He further submitted that:-
‘...the Ethics Committee in its first report in 1999 observed, “The Committee is of the
view that disqualifications have been prescribed under section 8 of the Representation of
People Act, 1951 wherein offences have been listed which entail disqualifications. As per
the existing law, a person attracts disqualifications on the ground of conviction for certain
offences mentioned in the Representation of People Act, but, unfortunately, the process of
conviction gets unduly delayed as a result, the very purpose of section 8 of the
Representation of People Act gets defeated. There are different views about disqualifying a
person with alleged criminal record. Whether a person should be disqualified the moment
FIR is filed against him or the charge sheet is presented or the cognizance of offence is
taken by the Magistrate or the conviction is done by the court or even after the conviction,
the appeal is pending in a higher court, are questions on which it would be difficult to
express any definite opinion. Since the Law Commission, the Election Commission and the
Government of India are seized of the matter, the Committee would only like to suggest that
the Government should expedite the process of initiating major electoral reforms in order
to keep criminals out of the political arena”.’
BACKGROUND OF THE PROPOSAL
4. Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had received a letter from the former Chief Minister of
Andhra Pradesh, Shri N. Chandrababu Naidu, in which he had stated that in the Monsoon Session
of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh a discussion had taken place on ‘Criminalisation of
Politics’. After discussing the subject at length from 23rd to 26th September , 2003, the Assembly
had unanimously resolved – “to request the Presiding Officers of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha and
Prime Minister of India for constitution of a Joint Parliamentary Committee to go into the entire
matter of criminalisation of politics, and suggest measures for cleansing the public life. The
Committee might also study comprehensive measures for electoral reforms, civil services reforms,
legal reforms and suggest for establishing good governance in the country”. The contents of the
letter were referred to the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs. The Ministry informed that the matter
had been examined by the concerned Ministries of Home Affairs; Law and Justice and Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions whose comments thereon had been invited by the Ministry of
Parliamentary Affairs. According to the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, the Ministry of Home
Affairs, after consolidating the view points of the concerned Ministries, had stated that constitution
of a separate JPC for the purpose would be an unnecessary exercise. The Ministry of Home Affairs
was, therefore, of the view that the objective of the proposal would be met if the subjects/items
mentioned in the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly resolution could be referred to the concerned
Department–related Parliamentary Standing Committee for examination and report.
5. Accordingly, the subject “Electoral Reforms” was referred by Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha to this Committee on the 13th September, 2004. In pursuance of the decision of the
Committee taken during its sitting held on the 23rd August, 2005 to elicit public opinion on the
subject, a Press Communique was published in leading national/local dailies on 3rd September, 2005
and wide publicity was also given in audio/visual media.
6. Thereafter, the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice was requested to
indicate issues/areas already identified by the Department in connection with the subject of Electoral
Reforms. In response thereto, the Department vide its O.M. No. H-11019(13)/05-Leg-II dated the
3rd October, 2005 informed as under:—

3
‘...the subject of Electoral Reforms has not been referred to the Department–related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on a Government Resolution and, therefore, the
Department does not have any formal approval of the Cabinet for the proposals of electoral
reforms which may be considered by the Committee. In the absence of the above said
approval, the Department is unable to indicate any priority for consideration of the
Committee and would like that the Committee may itself decide the proposals based on the
context of the reference received from the Hon’ble Chairman of the Council of States.’
7. Since the subject is very vast in nature, it was decided that further consideration of the
subject should be bifurcated into different topics for the purpose of preparation of reports. For this
purpose, in the first instance, the Committee issued a Press Communique in print and electronic
media on the 16th December, 2006 on the subject with emphasis on ‘Eligibility criteria to contest
elections’, ‘Criminalization of elections—use of money and muscle power’ and Preparation/Revision
of Electoral Rolls vis-a-vis possibility of preparation of common electoral rolls for the Lok Sabha,
Assembly constituencies elections as well as those of the local bodies elections. The Committee
accordingly proceeded to examine this vast and complicated subject in right earnest. However upon
the receipt of the communication from the Union Minister of Law and Justice regarding the proposal
of Election Commission to disqualify a person at the framing of charges level, a press communique
was again issued to elicit public opinion which was published in all the national/local dailies on the
26th January, 2007. Since the subject of Electoral Reforms was referred by the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, he was accordingly informed about the communication from the Union Law Minister
and the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha endorsed his permission on this subject. The Chairman and
Members of the Committee also addressed a press conference immediately after its meeting held on
18th January, 2007 to create awareness among the media and people on this vital subject. Taking into
consideration the importance of the subject, the Committee while keeping in abeyance the examination
of the subjects coming under the purview of “Electoral Reforms” decided first to take up the issue
of the disqualification as proposed by the Union Law Minister and present its report thereon
expeditiously and in any case in the ensuing Budget Session (2007).
DISQUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF PARLIAMENT AND STATE LEGISLATURES
8. As per sub-clause (e) of clause (1) of  Article 102 of the Constitution, a person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a Member of either House of Parliament if he is
so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. Sections 8, 8A, 9, 9A 10, l0A and 11A
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 deal with disqualification on the following grounds:—
(i) Conviction for certain offences (Section 8);
(ii) Corrupt practices (Section 8A);
(iii) Dismissal for corruption or disloyalty (Section 9);
(iv) Government contracts, etc. (Section 9-A);
(v) Office under Government company (Section 10);
(vi) Failure to lodge account of election expenses (Section l0A); and
(vii) Conviction for certain electoral offences (Section 11A).
9. Disqualification on conviction for certain offences.— (1) A person convicted of an
offence punishable under:—
(a) section 153A (offence of promoting enmity between different groups on ground of
religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance
of harmony) or section 171E (offence of bribery) or section 171F (offence of undue influence or
personation at an election) or sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 376 or section 376A

4
or section 376B or section 376C or section 376D (offences relating to rape) or section 498A
(offence of cruelty towards a woman by husband or relative of a husband) or sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3) of section 505 (offence of making statement creating or promoting enmity, hatred
or ill-will between classes or offence relating to such statement in any place of worship or in any
assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies) of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860); or
(b) the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955) which provides for punishment
for the preaching and practice of “untouchability”, and for the enforcement of any disability arising
therefrom; or
(c) section 11 (offence of importing or exporting prohibited goods) of the Customs Act,
1962 (52 of 1962); or
(d) sections 10 to 12 (offence of being a member of an association declared unlawful,
offence relating to dealing with funds of an unlawful association or offence relating to
contravention of an order made in respect of a notified place) of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967); or
(e) the Foreign Exchange (Regulation) Act, 1973 (46 of 1973); or
(f) the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985); or
(g) section 3 (offence of committing terrorist acts) or section 4 (offence of committing
disruptive activities) of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (prevention) Act, 1987 (28 of 1987);
or
(h) section 7 (offence of contravention of the provisions of sections 3 to 6) of the Religious
Institutions (prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988 (41 of 1988); or
(i) section 125 (offence of promoting enmity between classes in connection with the
election) or section 135 (offence of removal of ballot papers from polling stations) or section 135A
(offence of booth capturing) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 136 (offence of
fraudulently defacing or fraudulently destroying any nomination paper) of this Act; or
(j) section 6 (offence of conversion of a place of worship) of the Places of Worship
(Special Provisions) Act, 1991; or
(k) section 2 (offence of insulting the Indian National Flag or the Constitution of India) or
section 3 (offence of preventing singing of National Anthem) of the Prevention of Insults to
National Honour Act, 1971 (69 of 1971); or
(l) the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 (3 of 1988); or
(m) the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988); or
(n) the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 (15 of 2002),
shall be disqualified, where the convicted person is sentenced to-
(i) only fine, for a period of six years from the date of such conviction;
(ii) imprisonment, from the date of such conviction and shall continue to be disqualified for
a further period of six years since his release.
(2) A person convicted for the contravention of—
(a) any law providing for the prevention of hoarding or profiteering; or
(b) any law relating to the adulteration of food or drugs; or
(c) any provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961);

5
and sentenced to imprisonment for not less than six months, shall be disqualified from the date of
such conviction and shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years since his
release.
(3) A person convicted of any ‘offence and sentenced to imprisonment for not less than
two years other than any offence referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
disqualified from the date of such conviction and shall continue to be disqualified for a further
period of six years since his release.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 8 in sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3) a disqualification under either subsection shall not, in the case of a person who
on the date of the conviction is a member of Parliament or the Legislature of a State, take effect
until three months have elapsed from that date or, if within that period an appeal or application for
revision is brought in respect of the conviction or the sentence, until that appeal or application is
disposed of by the court.
Similar provisions as regards the State Legislatures, are provided under Article 191 of the
Constitution.
10. The Law Commission of India in its 170th Report on “Reforms of the Electoral Laws”
(1999) considered the issue of disqualification of persons on ground of the charges framed against
them by the court. After taking into account different views, for and against, the Law Commission
had recommended insertion of a new section 8B in the Representation of People Act, 1951 in the
following words:
“8-B Disqualification on framing of charge for certain offences-A person against whom
charge has been framed under :– (a) section 153A, section 171E, section 171F, section
171G , section 171H, section 171-I, sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 376,
sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 505 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
or
(b) Sections 10 to 12 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967); or
(c) The penal provisions of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(61 of 1985) except section 27 thereof; or
(d) Section 125, section 135, section 135 A or sub-section (2) of section 136 of this Act;
or
(e) Any other offence punishable with imprisonment for life or death under any law.
Shall be disqualified for a period of five years from the date of framing the charge, provided he
is not acquitted of the said charge before the date of scrutiny notified under section 36 of this
Act.”
11. The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution also examined this
issue and accordingly in its Report (2002) recommended as under:
“the Representation of the People Act be amended to provide that any person charged with
any offence punishable with imprisonment for a maximum term of five years or more,
should be disqualified for being chosen as, or for being, a Member of Parliament or
Legislature of a State on the expiry of a period of one year from the date the charges were
framed against him by the court in that offence and unless cleared during that one year
period, he shall continue to remain so disqualified till the conclusion of the trial for that
offence...the proposed provision...should equally be applicable to sitting members of
Parliament and State Legislatures as to any other such person”.

6
VIEWS OF THE POLITICAL PARTIES ON DEBARRING CANDIDA TES AGAINST WHOM
CHARGES HA VE BEEN FRAMED BY THE COURT OF LAW
12. The Chairman of the Committee had addressed letters on 28th November, 2005 and
5th January, 2006 to all the National as well as State level or regional Political Parties forwarding
therewith the list of 22 suggested areas on the “Electoral Reforms” to solicit their comments
thereon. The political parties were again reminded on 11th December, 2006 to expedite their views.
Upon receipt of the communication from the Union Minister of Law and Justice regarding the issue
of disqualification of persons from contesting elections on framing charges for certain offences,
the political parties were further requested on the 12th January, 2007 to offer their comments. So
far, the Committee has received written views from a few National and regional political parties.
In all the submissions received by the Committee, the parties are apprehensive that in all such cases
there is possibility of political vendetta. A party in power may very easily initiate these proceedings
against the opponents and when the records are managed properly, then the courts will also frame
charges based on the records placed before it and this can easily deny a party/candidate the right
to contest election. Thus all the political parties feel that merely framing of charges by a competent
court should not be the basis of denying a candidate the right to contest election.
VIEWS OF WITNESSES
13. The Committee heard the views of various experts like Dr. Jaiprakash Narayan, Lok Satta,
Hyderabad, Shri Jagdeep Chhokar, Retd. Professor, IIM Ahemadabad, Shri Prashant Bhushan, a
lawyer of Supreme Court and Mr. Justice G.N. Ray, Chairman, Press Council of India among others
who gave their written comments. During the course of discussions it emerged that while no sane
democracy could allow people who are accused of extremely serious criminal charges of the
magnitude of terrorism or murder or other heinous crimes, even contest, let alone win their seats in
Parliament and State Legislatures, yet there is always a possibility to frame the opponents so that they
would be disqualified or they would be discredited in a planned manner. In a country like ours where
the crime investigation machinery is largely controlled by the political executive of the day, and is
therefore, prone to partisan influences, it is extremely dangerous to allow any charge to become a
source of disqualification. Dr. Jaiprakash Narayan deposed before the Committee as under:—
‘...my own view is that a 5 years’ blanket ban is not desirable. Even if you raise the
bar from 2 years, as stated under section 8(3) of the Representation of People Act, 1951
to 5 years. I believe, that is still too Iowa bar. Many crimes entail a fairly high quantum
of punishment, disproportionate to the magnitude of the offence because the IPC, after all,
was drafted in the 1860’s under the British Government; actually, in the 30’s, it became law
in 1860. McCauley drafted that. Much of it is still continuing. It is generally pro-
Government and pro-public servant, obstructing public servant or what constitutes an
assault, and after all, an assault could be caused by even physically pushing in a moment
of heat, it would entail vast punishment in our IPC. Therefore, I am not comfortable that
a crime that entails a punishment of 5 years or more, must lead to disqualification. I believe,
it is a very dangerous thing’.
Shri Prashant Bhushan opined that the mere fact that the court has framed charges is not a
sufficient safeguard, for the reason that at the stage of framing of charges, the court only has the
police charge sheet and the 161 (CrPC) statements before it. At this stage, the court does not have
any defence of the accused. The accused cannot produce any evidence to show that these
161(CrPC) statements are false. The easiest thing for the police to do is, if they want to frame
a person, to just file two 161 (CrPC) statements of two witnesses who say that they saw him
committing a particular offence. On the basis of that, the court has no other option but to frame
charges. Then whether those statements of those two witnesses were correct or not would have to
be examined mid tried at later stages. That is why this could lead to very dangerous consequences.

7
Mr. Justice G .N. Ray, stated as under:—
‘...there is a deliberate attempt to implicate political persons in false cases, and once
this amendment comes in, there will be more tendencies to do that. So, some practical
solution is to be found out, and, I was suggesting that to try these cases, the system of
the Fast Track Courts should be made compulsory, because you are getting six months’
time. Within six months, if t he case is disposed of, there will be no difficulty. But
something is required to be done in apprehension that more and more persons may be
implicated falsely, and, by that process, a good number of politicians may be kept out of
the fray. Perhaps, to enter into the area of cleansing of the criminalisation of politics, this
is also a matter that requires serious consideration’.
VIEWS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
14. The Secretaries of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice and the representative of the Election
Commission were invited by the Committee in its meeting held on 20th February, 2007 to offer
their conclusive views on the subject.
The Home Secretary stated as under:—
‘...we in the Home Ministry do believe that probity and integrity in public life should
be a prerequisite. It should be there, if we have to take this country forward on to a higher
moral ground. But should we bank on a law which in spite of whichever way we go will
not be best option? It will leave a lot of holes to be plugged subsequently and you may
have a situation which can raise similar questions. You will find the people who are
ultimately proven innocent and are not there, they have been deprived of the electoral
process and it will also throw up challenges before the society. Sir, I had an occasion to
take the counsel of the Home Minister and he has also advised me to convey this to this
Committee that until and unless we find something which can really offer us a foolproof
or a nearly foolproof solution to the issue, we must adhere to the existing principle of the
presumption of ‘everybody is innocent till finally convicted.’ Because there have been
several instances where people have been acquitted and honourably acquitted subsequently.
They would have lost their opportunity in life if merely framing of charges, be it of the
regular offences as have been brought out or even if we list out some heinous offences
that have been mentioned, would have been the case. So, both inclusive and exclusive
categories might leave a lot of thought still to be deliberated later on.
...obviously, if a person has been in jail for a longer period of time and all avenues to
procure bail, etc., have failed and he does not enjoy the right to vote, perhaps, such
persons could be precluded. So, to that extent, if an amendment is moved, we would be
willing to support that. But anything more than that, it is the Legislative Department which
will prepare the draft legislation and this will come up before this Hon’ble Committee and
then, of course, we will deliberate on all the clauses that they will bring in at a greater
length and probably will be able to offer more comments’.
15. The representative of Election Commission stated as under:—
‘...letter written by the Chief Election Commissioner to the Prime Minister on
27th October, 2006 mentions about the point of the present position in the Act, and had
suggested consideration of the recommendation of the Commission, which had been first
given in 1998, that any person who is accused of an offence punishable by imprisonment
for five years or more should be disqualified from contesting the elections even when trial
is pending, provided the charges have been framed against him by the competent court, and
in the view of the Commission it was felt that keeping a person who is accused of such
serious criminal charges and where the court is prima facie satisfied about his involvement

8
in the crime and consequently framed charges out of the electoral arena would be a
reasonable restriction’.
16. The Secretary, Legislative Department stated as under:—
‘...it is important to note that although persons in prison as clearly stipulated in Section
62(5) of the Representation of People Act, 1951 have no right to vote but such persons
can contest elections. The reason being that under Section 32 of the Representation of
People Act, 1951, any person may be nominated as a candidate for election to fill a seat
if he is qualified to be chosen to fill that seat. In Form No. 2A read with Rule 4 of the
Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, the information as to the name of the candidate and the
serial number of the electoral roll at which his name appears is required to be given only.
Sir, my first proposal is how we can disqualify a proclaimed absconder from being a
candidate in election. In that regard, it is proposed in Section 16 of the Representation of
People Act, 1950 that a person shall be disqualified for registration in an electoral roll, if
he (a) is not the citizen of India; (b) is of unsound mind, so declared by the competent
court’ (c) is, for the time being, disqualified from voting under the provisions of any law
relating to corrupt practices and other offences in connection with election. Another clause
(d) may be considered by this Hon’ble Committee wherein we can say that a person shall
be disqualified for registration in an electoral roll if he is a proclaimed absconder declared
under Section 82 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. I wish to make one more submission
regarding proposal to prevent criminalization of politics and maintain probity in elections by
disqualifying those persons who are in prison of being accused of non-bailable heinous
offences. It would be in the public interest, and a suitable amendment by way of insertion
of a new Section 8B in the Representation of People Act may be considered. Sir, I am just
making a small submission before this Hon’ble Committee. The last time I made my
presentation before the Hon’ble Committee on the new Section 8B. Now, my present draft
is slightly different. The present draft says, “A person, if he is confined in prison and
against whom charges have been framed in criminal proceeding concerning heinous
offences—I have also revised the list of heinous offences—by a court of competent
jurisdiction, at least six months prior to the date on which his nomination has been delivered
under sub-section (1) of Section 33, shall be disqualified till his acquittal or discharge in
any such proceedings, as the case may be:
Provided that the provisions of the sub-section shall not apply in respect of any criminal
proceeding concerning a heinous offence which is stayed by an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction’.
17. In its written background note on the subject the Legislative Department informed the
Committee as under:—
‘...there have been several instances of persons charged with serious and heinous
crimes, like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. contesting elections during pendency of their trial,
and even getting elected in a large number of cases this leads to a very undesirable and
embarrassing situation wherein law breakers become law makers and move around under
police protection. Once an accused is elected during the trial period, he allegedly gets the
advantage of twisting the arms of police/prosecution to dilute the case, or of pressurizing
the government to withdraw the prosecution against him. This is the chief reason why
political office is very attractive to persons with criminal antecedents. On the contrary, it
is argued that every person is presumed innocent until proven guilty and disqualification of
a person against whom charges have been framed would be unfair denial of his rights. But,
disqualification is not conviction or pronouncement of guilt. Right to contest for an elective
office is only a legal right, not a fundamental right. In democracy, the people’s right of
being represented is fundamental; the people’s right to have good representation should have

9
precedence over an individual’s right to represent the people. Right to contest elections is
only a statutory right, and not a fundamental right and it would be in larger public interest
that the persons who contest elections to the Parliament and State Legislatures are not from
the alleged criminal background. Disqualifying a persons on the basis of charges in serious
offences having been framed by the competent court after due application of mind would
be in larger public interest. It is noteworthy that the proposal is to disqualify a ‘judicially
charged’ person, that too in serious and heinous offences, not the one against whom only
charge-sheet has been filed by police; in such a case, the court has taken cognizance,
applied its mind, found a prima facie case, framed charges and placed the accused on trial.
No doubt, in some cases, accused may get acquitted in the long run and the disqualification
may prove costly for the society, but the society may have to pay this price, keeping in
view the very pertinent dimensions of the problem’.
18. The Legislative Department in its concluding note requested the Committee as under:—
‘Looking at the ground of disqualification maintained in the Representation of People
Act, 1951, it is submitted that the proposal to disqualify persons accused of having
committed serious offences and having been judicially charged may be considered by the
Committee as charges are framed where the magistrate is of the opinion that there is ground
for presuming that the accused has committed an offence’.
Later on the Legislative Department forwarded their further suggestions as under.
‘In section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, the following clause may
be inserted:—
16(1) A person shall be disqualified for registration in an electoral roll if he:—
(a) xxxx
(b) xxxx
(c) xxxx; and
(d) is a proclaimed absconder declared under section 82 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
Explanation: – For the purpose of clause (d) the expression “proclaimed absconder” means
a person having been accused of offences which are punishable with imprisonment for a
term of seven years or more or life imprisonment or death sentence and the Court has
reason to belief (whether after taking evidence or not) that such person against whom a
warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing himself so that such warrant
cannot be executed.’
CONCLUSIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. To begin with the Committee is constrained to disagree with the proposal of the Election
Commission to disqualify citizens from contesting elections on mere framing of charges against
them in a Court of law for committing certain offences. However to sum up, as per existing law,
a citizen is debarred from contesting elections only on conviction by a competent court of law for
certain offences specified in section 8 of the RP Act, 1951 which have already been spelt out in
the preceding paras.
20.0 The Committee is of the view that the proposal of the Election Commission under
reference is a major departure from the law for the time being in force, which provides that
if a person is convicted for an offence and the court gives a judgment convicting him, then
such a person shall be disqualified from contesting elections.

10
20.1 The Committee feels that there is a lurking fear of the course of prosecution being
influenced by the political party in power or due to the failure of foolproof system which
may finally lead to the filing of the chargesheet in an appropriate court of law. Merely
looking into the chargesheet with supporting evidence and other materials furnished by the
prosecution and without giving sufficient opportunity to the accused to defend him and plead
his case against the charges so framed, the court can frame charges against the accused.
It is also possible in certain cases that the court may discharge the accused under Section
227 (CrPC), if it is so convinced after recording reasons for the same in writing.
20.2 However, if after perusing the material evidence and statements made by the prosecution,
the court prima facie feels that there is sufficient ground that the accused has committed an
offence, then the court may frame charges under Section 228 of the CrPC. In the amended
Criminal Procedure Code (1973), at this stage of framing of charges, the Court is not required to
appreciate evidence to conclude whether the materials produced are sufficient for convicting the
accused, which in fact is a major bottleneck. If the proposed amendment is accepted once charges
are framed by the court, the person will be deprived of his statutory right which is of fundamental
nature in a democracy to contest election as per the proposed amendment in the Election Law.
20.3 The Committee takes note of various judgments of Supreme Court regarding the provision
of Section 227 and 228 of CrPC and finds that at the initial stage of framing a charge, the truth,
veracity and effect of the evidence which the prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to be
meticulously judged and that the standard of test, proof and judgment which is finally applied
before finding the accused guilty or otherwise, is not exactly to be applied at the stage of framing
a charge. At that stage even on a very strong or grave suspicion founded upon materials, a charge
can be framed.
20.4 While considering the question of framing charge in a case committed to the Court of
Session, the Sessions Judge is to consider the record of the case and the documents submitted
therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution, has to decide
whether prima facie there is an offence which is exclusively triable by the Court of Session, and
if it is so, he has to frame charge accordingly and proceed with the trial.
20.5 Section 228 of the CrPC does not in terms direct that the court should pass a formal order
giving its reasons for the framing of the charge. That the legislature did not contemplate a formal
order framing the charge is evident from the fact that while in Section 227 of the said Code there
is express mention that the order of discharge passed by the court should be supported by reasons,
there is absence of such a provision in Section 228 (1). There is reason for holding that the omission
in the latter case is not accidental or inadvertent, because under the scheme of the Code, an order
or discharge being a final order is liable to be challenged by the prosecution and in case it is
challenged, the reasons for the discharge should be made available for scrutiny by the superior court.
In case a charge is framed, the trial proceeds and an opportunity to challenge any irregularity in the
charge or its validity would be available to the party affected at the conclusion of the trial.
21. The Committee feels that prosecution in many cases is bound to be influenced by the
party in power or by failure of system and in that case as enumerated in preceding paras
there is every likelihood for framing false and malafide  charges against their political
opponents. Once charges are framed by the prosecution, the person would be deprived of
his statutory right to contest an election which will naturally benefit his opponents.
22. As per the existing law, before contesting election, a citizen has to file an affidavit which
is given to the Election Commission, containing particulars regarding criminal charges, if any,
pending against him. The individual is given an opportunity to contest the elections and it is vested
upon the people to decide his fate. During the course of electioneering contents of the affidavit
would be debated by contesting parties and thus awareness among the voters would be created.

11
People are allowed to decide whether a person with criminal background can be their representative
or not. Hence this right of an individual to canvas regarding the moral status of a representative
of a particular constituency through democratic process is allowed by the present law.
23. At the same time, the Committee is deeply conscious of the criminalization of our
polity and the fast erosion of confidence of the people at large in our political process of
the day. This will certainly weaken our democracy and will render the democratic
institutions sterile. The Committee therefore feels that politics should be cleansed of
persons with established criminal background. The objective is to prevent criminalisation of
politics and maintain probity in elections. Criminalization of politics is the bane of society
and negation of democracy. But the arguments against the proposal of the Election
Commission are overwhelming. As stated in the foregoing paras the Courts frame charges
even when they are conscious that the case is ultimately bound to fail.  Appr eciation of
evidence at the stage of framing charges being more or less prohibited, charges are still
framed even when the court is convinced that the prosecution will never succeed. There are
many glaring illustrations which are of common knowledge and any criminal lawyer can
multiply instances of such nature. Hence the proposal can not be accepted in its present
form as the country has witnessed in the past misuse of MISA, TADA, POTA etc.
24. But at the same time one situation in which disqualification can be sustained is that
if a case is pending against a person but the accused has absconded and is making the
completion of the trial or even the framing of charges impossible. A person, facing a charge
by the State and without utilizing the opportunity under Section 227 for discharge absconds
from the proceedings of the court and the court is also satisfied under section 82 of CrPC
and subsequently publishes a proclamation that such person is absconding, can be considered
for the purpose of disqualification from contesting an election.
25. However the Committee feels that if the individual is fully aware of the issuance of
the warrant by the Court against him and despite that he wilfully disobeys the orders of
the Court and continues to evade the judicial process for a period of more than a year
before revision of electoral rolls, such a person may be considered for disqualification to
register or maintain his name in the voter’s list.
26. The Committee recommends that suitable amendments may be made in the RP Act,
1951, so that a proclaimed absconder, declared under Section 82 of the CrPC willfully
remains absconding for a reasonable period of time such as one year prior to the date of
revision of electoral rolls. However, at the drafting stage of such an amendment the term
“an absconder” should be clearly defined and in such an eventuality the conduct for which
the absconder is disqualified should be proved beyond doubt and it should be made clear that
the disqualification is a punishment for the act of absconding and not for the offence with
which he is charged but not convicted.
27. Criminal jurisprudence allows different ways of procedure for coming into conclusion for
proving the commission of a particular offence. In certain countries they are following the system
of shifting the burden of proof on the accused to prove his innocence but Indian Law of Criminal
Jurisprudence follows Anglo saxan law which says that a person is innocent till the offence proved
by the prosecution beyond all reasonable doubt. Hence the prosecution is responsible for the burden
of proof and not the accused.
28. Upon the consideration of the record of the case and the document submitted there in and
the submission by accused the Judge considers that there is a sufficient ground of procedure
against an accused – can not be taken as a proof of criminal offence applying the principle of
criminal jurisprudence followed in Indian case. If he faces the disqualification of the conditions
imposed in Article 326 of the constitution and chapter 3 of the Representation of the People

12
Act, 1951 that it is very much clear that conviction is a must for disqualifying a person from
contesting the election. But the original provision which fixes the terms of sentence as 2 years was
gradually expanding for different offences in different provisions of IPC and special enactments
made in different period for various offences. It has even spread at the level of different scale of
imprisonment and even convicted and sentenced to pay only fine. This proposition of conviction
and sentence was never rolled backward changing the criminal jurisprudence followed in India.
Therefore the Committee is unable to appreciate the proposal made by the Election
Commission to disqualify a person who is facing the charge i.e. at the entry points and at
the stage of framing of charges under section 228 of CrPC.
29. The evolution of democracy and practice of democracy in India has successfully reflected the
confidence, acceptance and necessity for choosing a representative by casting majority of votes in
every free election. The character of a candidate is open to scrutiny and comments by rival
candidates and the voters at large whether he belongs to a particular party or contests as an
independent. Choosing their representatives by majority of the people by the democratic process is
prerogative of the people. They may look at the candidates from different angle and perspective i.e.
he is the best person to represent them in a particular period ignoring certain other things which may
not be accepted by some other persons. This is the essence of democracy where an individual, his
capacity and incapacity is very much transparent during the course of electioneering. This is fully
debated and exposed by the different contesting candidates, vibrant media, NGOs and other
stakeholders. The Committee has enough faith in the sense of the people who by no means will serve
their own interest by returning bad characters or history sheeters to the Parliament and legislatures
of the States and Union Territories. The Committee feels that Political parties can also easily ensure
that their political support is denied to persons of questionable character and credentials.
30. Since the Legislative Department in their written note have requested for insertion of
a new clause in the Section 16 (1) of the Representation of People Act 1950, wherein a person
will be disqualified for getting registration in electoral roll if he is a proclaimed absconder
under section 82 of the CrPC, the Committee finds no reason to disagree with the views of
the Government provided the period of absconding exceeds more than a year. The Committee
feels that if the disqualification is made at the stage of registration in the Electoral Roll
itself, then an affected person would certainly get an opportunity to appeal against the non-
registration of his name in the electoral roll. This could be prove to be more protective of
individual rights of a person. But this provision should be invoked after issuing show-cause
notice to affected person an passing orders for deletion of names from the electoral roll, since
in the past, there are numerous instances where in names of many persons had been suo-
motu deleted against whom non-bailable warrant remained pending for six months.
31. During the examination of the proposal under reference some very good suggestions were
given by the members of the Committee which are as follows:—
(i) if a charge sheet in a criminal case is framed in a Court of law against a political
person the case should stand transferred to a Fast Track Court with the mandate that
the case be decided at the earliest but within a period of six months. For that sittings
of the said Fast Track Court should be held on day-to-day basis till the case is finally
disposed off.
(ii) in order to give effect to the said provision the Code of Criminal Procedure may be
amended suitably.
(iii) Special Election courts may be established to decide election related matters including
the proposal examined by the Committee.
32. The Committee hopes that the Government will also take into consideration the above
referred suggestions at the drafting stage of the proposed Bill.

13
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
20.0 The Committee is of the view that the proposal of the Election Commission under
reference is a major departure from the law for the time being in force, which provides that
if a person is convicted for an offence and the court gives a judgment convicting him, then
such a person shall be disqualified from contesting elections.
20.1 The Committee feels that there is a lurking fear of the course of prosecution being
influenced by the political party in power or due to the failure of foolproof system which
may finally lead to the filing of the chargesheet in an appropriate court of law. Merely
looking into the chargesheet with supporting evidence and other materials furnished by the
prosecution and without giving sufficient opportunity to the accused to defend him and plead
his case against the charges so framed, the court can frame charges against the accused.
It is also possible in certain cases that the court may discharge the accused under Section
227 (CrPC), if it is so convinced after recording reasons for the same in writing.
21. The Committee feels that prosecution in many cases is bound to be influenced by the
party in power or by failure of system and in that case as enumerated in preceding paras
there is every likelihood for framing false and malafide  charges against their political
opponents. Once charges are framed by the prosecution, the person would be deprived of
his statutory right to contest an election which will naturally benefit his opponents.
23. At the same time, the Committee is deeply conscious of the criminalization of our
polity and the fast erosion of confidence of the people at large in our political process of
the day. This will certainly weaken our democracy and will render the democratic
institutions sterile. The Committee therefore feels that politics should be cleansed of
persons with established criminal background. The objective is to prevent criminalization of
politics and maintain probity in elections. Criminalization of politics is the bane of society
and negation of democracy. But the arguments against the proposal of the Election
Commission are overwhelming. As stated in the foregoing paras the Courts frame charges
even when they are conscious that the case is ultimately bound to fail.  Appr eciation of
evidence at the stage of framing charges being more or less prohibited, charges are still
framed even when the court is convinced that the prosecution will never succeed. There are
many glaring illustrations which are of common knowledge and any criminal lawyer can
multiply instances of such nature. Hence the proposal can not be accepted in its present
form as the country has witnessed in the past misuse of MISA, TADA, POTA etc.
24. But at the same time one situation in which disqualification can be sustained is that
if an case is pending against a person but the accused has absconded and is making the
completion of the trial or even the framing of charges impossible. A person, facing a charge
by the State and without utilizing the opportunity under Section 227 for discharge absconds
from the proceedings of the court and the court is also satisfied under section 82 of CrPC
and subsequently publishes a proclamation that such person is absconding, can be considered
for the purpose of disqualification from contesting an election.
25. However the Committee feels that if the individual is fully aware of the issuance of
the warrant by the Court against him and despite that he wilfully disobeys the orders of
the Court and continues to evade the judicial process for a period of more than a year
13

14
before revision of electoral rolls, such a person may be considered for disqualification to
register or maintain his name in the voter’s list.
26. The Committee recommends that suitable amendments may be made in the RP Act,
1951, so that a proclaimed absconder, declared under Section 82 of the CrPC willfully
remains absconding for a reasonable period of time such as one year prior to the date of
revision of electoral rolls. However, at the drafting stage of such an amendment the term
“an absconder” should be clearly defined and in such an eventuality the conduct for which
the absconder is disqualified should be proved beyond doubt and it should be made clear that
the disqualification is a punishment for the act of absconding and not for the offence with
which he is charged but not convicted.
28. Therefore the Committee is unable to appreciate the proposal made by the Election
Commission to disqualify a person who is facing the charge i.e. at the entry points and at
the stage of framing of charges under section 228 of CrPC.
30. Since the Legislative Department in their written note have requested for insertion
of a new clause in the Section 16 (1) of the Representation of People Act, 1950, wherein
a person will be disqualified for getting registration in electoral roll if he is a proclaimed
absconder under section 82 of the CrPC, the Committee finds no reason to disagree with
the views of the Government provided the period of absconding exceeds more than a year.
The Committee feels that if the disqualification is made at the stage of registration in the
Electoral Roll itself, then an affected person would certainly get an opportunity to appeal
against the non-registration of his name in the electoral roll. This could be prove to be
more protective of individual rights of a person. But this provision should be invoked after
issuing show-cause notice to affected person an passing orders for deletion of names from
the electoral roll, since in the past, there are numerous instances where in names of many
persons had been suo-motu deleted against whom non-bailable warrant remained pending for
six months.

15
MINUTES

17
RELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met on 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16th November, 2006 in Room ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary;
2. Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Additional Secretary; and
3. Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary.
III. * * *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, the Secretary,
Legislative Department, the Secretary, Legal Affairs to the meeting. The Chairman informed the
*** Relate to some other matters.

18
Committee that the subject “Electoral Reforms” had been referred by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha and presently under consideration before the Committee.
3. The Chairman also apprised the Committee that on the subject “Electoral Reforms”, the
questionnaire had been sent to all the Political parties and most of them had since replied. The
Committee had heard some of the former Chief Election Commissioners on the subject. The
Chairman then asked the Secretary about the stand of the Government on the 22 proposals
pertaining to Electoral Reforms sent by the Election Commission. Thereafter, while extending
thanks to the august Committee for the opportunity to be heard on the subject, the Secretary,
apprised the Committee that the Electoral Reforms was a wide and complex subject and unless
there could be any consensus among the Political Parties, the reforms process would derail.
4. The Chairman thereafter asked the Secretary to take some more time and furnish the views
of the Government on the subject in general and about the 22 points sent by Election Commission
in particular.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. The Committee also decided to undertake a study-visit to Kochi, Chennai, Port Blair and
Kolkata from 4th January to 10th January, 2007, for in-depth study/examination of “Electoral
Reforms”, “Judicial Reforms”, “Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism” and “Appointment on
Compassionate Grounds” as part of consideration of Administrative Reforms in Public Sector
Enterprises/Banking institutions, presently under consideration before the Committee and authorise
its Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman for permission.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 4.17 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

19
19
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 28th December, 2006 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Dr. P. C. Alexander
5. Shri Tarlochan Singh
6. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
9. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Dr. C. Krishnan
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Prof. M. Ramadass
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
15. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B. Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representative of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad
Shri Jagdeep S. Chhokar
II. Representative of Lok Satta
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan
III. Representative of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the newly nominated Members, Shri Suresh
Bhardwaj, Member, Rajya Sabha and Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato, Member, Lok Sabha to the

20
Committee. He apprised the Committee of a letter received from the Hon'ble Minister of Law and
Justice in which the Committee had been requested to urgently take up the issue of disqualification
of candidates from contesting elections on framing of charges against them by a competent court
for certain offences and to give recommendations thereon. Some of the members voiced their opinion
against debarring such persons from contesting elections on the ground that such a proposal would
go against the fundamental principle of Indian Criminal jurisprudence on the plea that an accused was
presumed to be innocent until proven guilty. They were of the opinion that moreover, such a step
would shift the burden of proof on the accused whereas it should be on the prosecutor. The
Members expressed their concern that if this proposal was accepted, opposition Parties may take
advantage of the same. Some of the Members supported the proposal and opined that it would curb
criminalisation of politics to a certain extent. The Committee unanimously decided first to hear the
views of the Secretary, Legislative Department on the proposal. The Committee then authorized the
Secretariat to issue Press Release on the issue referred to in the letter of the Hon'ble Minister of Law
and Justice, in major national and local newspapers.
3. The Chairman welcomed Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan to depose before the Committee on
“Electoral Reforms”. Speaking on the topic of voter registration, he informed the Committee that the
margin of error in voter registers was 4-6% in rural areas and about 12% in urban areas. He
suggested that if Post Offices could be made the nodal agencies for registration of voters, the error
factor would decrease. Stressing upon the need to curb criminalization of politics, he deposed that
persons who were facing trial for crimes such as waging war against the country, murder, abduction
with an intention to commit murder or for ransom, rape, dacoity with or without murder, offences
under Sections 18 and 20 of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act and
corruption charges under Prevention of Corruption Act should be disqualified from contesting
elections. He opined that the present Bill before the Parliament which envisaged reservation for
women in contesting elections was fraught with various bottlenecks and advocated that a group of
three Parliamentary constituencies might be treated as a unit and that it should be made mandatory
that 1/3rd of the candidates put up by every Political Party in each unit should be women.
4. While highlighting the need for envisaging restriction on the number of constituencies from
which candidates could contest, he opined that they should not be allowed to contest from more
than one constituency and that if they want to contest from more than one, they should meet the
expenses out of their our pocket. He put forward a proposal of a mixed model of proportional
representation in which 50% seats could be reserved and the remaining 50% could be through
proportional representation and this would cut down fragmentation of votes based on caste,
religion or ideology. The Chairman requested him to appear before the Committee again on
18th January, 2007 to depose on “Electoral Reforms”.
5. Shri Jagdeep S. Chhokar deposed that unless the financial transactions of Political Parties
were subjected to public scrutiny, the question of State funding does not arise. He highlighted the
need for internal democracy in Political Parties, disqualification from candidature in case of framing
of charges for criminal offences and implementation of 170th Report of the Law Commission of
India.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

21
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 18th January, 2007, in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Tariq Anwar
3. Dr. P.C. Alexander
4. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
9. Prof. M. Ramadass
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta, M.P., Lok Sabha
REPRESENTATIVE OF LOK SATTA
Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
DEPARTMENT)
1. Shri B.A. Agarwal, Additional Secretary; and
2. Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary.
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed Shri N.S.V . Chitthan, newly nominated Member of
the Committee. Thereafter the Chairman apprised the Committee that a petition had been received
regarding stagnation in the Central Secretariat Services cadre and sought the approval of the
Committee to take up the issue.
21

22
3. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, a witness who had earlier appeared before the Committee to
depose on “Electoral Reforms” on 28th December, 2006, while deposing on the subject of
“disqualification of persons from contesting elections on framing of charges against them by a
competent Court for certain offences”, stated that if a person was disqualified at the trial stage
itself, there could be a possibility of its misuse for reasons of political vendetta. He opined that
such disqualification should be exercised with extraordinary caution. He stressed upon the necessity
of autonomous and fully accountable crime investigation to eliminate chances of framing of false
charges. He apprised the Committee that the Second Administrative Reforms Commission had also
been examining this aspect.
4. He advocated the need for a legislation, under Article 249 of the Constitution of India, to
regulate the functioning of police and to insulate crime investigation from the vagaries of political
influence. He opined that compulsory voting could be fraught with practical difficulties and that
voter registration should be done through Post Offices. He highlighted the need to curtail public
money from being utilised to lure people in order to garner their votes.
5. The Members of the Committee expressed concern that if the proposal to disqualify persons
at the stage of framing of charges against them was accepted, there might be chances for the
provision to be misused by opponents to prevent their political rivals from contesting elections.
6. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta pointed out that certain territories in India such as the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands were under one man rule and opined that effective and proper implementation of
election laws should be ensured. The witnesses then responded to the queries raised by the
Chairman and Members of the Committee.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting was adjourned at 12.50 
P.M.

23
23
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 25th January, 2007 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
8. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
13. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary;
2. Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary.
*** Relates to some other matter.

24
2. * * *
3. The Secretary, Legislative Department made a presentation on the proposed amendment in
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 which provided for disqualification of persons, against
whom charges had been framed in criminal proceedings by a competent Court, from contesting
elections. He informed the Committee that the Law Commission of India, the Election Commission
and the Ethics Committee had recommended that concrete steps should be taken to keep criminals
out of the political arena. The Additional Secretary, Legislative Department explained in detail the
stage at which persons were contemplated to be disqualified and the procedure followed therefor.
They responded to the points raised by the Committee.
4. The Members voiced their concern that such an amendment would lead to the ruling
political parties implicating their opponents in false and malafide cases.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 1.01 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

25
25
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 2nd February, 2007 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B. Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary;
2. Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shri R. C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary.
*** Relate to some other matters.

26
2. * * *
3. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs while deposing before the Committee on the Bill,
stated that it was brought forward on the basis of the recommendations of the Law Commission
of India. He traced the history of the Bill and stated that it sought to provide a statutory basis to
the already existing in-house peer review of judges.
4. * * *
5. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

27
27
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 20th February, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Dr. C. Krishnan
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Shri Raj Babbar
11. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Justice P.N. Bhagwati, Former Chief Justice of India; and
2. Justice G. N. Ray, Former Supreme Court Judge and the Chairman, Press Council of
India.
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary; and
2. Dr. B.A. Agarawal, Additional Secretary.
*** Relate to some other matters.

28
IV. Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Additional Secretary;
2. Dr. P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary; and
3. Shri N.M. Perumal, Director.
V. Representatives of the Election Commissions of India
1. Shri R. Bhattacharya, Deputy Election Commissioner; and
2. Shri R. Balakrishnan, Deputy Election Commissioner.
2. * * *
Electoral reforms
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for discussion, the criminalization in electoral politics.
The Committee noted that as per the existing law, a convicted person alone was disqualified but
now the Election Commission of India had proposed to disqualify a person from contesting an
election, who was accused of an offence punishable by imprisonment for five years or more, even
while the trial was pending, provided that the charges had been framed against him by a competent
court.
4. The Committee Members unanimously opined that such a proposal was likely to be grossly
misused by the political opponents against each other as the charges were framed on the basis of
prima-facie  evidence, which may or may not be proved ultimately in the courts. Justice G .N. Ray
while commenting on the issue stated that it may amount to preventing a person at the threshold
itself from coming into the political arena. Though, the Committee noted the clarification given by
the representatives of the Election Commission that the Law Commission had recommended
amendment in the Representation of the People Act, for disqualifying candidates from contesting
elections for specified offences under the IPC, unlawful activities (Prevention and Detention) Act
and the Narcotics, Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, still it felt that the proposal would
harm the political career of the candidates. The Committee was in favour of a reconsideration of
the entire proposal.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

29
ANNEXURE

31
ANNEXURE
gal jkt Hkkj}kt MINISTER
H.R. BHARDWAJ LAW AND JUSTICE
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
D.O. No. H-11019(8)/2006-Leg-II NEW DELHI-110 001
Dated the 20th December, 2006.
Dear Chairman,
I would like to inform you that the Chief Election Commissioner of India has written to the
Hon’ble Prime Minister on 27th October, 2006 that in the view of the Election Commission, there
is a lurking danger that persons like Mr. Abu Salem, Mr. Dawod Ibrahim (if he returns), may one
day enter the electoral fray to become Members of the august Houses of Parliament and State
Legislatures, unless the law is amended. He has suggested amendment in the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 to disqualify any person accused of an offence punishable by imprisonment for
five years or more, from contesting elections even when trial is pending, provided charges have
been framed against him by a competent court.
2. Incidentally, the above proposal is one of the 22 proposals on electoral reforms recom-
mended by the Election Commission in July, 2004, which are under consideration of the Hon’ble
Committee.
3. On the directions of the Hon’ble Prime Minister, the views of this Ministry in this regard
were sent to the Prime Minister’s Office on 21.11.2006, a copy whereof is enclosed herewith.
4. The Hon’ble Prime Minister has now desired that I may ask the Hon’ble Committee to first
take up the issue of disqualification on framing of charges for certain offences and give its
recommendations separately and at the earliest.
5. In view of the above, I request the Hon’ble Committee through you to bestow its urgent
consideration on the aforesaid proposal as to electoral reforms and enlighten this Ministry, at the
earliest.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(H.R. BHARDWAJ)
Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan,
Chairman,
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice,
Room No. 126, 1st Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi


Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.