PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTY NINTH REPORT
Action Taken on 85th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2016-17)
Pertaining to
The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2017/Magha, 1938 (Saka)
89
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 177
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTY NINTH REPORT
Action Taken on 85th Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2016-17)
Pertaining to
The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2017/Magha, 1938 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-23
(i) Chapter I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accpted by the Ministry.. 2-12
(ii) Chapter II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry.................................. 13-16
(iii) Chapter III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Committee has not
accepted replies of the Ministry ............................................................... 17-23
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE .................................................... 24-25
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 27-30

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Prabhat Jha
4. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva
10. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Idris Ali
13. Shri Sharad Bansode
14. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary
15. Adv. Joice George
16. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
17. Shri Santosh Kumar
18. Shri Bhagwant Mann
19. Shri B.V . Nayak
20. Shri Vincent H. Pala
21. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
22. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
23. Dr. A. Sampath
24. Shri M. Udhayakumar
25. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli

(ii)
 26. Dr. Anshul Verma
@27. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
@28. Shri Pralhad V . Joshi
@29. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
@ Nominated w.e.f. 29th November, 2016

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Eighty-Ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Eighty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Eighty-fifth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
26th April, 2016.
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action Taken Replies on
the Eighty-fifth Report of the Committee on 30th May, 2016, 31st August, 2016 and 23rd September,
2016. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 24th
January, 2017.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
24th January, 2017 Chairman,
Magha 4, 1938 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
CBI : Central Bureau Of Investigation
ICEI : International Centre for Excellence and Investigation
LBSNAA : Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
CVC : Central Vigilance Commission
CA T : Central Administrative Tribunal
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
IAS : Indian Administrative Service
IPS : Indian Police Service
IFS : Indian Forest Service
ASCI : Administrative Staff College of India
SCOV A : Standing Committee of V oluntary Agencies
SSC : Staff Selection Commission
CAPFs : Central Armed Police Forces
CIC : Central Information Commission
NBCC : National Buil ding Construction Corporation
ICEI : International Center for Excellence in Investigation
(iv)

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its Eighty-fifth
Report on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 26th April, 2016.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned Report, vide, their
communications dated on 30th May, 2016, 31st August, 2016 and 23rd September, 2016. These replies
have been categorised as follows :
CHAPTER-I: The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry
i.e., in respect of paras 27, 30.7.2, 30.7.3, 31.3, 32.4, 32.5, 33.3, 34.3, 37.3,
38.4, 41.3, 41.5, 42.4, 42.6, 42.7, 43.3 and 43.4 of the Report. The Committee
is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted these recommendations.
CHAPTER-II: The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies given by the Ministry i.e., in respect of paras 31.2, 35.3,
35.4, 36.3, 36.4 and 42.5 of the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the
explanations advanced by the Ministry and does not wish to pursue them as of
now.
CHAPTER-III: The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee is not satisfied
with the replies given by the Ministry i.e., with regard to paras 30.3, 30.7.1, 28,
29, 33.4, 34.4 and 40.2 of the Report. The Committee does not accept the reasons
given for not accepting the recommendations of the Committee and reiterates its
recommendations.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Department of Personnel & Training
Major Head : 2070 - Other Administrative Expenses
Recommendation/observation
1.0. The Committee appreciates the innovative move of projecting all Plan Outlays of the three
Departments of the Ministry under a single Major Head, i.e. '2070'. The move has erased the chances
of overlapping projections in the Minor Heads and Object Heads of the projections. [Para 27]
Action Taken
1.1. The observation of the Committee has been noted.
Further Observation
1.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI)
Capacity Building of the CBI
Recommendation/observation
2.0. The Committee endorses the need for capacity enhancement and skill development of the CBI as
well as its counterpart State Police Forces. It is of the firm belief that, augmenting the prowess and
competence of the State Police Forces parallel to the CBI will go a long way in abating cases referred
to it by the States and thereby relieving the work-load of the agency. The Committee commends the role
played by the International Centre for Excellence and Investigation, Ghaziabad in the field of capacity
building and encourages more exposure in the international arena by way of holding more interactions
with their international counterparts through the Centre. (Para 30.7.2)
Action Taken
2.1. The Standing Finance Committee proposal for set up of International Centre for Excellence and
Investigation (ICEI), Ghaziabad under the Plan (Capital) Scheme 'Modernization of CBI Training Center'
is under active consideration in this Department.
Further Observation
2.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/observation
3.0. Keeping in view the high pendency of cases with the CBI and especially those of Foreign
Investigations which have a direct bearing on the country's credibility, the Committee recommends that
the activities of the Centre should be expanded to provide a continuous in-service training to the CBI
2

3
personnel in order to hone the skill and expertise of those engaged in the field of crime investigation.
The Committee further recommends that, if need be, more funds for the purpose may be made available
to the CBI. (Para 30.7.3)
Action Taken
3.1. CBI Academy has been constructed at 26.66 acres of land at Ghaziabad with the expenditure of
Rs.37.92 crore for the purpose of impart training courses to enhance capabilities of official of CBI.
During the last five years i.e. 2012 to May, 2016, the CBI Academy has conducted a total of 411 courses
in which the number of participants were 11905 (CBI 5827 & Non CBI 6078). Funds as demanded by
CBI in BE-2016-17 have been provided to them.
Further Observation
3.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ADMINISTRATION (LBSNAA)
Reduction of funds of the LBSNAA
Recommendation/observation
4.0. As regards the reduction of funds of the LBSNAA, while acknowledging the justification of the
Ministry, the Committee is of the view that every spending unit should make a prudent exercise of the
avenues of actually carrying out plan schemes it proposes to undertake before budgetary allocations are
sought. Furthermore, strategies should be drawn for the utilization of funds made available to spending
units and should be closely monitored. (Para 31.3)
Action Taken
4.1. The observation of the Committee has been noted. The trend of expenditure incurred by each
Spending Unit is monitored on a regular basis at senior levels and all concerned Divisions / Organisations
are suitably instructed from time to time to ensure that 50% of allocated budget is utilized by 30th
September, 2016.
Further Observation
4.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (CVC)
Budgetary projection for CVC
Recommendation/observation
5.0. The Committee fails to comprehend the status quo in respect of the budgetary projection for CVC
inspite of its earlier recommendation for making the Lokpal inclusive. (Para 32.4)
Action Taken
5.1. Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 requires some amendments so as to provide for situations where
the composition of the Selection Committee is deficient/incomplete due to absence of Leader of Opposition

4
in the LokSabha, recognized as such, etc. accordingly, the Government had brought the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas and other related Law (Amendment) Bill, 2014 which was introduced in LokSbha on
18/12/2014. The said Bill was referred to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law Justice for examination and report. The said Committee has submitted
its 77th report in the Parliament on 07/12/2015 wherein it is recommended that the institutions of CVC
and the CBI (in so far as its anti-corruption functions are concerned), be fully integrated with Lokpal
and the institution of anti-corruption watchdog may be architecturally created vertically with the Lokpal
at the apex level and CVC and CBI (anti-corruption wing) working directly under its command and
control. The functions of Lokpal and CVC be clearly specified and overlap between functions and
powers of CVC and Lokpal be addressed. Lokpal in turn should utilize these organizations for conduct
of inquiry, investigation and prosecution. The recommendations of the Committee cover various aspects
and elements of the Lokpal & Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and thus require exhaustive consideration. The said
recommendations are presently at an advanced stage of consideration by the Government. Thus till such
time the Government takes a view on the acceptance or otherwise of the said recommendation the status
quo as regards budget allocation needs to be retained.
Further Observation
5.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
DELAY IN GIVING VIGILANCE CLEARANCE FOR BOARD LEVEL APPOINTMENTS
Recommendation/observation
6.0. As regards the time taken by CVC to give vigilance clearance for Board level appointments, the
Committee is of the view that the two months time should be reduced by way of digitalizing the data
base of these officers which may be maintained by each cadre controlling authorities and synchronized
with that of the CVC and the CBI. Such procedural delays should be done away with in this age of
information technology. (Para 32.5)
Action Taken
6.1. The suggestion of the Committee has been noted. As far as officers of CPSEs are concerned, the
cadre controlling authority is the administrative ministry under which the CPSE falls. The primary onus
for maintenance of career records lies with the respective cadre controlling authorities. Clearance from
the Commission is required in respect of candidates recommended by PESB/ Search-cum-Selection
Committee for Board level appointments in CPSEs. Department of Personnel and Training is the nodal
authority for processing and notifying appointments. The suggestion of CVC to consider issuing instructions
to all administrative ministries/departments having CPSEs to maintain career profiles and vigilance history
of their employees in digital format so that these may be transmitted electronically to the Commission
when the need for vigilance clearance arises, has been noted by DoPT and the same is under examination.
6.2. Further, CVC has intimated that with a view to augment the existing procedure, electronic sharing
of vigilance clearance data between CVC and CBI, which would help in expediting replies to vigilance
clearance proposals, is likely to commence shortly after procuring digital signature.

5
Further Observation
6.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL (CAT]
Measures to strengthen CAT
Recommendation/observation
7.0. The Committee feels that CAT needs to be strengthened in terms of infrastructure and also the
human resource. Therefore, the Committee suggests the Ministry to resolve the issues related therewith.
The Committee also feels that the CAT should function as mediator rather than a court or an appellate
authority. Effort should be to avoid further appeal against CAT decision to the High Court or the
Supreme Court. The Committee, however, suggests that even where it is felt that the law has not been
properly applied, review petition should be encouraged and the CAT should mediate till the case is
settled. (Para 33.3)
Action Taken
7.1. CA T has 17 Benches throughout India including Principal Bench at New Delhi. Out of 17 Benches,
08 Benches have their own building, two are working in the CGO Complex/ Rajaswa Bhawan and seven
are working in building taken on rent. Efforts are being made to have their own building for every Bench
having regular sitting. Land for construction of building for one Bench is already there and land for two
Benches has been purchased from the State Governments. Budget allocated during the Financial Year
2015-16 of ` 10 crore was utilized for purchase of land for Lucknow and Jabalpur Benches of CAT.
A budget provision of ` 29.67 crore has been made during the year 2016-17 for purchase of land and
construction of buildings for CAT Benches where land is available.
7.2. A proposal of CAT for construction of Annexe building for Principal Bench has been approved.
Further, CAT has been advised to send proposals for construction of buildings for three Benches of CAT
viz. Guwahati, Lucknow and Jabalpur so that sanction can be given in 2016-17.
7.3. As regards to strengthening the human resources of CAT, as and when any proposal is received
from CAT for creation of post or promotion or any other issue, the same is taken care of and disposed
of appropriately. As regards to recommendations related to functioning of CAT as mediator between
employees and Government, the same has been communicated to CAT for necessary action.
Further Observation
7.4. The Committee takes note of the reply.
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (UPSC)
Measures for reduction of time taken in recruitment process
Recommendation/observation
8.0. The Committee appreciates that the UPSC has devised ways to shorten the duration of time taken
from the time of publication of advertisement to time of actual recruitment and also with regard to DPCs

6
for promotions and deputations. However, it is constrained to point out that the earlier recommendations
of the Committee to explore the feasibility of adopting a computerized GMAT kind of system having
validity of the score for at least three years in the preliminary stage of examinations has not so far been
made applicable by the UPSC. The Committee therefore reiterates is earlier recommendation to explore
a modality akin to the GMAT system in order to save on the expenditure on stationery as well as
processing time of the examinations at the earliest time possible. (Para 34.3)
Action Taken
8.1. The Commission continues efforts to further shorten the time taken from the publication of the
advertisement to the time of actual recruitment. It may be mentioned that the CSE is being comprehensively
reviewed by a Committee of Experts and the terms of reference includes an examination of use of ICT
in the CSE.
Further Observation
8.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
FIXED TENURE OF IAS, IPS & IFS
Recommendation/observation
9.0. In this context the Committee views that the DoPT should impress upon the State Governments
to strictly comply with the service rules relating to tenure of the high ranking officers in service so that
the officers are able to discharge their duty without fear. (Para 37.3)
Action Taken
9.1. It is stated that in the matter of Shri. T.S.R Subramanian, the Hon'ble Supreme Court directed the
Central Government and all the State Governments for setting up of Civil Services Board for IAS, IPS
and IFS and to provide minimum tenure to All India Service officers. The relevant amendments in Rule
7 were carried out and the notification dated 28.01.2014 (Annexure-I) was issued by this Department
in compliance of Apex Court's judgment.
9.2 Further amendments were proposed by State Government of Uttar Pradesh in Rule 7 of IAS
(Cadre) Rules, 1954 and same was discussed in the GAD meeting of all State/UT Government on
08.09.2015. All the State Governments agreed to the amendments as proposed by the State Government
of Uttar Pradesh. The Proposed amendments in Rule 7 of the IAS (Cadre) Rules, 1954 were notified
on 13.04.2016 (Annexure-II) by the Services Division.
Further Observation
9.3. The Committee takes note of the reply.
RECRUITMENT DRIVE FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (PWD)
Recommendation/observation
10.0. The Committee desires that posts reserved for PWDs which could not be filled up should be carried
forward and not transferred to another category. The Department should take all out effort to fill up

7
vacancies under reserved categories and not take the plea of not finding any candidate eligible. The
Committee further recommends that the eligibility criteria for these reserved posts be reviewed, where
eligible candidates are scarce and skill development approach should be applied to absorb them into the
system. (Para 38.4)
Action Taken
10.1. Section 32 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995 (PWD Act) provides for identification of posts which can be reserved for
Persons with Disabilities.
10.2. The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities administers the PWD Act.
10.3. Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities identify posts suitable for each category
viz. (i) blindness or low vision (ii) hearing impairment and (iii) locomotor disability or cerebral palsy, in
the posts identified for each disability.
10.4. Though there is a provision in the Section 36 of the PWD for carrying forward of vacancies for
Persons with Disability and subsequent interchange of vacancies among the three categories in case of
non-availability of candidates, the Government has taken steps to fill up vacancies identified for respective
category of person with disability through instruction issued in May, 2015 to carry out Special Recruitment
Drive.
10.5. Thirteen Inter-Ministerial Committee Meetings at the level of Secretary (Personnel) have been held
between June, 2015 to May, 2016 to monitor the filling up of vacancies for Persons with Disabilities.
12377 vacancies for the persons with disabilities have been filled up. Concerted and continuous efforts
are being made to fill up vacancies identified for each category of person with disability.
10.6. A Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment
was constituted in July, 2013 comprising representatives from 20 Ministries/Departments to make in-
depth analysis of the reasons for non-filling up reserved vacancies/less employability of SCs, STs, OBCs
and Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) in Government sector and to suggest remedial measures. Keeping
in view the recommendations of the Committee, time bound deliverables have been identified and intimated
to Ministries/Departments to constitute in-house Expert Committee, preparation of data-sheet in regard
to backlog vacancies, study the reasons for non-filling up of reserved posts, identify more posts for
persons with disabilities and to fill up such vacancies, including those of persons with disabilities.
Further Observation
10.7. The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS & PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
Pilot Projects on Administrative Reforms
Recommendation/observation
11.0. "While taking note of the steps taken by the Department of Administrative Reforms with regard
to modernization of Government Offices, the Committee is of the view that the Department should not

8
merely play the role of a funding agency for the schemes, but should take upon itself the task of
monitoring the effective execution of the schemes in the offices undergoing modernization.
11.1. While the Committee appreciate advocacy of Good Governance and Best Practices in public
administration through informative booklets, pamphlets, CDs etc. by the Department, it advocate that
implementation of these schemes should not only confine to printing of information material but actual
achievements of principles and targets envisaged in the scheme and policies, should be accomplished
through other innovative means and continuous training and skill development." (Para 41.3)
Action Taken
11.2. After the release of funds, the Additional Secretary, DARPG regularly reviews the implementation
of modernization of projects and utilization of funds. At the end of financial year, this review is done
almost on a daily basis. The concerned officials of the Department also visit the site of the projects.
11.3. The objective of PM Award Scheme is to acknowledge, recognise and reward the extraordinary
and innovative work done by officials/ organizations of the Central, State Governments, Autonomous
Bodies, Urban Local Bodies, Panchayats, ZilaParishads. To meet this objective and also to take advantage
of benefits accrue to the best practices, the Department is making following efforts:
(i) Pursuing State/UTs to replicate the PM Award winning initiatives in their States/UTs according
to their suitability. In this connection number of meetings with State/UT Govt. have been
held through video conferencing. With the result out of 17 initiatives awarded PM Award
on 21st April, 2015, 23 States and one UT have identified 14 initiatives for replication in
their States/UTs as per their suitability. As this is a huge task which needs to be completed
in a time bound manner, the Department has also engaged Administrative Staff College of
India (ASCI), Hyderabad to give technical support in this project. The ASCI has been
mandated to visit different sites (approx.100) across the country and also to conduct
workshop, meeting etc. with State and Central Governments so that best practices identified
by the States could be rolled out in an effective and time bound manner and benefit out of
these initiatives could reach to the common citizen in a shortest possible time.
(ii) The Department operates a scheme under State Collaboration Initiative (SCI) for funding
to the States/UT Governments for improvement in public administration and public service
delivery system. The Department has revised the guidelines to include funding to the project
of the State/UT Govt. for replicating PM Awarded initiatives.
(iii) The Department imparts foreign training to the Champions of Award winning initiatives.
(iv) The Department carries out Research & Evaluation study of the PM Awarded initiatives.
The study report then circulated to the all State/ Central Training Institutes for training
purpose.
Further Observation
11.4. The Committee takes note of the reply.

9
Recommendation/Observation
12.0. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department in involving International Experts to
analyse and study the e-governance methods, processes and technology employed by Government institutions
which will be indicative of the country's actual standing in the international standards. The move for
a Knowledge Repository is also welcome. It hopes the endeavour of the Department to take the country
at par with the e-Governance practices of other advanced countries will be realized very soon.
(Para 41.5)
Action Taken
12.1. UNDP has been partnering with DARPG since the last quarter of 2013. The key focus of the
project is to assist in the area of administrative reforms and Government Business process Re-engineering
through e-governance and sharing of knowledge on global best practices. Last year in August, 2015, the
focus of the partnership took a new turn with the Department shifting its focus to improving India's
e-governance through online citizen-centric services and thereby, improving India's global ranking in the
UN e-Government Development Index 2018. DARPG has asked UNDP's assistance in bringing out a
comprehensive e-Governance Roadmap with short-term actions primarily focused on these milestones
that would help in enhancing India's global ranking. Some of the short- term actions have been completed
in 2015, other need to be completed along with the medium-term actions by mid-July, 2016. Actions are
to be taken on the following activities as per Annual Work Plan 2016.
(a) Bring out a sub-National e-Government Index with targets to motivate States in enhancing
their online citizen-centric services delivery.
(b) Consolidate e-Governance services through the India National Portal and standardize channel
interfaces.
Further Observation
12.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
PUBLIC GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL
Recommendation/Observation
13.0. The Committee takes note of the colossal increase in the number of grievances received lately and
the corresponding disposal of the Grievances by the concerned Departments. It is of the conviction that
the essence of good governance is defeated in the absence of efficient and timely redressal of grievance.
Therefore, the DARPG should keep close vigil over monitoring of grievance redressal in every Ministry/
Department. (Para 42.4)
Action Taken
13.1. Monitoring of pendency of Grievances is being done regularly through review meetings held
monthly. 22 such review meetings have been held during 2014-2015 which have been attended by almost
all the Ministries/Departments.

10
Further Observation
13.2. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Ministry should, however, take measures to
ensure that the rate of disposal of grievances is increased and quality disposal of grievances is
made.
Recommendation/Observation
14.0. "Good Governance" is reflected by the peoples' satisfaction on the working of, accessibility to,
delivery of services by the system whereas a large number of grievance petitions show a Department in
a bad light. The Committee is of the view that the spirit of Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism is
primarily to resolve the grievances to the satisfaction of the petitioner. The Committee strongly feels that
the relief and remedial mechanism should also fix the accountability on the decision making authorities.
The Committee notes that the data provided to the Committee does not reflect the satisfaction of the
petitioners in respect of the redressal of their grievances. The Committee is apprehensive that in the event
of dissatisfaction of petitioners on the redressal of their grievances, the petitioners are bound to approach
courts for redressal of their grievances. Hence, the Committee desires that the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances should conduct a study to find out the number of complainants who had
gone to courts/tribunals and how many cases the courts/tribunals ruled in favour of the petitioners. It
further desires that while submitting the ATRs, the findings of the study may be furnished for the
consideration of the Committee. (Para 42.6)
Action Taken
14.1. The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances has no such information regarding
complainants who have approached courts/tribunals on being dissatisfied with the grievance redressal and
have got favourable recourse from the courts. Information regarding Court Cases arising out of non-redress
of public grievance is being collected. A study is also being proposed to be undertaken on this issue after
which the findings will be furnished to the Committee.
Further Observation
14.2. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Department should, however, furnish the
information once it is collected by it as also the results of proposed study to the Committee.
ROLE OF DARPG
Recommendation/Observation
15.0. The DARPG should realize the crucial role of the Department in this regard and having so many
high cadre officers should take a pro active stand to see that these recommendations are implemented
in war footing mode to give "Good Governance" in real time basis. (Para 42.7)
Action Taken
15.1. The Department has noted the observations of the Committee.

11
Further Observation
15.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Department of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare
CENTRALIZED PENSION GRIEV ANCE REDRESS AND MONITORING SYSTEM (CPENGRAMS)
Recommendation/Observation
16.0. The Committee desires that this Department should play a role as an apex level coordination entity
for addressing the grievances of pensioners. The Committee is of the firm belief that pension is a right
and not merely a privilege. It welcomes the initiatives 'Bhavishya', 'Sankalp' and 'Anubhav' and hopes
that maximum pensioners will be benefited by these initiatives. The Committee, at the same time is very
much concerned about their welfare and accordingly recommends that nodal officers should be appointed
in every Department including PSUs in their respective establishments to attend to the welfare of
pensioners and represent them if required to the concerned authorities. (Para 43.3)
Action Taken
16.1. Implementation of pension policy is dealt with in respective Ministries/Departments and their
subordinate formations, from where the employee retires as well as the pension disbursing authority.
Nodal Officers for pension related grievances have been nominated in all Ministries/ Departments. Details
are available on the Pensioners' Portal website. Since the matters relating to welfare of pensioners (except
policy issues) are to be dealt with by respective Ministries/ Departments, the recommendations of the
Standing Committee as made in para 43.3 have been communicated to all Ministries/ Departments
including those regarding appointment of Nodal Officers for pensioners welfare in every PSU and will
be followed up.
Further Observation
16.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
17.0. The Committee feels that every public servant will eventually become a pensioner in their lifetime.
The Trade Union and Employees/Officers Union of Organisations/Departments may be allowed to negotiate
with their employer for improvement of the post-retirement issues along with the existing service conditions.
The Government can also use the expertise of the post retiree citizens productively in various fields in
order to boost their morale and give them renewed zest to life. The Government should also approach
the elder citizens (retirees) in positive way by calling annual meetings and discuss their welfare. Therefore,
the Committee recommends that the Department should give serious consideration to these suggestions.
(Para 43.4)
Action Taken
17.1. W ith a view to use the expertise of pensioners productively the Department has launched a web
enabled application - Sankalp which aims at channelizing skill, experience and time available with retired

12
government servants into meaningful, voluntary contribution to society. This would add to the social
capital of the country and at the same time restore dignity and purpose to life post-retirement.
17.2 The Department, on the recommendation of Parliamentary Consultative Committee, has also
constituted a Standing Committee of Voluntary Agencies (SCOVA) to mobilize the voluntary efforts to
supplement the Government action. It is a useful forum for holding consultation with the pensioners
through their Associations and provides them an opportunity for raising their problem directly before the
concerned Ministries, as the official of these Ministries are also present in the meeting. The meetings
of SCOV A also provide valuable feedback to the Government for effective implementation of the programmes
and give direction for the future course of action. Due representation has been given to various Pensioners'
Associations in the SCOVA. The meeting of SCOV A is held twice a year and are chaired by Hon'ble MOS
(PP).
17.3 The recommendation of the Standing Committee, as made out in para 43.4 of their subject Report,
have been brought to the notice of all Ministries/ Departments for further appropriate action.
Further Observation
17.4. The Committee takes note of the reply.

13
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
Department of Personnel & Training
LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ADMINISTRATION (LBSNAA)
Shortage of trainers at LBSNAA
Recommendation/observation
1.0. The Committee expects that the premier training institution of the country ought to be adequately
equipped not only in physical terms but also in terms of its manpower. Due to the fact that the whole
system of governance is now changing and the international pressure and expectations are now high,
flexibility has to be brought into the system. In that context, all training programmes confined to one
location may not be the single answer to the existing problem of shortage of manpower. Accordingly,
other feasible options of handling the situation may be explored. At the same time, the DoPT should
evolve a policy which can address this constraint of the LBSNAA. (Para 31.2)
Action Taken
1.1. Academy is utilizing the services of other training academies/Institutes by conducting special /
parallel foundation and induction training courses.
Further Observation
1.2. The Committee takes note of the reply. However, DoPT should evolve a policy to address
the acute shortage of trainers.
STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION (SSC)
Computer based examination
Recommendation/Observation
2.0. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the SSC in adopting the Computer based mode of
conducting its examinations which has reduced the time taken from filling up of applications by the
candidates to declaration of results. The Committee hopes that more efforts for better management may
be invested by both the Commission which would further reduce the time. It is of the firm belief that
the time of the young applicants is very valuable and therefore, the Commission should make all out
efforts to not waste their time by making long lapses in declaring result of examinations.  (Para 35.3)
2.1 In view of the high increase in number of applicants, the Committee recommends that commensurate
enhancement in the budgetary allocation should also be made by the DoPT. As the SSC adopted the
13

14
Computer base mode of conducting examinations, the Committee desires that all caution should be taken
to ensure that examinations are inaccessible to candidates from far flung and rural areas were commodities
such as electricity, computers are scarce. The Committee further recommends that the SSC should ensure
to authenticate institutions in rural areas to train the youths in those rural areas with regard to the
computer system. (Para 35.4)
Action Taken
2.2. The Staff Selection Commission (SSC) is mandated to conduct eight All India Open Competitive
Examinations in a year. The Commission has been conducting these examinations in the OMR Based
Mode and in the current year the Commission has been requested to conduct Combined Graduate Level
Examination, 2016 in the Computer Based Mode. The Commission has already conducted the Re-
examination of Sub-Inspectors in Delhi Police, Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) and Assistant Sub-
Inspectors in CISF Examination 2016 in the Computer Based Mode in June 2016. The decision to change
the mode of conduct of examination from OMR Based Mode to Computer Based Mode is expected to
increase confidentiality in Question Paper Management and Administration, faster processing of results
by the SSC besides better data management.
2.3 The Government has requested the Commission to conduct the Combined Graduate Level
Examination, 2016, i.e. the flagship examination of the Commission in Computer Based Examination
Mode. The Government has also requested the SSC to take expeditious steps to revamp the scheme of
other examinations conducted by it on the lines of the changes approved for CGLE.
2.4 The Commission has exercised due caution and taken initial measures to ensure that the computer
based examinations are easily accessible to candidates from far flung and rural areas. These measures
inter-alia include:
(i) Simplification of the format / procedures for on-line registration for candidates from far
flung and rural areas;
(ii) Uploaded an 'animated walk through module' on the website of the Commission and its
Regional Offices, to comprehensively educate the candidates on the salient processes entailed
for conduct of the computer based examinations.
2.5. Uploaded practice tests' and mock drills' for candidates on the website of the Commission and its
Regional Offices so that candidates can regularly practice and adapt themselves to the computer based
mode of examinations.
Further Observation
2.6. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee also appreciates the conducting
of Computer based examinations by the SSC in the year 2016 and the steps taken for making
such examinations accessible to candidates from far flung and rural areas.
CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION (CIC)
Pendency of cases in CIC
Recommendation/Observation
3.0. The Committee takes note of the upcoming building for the CIC which on completion, it hopes,
will boost the morale of the CIC and in turn will result in the greater efficiency of the Commission. With

15
regard to the pendency of cases with the Commission, the Committee recommends that the CIC should
take holistic approach to ensure that the cases pending with it are disposed off in a time-bound manner.
(Para 36.3)
Action Taken
3.1. As per MoU signed between CIC and NBCC, the date of Completion (likely) of the new CIC
building under construction is 31.03.2018.
With regard to pendency of cases with the Commission, recently Central Govt. has appointed three
more Information Commissioners in the Commission bringing the Commission to work in its full strength
for the first time, i.e. 1 CIC and 10 ICs. This would help the Commission to expedite the disposal of
pending cases. Further, with the strengthening of e-governance in the Commission, the process of
disposal of Appeals/Complaints will be expedited.
Further Observation
3.2. The Committee takes note of the reply, and hopes that with the Commission working with
its full strength, pace of disposal of cases would significantly improve and pendency of cases
reduce.
SUO MOTU DISCLOSURE BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES UNDER RTI
Recommendation/Observation
4.0. In this context, the Committee is of the view that the purpose of the institution of RTI and thereby
the CIC is to ensure transparency in the working of the Government and not to institute another platform
of justice dispensation. Therefore, the CIC should function more as a mediator between the information
seeker and the information giver. On the other hand, all department and ministries should be encouraged
for voluntary disclosure of information as per Section 2(4) of the RTI Act. All information providers,
such as the Departments and Ministries should be in a position to give remedy to the ordinary people
to inform how the tax-payers money is spent. (Para 36.4)
Action Taken
4.1. W ith a view to maximize suo-motu disclosure by public authorities so that citizens need not resort
to filling RTI applications to obtain information, guidelines had been issued to all the Ministries/Departments
of Govt. of India on 15.04.2013. DoPT has further issued instructions to all Public Authorities vide O.M.
No. 1/1/2013-IR, dated 9th July, 2015(Annexure-III)that the Departments must take an analysis of
information which is sought most often from applicants and provide it on their website as suo-motu
disclosure.
4.2. Another OM No. 1/34/2013-IR dated 30th June, 2016 (Annexure-IV) has been issued giving
directions to all Public Authorities under Central Government to inter alia improve their mechanisms of
suo-motu disclosure through:
(i) Constitution of Consultative Committees of stakeholders,
(ii) Having Information and Facilitation Centers,

16
(iii) Proper categorization and organization of information that is disclosed for its easy
retrieval, and
(iv) To undertake Transparency audit of their suo-motu disclosure.
4.3. Further, CIC is taking necessary measures for improvement in the quality of suo-motu disclosure
under Section 4(1)b.
Further Observation
4.4. The Committee takes note of the reply and further recommends that the CIC may also
insure that its instructions in this regard are adhered to by the Public Authorities.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS & PUBLIC GRIEVANCES (DARPG)
Public Grievance Redressal
Recommendation/observation
5.0. The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the Department to assess and analyse the quality
of grievance redressal in the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. It hopes that the
Department will continue the exercise with other Ministries/Departments as well. The Committee further
recommends that the data thus collected from the Ministries/Departments should be uploaded in its
website and given wide publicity to procreate the zeal for holistic address of the issue in the Ministries/
Departments. (Para 42.5)
Action Taken
5.1. Grievance Analysis Study was got conducted for 20 Ministries/Departments which accounted for
around 75% of the grievances received on CPGRAMs. It is proposed that a similar study will be
conducted for the next 20 Ministries/ Departments in terms of volume of grievances.
Further Observation
5.2. The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the efforts of the Department for
not only disposing of Grievances but assessing and analyzing the quality of grievance redressal
in the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. The data thus collected from various
Ministries/Department should be uploaded on the website of the Department.

17
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Reduction of Budgetary allocation
Recommendation/Observation
1.0. The Committee strongly recommends for making adequate funds available to the CBI to enable
it to implement its Plan schemes to the ideal stipulation. The Committee is however unable to understand
why the allocation of ` 85.07 BE (2015-16) was reduced to ` 75.25 crore at the RE stage and then to
` 75.00 crore as BE this year. The Committee however surmises that fund reductions could be for the
reason that the spending units, CBI in this case, were unable to utilise 50% of the funds within the first
six months of the financial year, hence funds got reduced at next year's BE. The Committee apprehends
that such a reduction may affect the pace of implementation of schemes. The Ministry in their action
taken replies should clarify the same, explain the reasons for such reductions and also suggest how it
can be avoided. Meanwhile, the Committee recommends to the CBI to beef up the pace of the
implementation of its proposed schemes. (Para 30.3)
Action Taken
1.1. Funds as demanded by CBI in BE-2016-17 has been provided to them. At present, CBI has made
'Nil' requirement of funds in first batch of demand for Supplementary. As far as under utilization of 50%
of the funds within the first six months of the financial year 2015-16 is concerned, CBI has stated the
reasons and action taken in the current year as tabulated in Annexure-V .
Further Observation
1.2. The Committee expresses its serious concern over non utilization of funds owing to procedural
reasons which could have been avoided with better monitoring. Considering the responsibility
entrusted to the CBI these procedural hassles needs to be addressed so that funds made available
to the agency are utilized and the schemes are implemented as per schedule. The Committee
accordingly impress upon the DoPT & the CBI to take necessary measures so that under-
utilizations of funds is avoided in future.
VACANCY POSITION IN CBI
Recommendation/Observation
2.0. The Committee expresses deep concern on the state of affairs relating to the vacancy position in
the CBI. It therefore impresses upon the DoPT to complete the exercise of cadre review by June, 30, 2016
17

18
as per the direction of the Supreme Court to deal with the vacancy position of the establishment. The
Committee is apprehensive that unless the present malady of massive vacancy is not corrected immediately,
the very purpose of establishment of the CBI would be eroded and its credibility tarnished. At this
juncture when the nation envisages the premier investigating agency of the country to be at par with their
international counterparts, performance and result oriented and equipped to combat the challenges of
international pressures of transnational terrorism, cyber-crimes and corruption, the Committee is disheartened
that the CBI is crippled with a very basic requirement, shortage of manpower.
Action Taken
2.1. The Central Bureau of Investigation, as a multi disciplinary premier investigation agency, investigates
cases wherein sensitivity and dimensions require high degree of expertise, hard work, professionalism
and responsibility. Due to the deputationist character of the Bureau, there will always be certain vacancies
due to the cyclical nature of officers coming and going on deputation, and active cases seeking new
officers on deputation are always under process. The number of vacancies keeps on varying depending
on the induction, promotion, repatriation and retirement of officers. Department of Personnel & Training
concerned with filling up posts of level of SP and above in CBI has filled up a number of vacant posts
at senior level on the recommendations of CBI Selection Committee headed by CVC. CBI, responsible
with filling up vacancies at junior level executive posts, has made persistent efforts to fill up these posts
by various methods of recruitment. DoPT as well as CBI has pursued with UPSC to expedite recruitment
process in respect of various vacant executive / legal / technical posts in CBI at different levels. CBI
has also taken steps for conducting DPCs to expedite appointments for vacant executive posts at various
levels by promotion in time bound manner. Further, CBI is in the process of reviewing its Recruitment
Rules and an Internal Committee has been constituted for this purpose to expedite the recruitment
process. The recruitments made during 2015-16 & 2016-17 are furnished in Annexure-VI.
Further Observation
2.2. The Committee is of the view that the CBI must ensure adequate staffing in order to deal
with the rising burden of investigations. The process for recruitment of manpower on deputation
should be initiated well in advance before the vacancies arise, so that the gap between occurrence
of vacancies and their filling is reduced to the minimum possible. The Committee is however
constrained to note that the information given in ATR does not categorically explain the actual
status of vacancies. The Committee desires to be apprised with the actual status of vacancies.
The Committee accordingly advises that proactive steps must be undertaken to fill up the
existing vacancies in a time bound manner .
IMPLEMENTATION OF 24 REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON CBI
Recommendation/Observation
3.0 With cases being referred by States and Courts to the CBI for investigation, the Committee
acknowledges the burden of load bestowed upon it. However, it is of the concerted views that, the CBI
turn to the State or other Central Forces to plug the vacancy in the establishment. It therefore, desires
that the CBI manage its cadre more efficiently and the DoPT should take holistic steps to hasten the
part of recruitment in consultation with the UPSC. For that matter, the Committee strongly recommends

19
the DoPT to revisit the 24th Report of the Committee on 'The Working of the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI)' wherein, after an exhaustive examination and intensive study of the issues, had
recommended workable ways to strengthen the CBI which included an enactment for the CBI.
(Para 30.7.1)
Action Taken
3.1. The 24th Report of the Committee on 'The Working of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)'
had given recommendations for strengthening CBI. The most of the recommendations have so far been
implemented by the Government. The major decisions taken from time to time to strengthen CBI are:-
(a) Director CBI has been delegated financial powers equivalent to Director Generals of CAPFs
and CRPF vide DoPT's orders dated 22.07.2013 and 22.01.2014.
(b) The amendments to the Delhi Special Police Establishment (DSPE) Act, 1946 have been
made through the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, providing for appointment of the
Director, CBI and the Director of Prosecution, CBI in order to give them autonomy and
independence.
(c) Director CBI has further been given more administrative powers to strengthen CBI like
recruitment to the post of DySP in exemption from consultation of UPSC for recruitment
to the post of Dy SP for a period of three year, extension in the deputation tenure of
Inspectors in CBI upto 10th year, seeking first stage advice in disciplinary cases against CBI
officers directly from CVC, etc.
(d) To further strengthen CBI, 598 posts have been created in CBI during the year 2015-16.
To make it a modern and efficient organization, Government has taken various measures
which inter alia include modernization, improvement in training, infrastructure, housing and
improving condition of work and employment of staff of the CBI. A Plan outlay of Rs 309
crores under various schemes in the 12th plan have been provided for CBI.
(e) Furthermore, two separate schemes for establishment of Centralized Technology Vertical
(CTV)-CBI and International Center for Excellence in Investigation (ICEI)-CBI are under
consideration in the Department.
(f) CBI, since submission of 24th Report of the Committee on 'The Working of the Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI)', has grown into more dynamic and efficient organization with
aforesaid measures strengthening CBI. The subject of bringing a separate statute for CBI
has been considered and it has been concluded that the Constitution would require to be
amended, which may also impinge on the federal structure of the Constitution and the
mandate of Parliament to enact a law which would be in conflict with Entry 2 of List II
which is in the domain of the States. Therefore, it is not open to the Central Government
to constitute a CBI and confer on it powers which will impinge on all the powers of
investigation of offences which are conferred on the state police.
Further Observation
3.2. The Committee is of the view that the powers given to the CBI under DSPE Act are not
adequate enough considering the pace of changing times and in this context the Committee
recommended for a separate statute for CBI. Further, the apprehensions raised by the Department

20
have been adequately answered in its Twenty-fourth report of the Committee. Thus the Committee
reiterates its recommendations made in this regard.
LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ADMINISTRATION (LBSNAA)
REDUCTION OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION TO LBSNAA
Recommendation/Observation
4.0. The AS & FA of the Ministry had given justifications for the reduction of the funds allocated for
LBSNAA that the Academy did not make a fifty per cent utilization by September of the financial year
2015-16 which led to the reduction of funds at the RE stage. Further by the end of that financial year,
the utilization was 85% of the total allocation and therefore the budgetary allocation for 2016-17 has
been reduced. However, the Committee is the view that reduction of budgetary allocation reflects that
the spending unit has not assessed its targets thoroughly before making the projections. It, therefore,
desires that such instances of lapse should be avoided at all cost. The Committee, accordingly, desires
that all spending units of the Ministry may be required to furnish their respective percentage of expenditure
as on that date when furnishing the Action Taken Replies of this Report. (Para 28)
Action Taken
4.1. The trend of expenditure by each spending unit is closely monitored on regular basis at senior
levels and all Organisations/Divisions are suitably instructed to ensure to assess their targets thoroughly
while making projections and achieve expenditure targets accordingly.
4.2. A statement showing the percentage of expenditure incurred by each spending unit included in
Grant No.64 is attached at  Annexure-VII.
Further Observation
4.3. The Committee notes that as per the Statement of Expenditure as on 31st August, 2016,
the LBSNAA has been able to utilize only 22.90% of plan expenditure and 17.68% of non-plan
expenditure, whereas the organizations are required to utilize 50% of the allocated budget by
30th September, 2016. The DoPT must, therefore, ensure that such instructions on utilization of
allotted funds are strictly adhered to by these organizations.
UTILIZATION OF FUNDS ALLOCATED TO DEPARTMENTS
Recommendation/Observation
5.0. The Committee is on the whole, in respect of fund management of the Ministry, is happy with the
performance of the Ministry. It however, wishes to recommend that every Department should ensure that
early commencement of its schemes/projects to ensure the 50% utilization of the funds before September
of each year so as to avoid fund reduction by the Ministry of Finance. (Para 29)
Action Taken
5.1. The observation of the Committee has been noted. The trend of expenditure incurred by each
Spending Unit is monitored on a regular basis at senior levels and all concerned Divisions / Organisations

21
are suitably instructed from time to time to ensure that 50% of allocated budget is utilized by 30th
September, 2016.
5.2. T ill 31st August, 2016, the Ministry has incurred an expenditure of 31.60% and 31.57% of Plan
and Non-Plan Allocations respectively for the current F.Y .(2016-17).
Further Observation
5.3. The Committee takes note that as per the Statement of Expenditure as on 31st August,
2016 Departments/Organizations such as SSC, ISTM & LBSNAA have utilized less than one-third
of their plan and non-plan expenditure which is not in tandem with the M/o Finance instructions
of utilization of 50% of allotted budget by September of the current financial year. This means
either units are projecting fund requirements which are more than actuals or implementation/
expenditure is non efficient and both these situations reflect poorly on the Department. The
Department should ensure that projection of funds by units is realistic and monitoring is effective
enough to ensure proper utilization of funds.
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL (CAT)
Grievance Redressal Mechanism
Recommendation/Observation
6.0. The Committee is of the concerted opinion that employees frustrated with the service condition
approach Courts, including CAT where they end up waiting for years for the judgment and thereby the
entire system is adversely affected. The Committee feels that many of the cases in service matters can
be settled by mediation within the system itself. The Committee is of the opinion that in the administration,
the senior officer be made duty-bound to resolve the grievances of the subordinate officers. He is
expected to sit along with the aggrieved and decide the matter, get the concurrence of the supreme
authority and complete the entire process. The tribunals/ Courts are needed to be resorted to, only in
the rarest matters. Thus, the Committee calls for a drastic change in the attitude of the administration.
(Para 33.4)
Action Taken
6.1. Redressal of grievances system is already there where a Government employee can approach to
higher officers for redressal of his grievance. Also as per CAT Act, a Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit
an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant has availed of all the remedies to him under the
relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances.
Further Observation
6.2. The in-house Grievance Redressal system in the organization should effectively deal with
the grievances of the employees. The Committee has, therefore, suggested that a nodal officer
of senior level be appointed to ensure redressal of grievances. If grievances are satisfactorily
redressed, the burden on adjudicating bodies would automatically be reduced. Thus the Committee
reiterates its recommendation in this regard and Govt. should take steps to enhance the efficacy
of these Grievance Redressal systems.

22
FILLING OF V ACANCIES IN V ARIOUS ORGANIZATION UNDER DoPT
Recommendation/Observation
7.0. The Committee is necessitated to refer to the submissions of the various subordinate offices within
its jurisdiction, such as, the CBI, CIC, CVC, LBSNAA, ISTM, etc. wherein they have highlighted the
gross vacancies of sanctioned posts are lying unfilled-up. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
DoPT in sync with the UPSC assess the extent of shortfall of staffs in all Ministries/Departments and
attached bodies of the Central Government. The DoPT and the UPSC may thereto work out the manner
in which these vacancies may be filled up at the earliest. (Para 34.4)
Action Taken
7.1. The observation of the Committee has been noted. Recruitment to the vacant posts is a continuous
and time consuming process. Therefore, there is always a shortfall between the sanctioned posts and
incumbency position. The recruitment to any post is required to be made as per the Recruitment Rules.
The Government takes necessary steps to fill the vacancies from time to time.
7.2. As regards the vacancies in the organisations under DoPT such as CBI, CIC, CVC, LBSNAA,
ISTM etc., the position was reviewed at senior level and necessary instructions have been issued to all
concerned to expedite the process of recruitment by the Recruiting Agencies. The recommendation of
the Committee has been conveyed to all concerned Divisions / Organisations under DoPT to take
necessary action for filling up of vacancies as recommended by the Committee. A copy of O.M. dated
27.7.2016 is at Annexure-VIII.
Further Observation
7.3. The subordinate offices and other organizations under the DoPT play a very important role
in the personnel management and governance. Thus DoPT should take proactive steps to fill up
the anticipated vacancies well in advance, so that the functioning of these organizations does not
get adversely affected. Committee reiterates its recommendations in this regard.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS & PUBLIC GRIEVANCES (DARPG)
Modernization of Government Offices
Recommendation/Observation
8.0. The Committee is disappointed that in only one year short of three decades the Department has
been unable to complete this Plan scheme. Keeping in view the advancements in IT and communication
all over the world, the Committee urges upon the Government to modernize the entire administrative
apparatus, which should come up to the levels of excellence in administration in the present era of
globalization within a set time-frame. In this regard, the Committee recommends that, if the need be,
higher budgetary projections may be made at the RE stage under this component so that the completion
of the Scheme is not further procrastinated. This will enable the Department to focus on new initiatives.
(Para 40.2)

23
Action Taken
8.1. The 'Modernization of Government Offices' Scheme, being administered by the Department of
Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances (DARPG) is applicable only to Central Government offices
located in the city of Delhi. In order to give catalytic effect to modernization as an overall process of
administrative reforms, the Department extends financial support to the offices for modernization. The
Department gives only 75 per cent of the total cost of the project and the beneficiary has to chip in with
25 per cent of the cost. Once the financial assistance is given as per the existing guidelines, it is expected
that the beneficiaries will carry forward their modernization projects in future on their own. The Ministries/
Departments have their own allocation for 'Minor Works' in the Annual Budget. The DARPG at present
does not have wherewithal and infrastructure to go in for large scale modernization of entire administrative
apparatus of the Government.
Further Observation
8.2. As more and more services of the Government are becoming IT enabled, modernization
of Government Offices is a must for efficient and responsive Government. Inadequate budgetary
allocation and infrastructure for the DARPG, which is the nodal Department for implementation
of the scheme "Modernization of Government Offices", is a matter of concern. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation that higher budgetary allocations should be made for the Department.

24
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCPTED BY THE MINISTRY
1. The Committee takes note of the reply.(Paras 1.2., 2.2., 3.2., 4.2., 5.2., 6.3., 7.4., 8.2., 9.3.,
10.7., 11.4., 12.2., 13.2., 14.2.,15.2)
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
2. The Committee takes note of the reply. However, DoPT should evolve a policy to address
the acute shortage of trainers. (1.2)
3. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee also appreciates the conducting
of Computer based examinations by the SSC in the year 2016 and the steps taken for making
such examinations accessible to candidates from far flung and rural areas. (2.6)
4. The Committee takes note of the reply, and hopes that with the Commission working with
its full strength, pace of disposal of cases would significantly improve and pendency of cases
reduce. (3.2)
5. The Committee takes note of the reply and further recommends that the CIC may also
insure that its instructions in this regard are adhered to by the Public Authorities. (4.4)
6. The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the efforts of the Department for
not only disposing of Grievances but assessing and analyzing the quality of grievance redressal
in the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. The data thus collected from various
Ministries/Department should be uploaded on the website of the Department. (5.2)
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY.
7. The Committee expresses its serious concern over non utilization of funds owing to procedural
reasons which could have been avoided with better monitoring. Considering the responsibility
entrusted to the CBI these procedural hassles needs to be addressed so that funds made available
to the agency are utilized and the schemes are implemented as per schedule. The Committee
accordingly impress upon the DoPT & the CBI to take necessary measures so that under-
utilizations of funds is avoided in future. (1.2)
24

25
8. The Committee is of the view that the CBI must ensure adequate staffing in order to deal
with the rising burden of investigations. The process for recruitment of manpower on deputation
should be initiated well in advance before the vacancies arise, so that the gap between occurrence
of vacancies and their filling is reduced to the minimum possible. The Committee is however
constrained to note that the information given in ATR does not categorically explain the actual
status of vacancies. The Committee desires to be apprised with the actual status of vacancies.
The Committee accordingly advises that proactive steps must be undertaken to fill up the
existing vacancies in a time bound manner . (2.2)
9. The Committee is of the view that the powers given to the CBI under DSPE Act are not
adequate enough considering the pace of changing times and In this context the Committee
recommended for a separate statute for CBI. Further, the apprehensions raised by the Department
have been adequately answered in its Twenty-fourth report of the Committee. Thus the Committee
reiterates its recommendations made In this regard. (3.2)
10. The Committee notes that as per the Statement of Expenditure as on 31st August, 2016,
the LBSNAA has been able to utilize only 22.90% of plan expenditure and 17.68% of non-plan
expenditure, whereas the organizations are required to utilize 50% of the allocated budget by
30th September , 2016. The DoPT must, therefore, ensure that such Instructions on utilization
of allotted funds are strictly adhered to by these organizations. (4.3)
11. The Committee takes note that as per the Statement of Expenditure as on 31st August,
2016 Departments/Organizations such as SSC, ISTM & LBSNAA have utilized less than one-third
of their plan and non-plan expenditure which is not in tandem with the M/o Finance instructions
of utilization of 50% of allotted budget by September of the current financial year. This means
either units are projecting fund requirements which are more than actuals or implementation/
expenditure is non efficient and both these situations reflect poorly on the Department. The
Department should ensure that projection of funds by units is realistic and monitoring is effective
enough to ensure proper utilization of funds. (5.3)
12. The in-house Grievance Redressal system in the organization should effectively deal with
the grievances of the employees. The Committee has, therefore, suggested that a nodal officer
of senior level be appointed to ensure redressal of grievances. If grievances are satisfactorily
redressed, the burden on adjudicating bodies would automatically be reduced. Thus the Committee
reiterates its recommendation in this regard and Govt. should take steps to enhance the efficacy
of these Grievance Redressal systems. (6.2)
13. The subordinate offices and other organizations under the DoPT play a very important role
in the personnel management and governance. Thus DoPT should take proactive steps to fill up
the anticipated vacancies well in advance, so that the functioning of these organizations does not
get adversely affected. Committee reiterates its recommendations in this regard. (7.3)
14. As more and more services of the Government are becoming IT enabled, modernization
of Government Offices is a must for efficient and responsive Government. Inadequate budgetary
allocation and infrastructure for the DARPG, which is the nodal Department for implementation
of the scheme "Modernization of Government Offices", is a matter of concern. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation that higher budgetary allocations should be made for the Department.
(8.2)

MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 24th January, 2017 in Committee Room 'E', Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
3. Shri D. Raja
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Tiruchi Siva
6. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Idris Ali
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Shri B.V . Nayak
11. Shri M. Udhayakumar
12. Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi
13. Shri Pralhad V . Joshi
14. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
29

30
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the consideration
and adoption of the draft *** and *** Eighty-ninth Reports of the Committee on (i) and (ii) Action Taken
Replies of the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 85th Report on
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, respectively.
Hon'ble Members deliberated on the Reports, and thereafter, the Reports were adopted with minor
amendments.
3. The Committee decided to present the *** and Eighty-ninth Reports to both Houses of Parliament
on the 7th February, 2017. It authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri D.Raja to present the
Report to Rajya Sabha and Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi and in her absence, Shri M. Udhayakumar to lay the
same in Lok Sabha.
4. The meeting adjourned at 3.00 P.M.
*** Related to other matters.