 
DEPART
ON
 
 
 
TMENT-R
N PERSON
REVIE
PA
RELATED
NNEL, PU
Rajya 
August
ONE HU
W OF GU
 (Presented
 (Laid on th
ARLIAME
RAJYA
D PARLIA
UBLIC GR
Sabha Sec
t, 2022 / S
UNDRED E
UARDIAN
d to the Rajy
he Table of L
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENT OF I
A SABHA
 
AMENTAR
RIEVANC
 
 
cretariat, 
ravana, 19
 
EIGHTEEN
ON 
NSHIP AN
 
ya Sabha on 
Lok Sabha on
INDIA 
A 
RY STAN
CES, LAW
 
 
New Delh
944 (Saka
NTH REPOR
ND ADOPT
8th August, 2
n 8th August,
NDING CO
W AND JU
hi 
a) 
RT 
TION LA
2022) 
, 2022) 
RE
  
OMMITT
STICE 
WS 
EPORT NO
118 
 
 
EE 
 
O. 

2 
C O N T E N T S 
PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 3 
2. I NTRODUCTION 4 
3. ACRONYMS 7 
4. R EPORT
CHAPTER 1 8 
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 2 11 
LAWS ON ADOPTION AND GUARDIANSHIP
CHAPTER 3 25 
REVIEW OF LAWS ON ADOPTION- OBSERVATIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
CHAPTER 4 39 
REVIEW OF LAWS ON GUARDIANSHIP- OBSERVATIONS
AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 44
6. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 53 

 
3 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. @Vacant 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
7. &Vacant 
8. ^Vacant 
9. Shri P. Wilson 
10. *Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
14. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' 
20. Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
31. #Shrimati Kalaben Mohanbhai Delkar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
3. Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary  
6. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Assistant Committee Officer 
__________________________ 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.11.2021 
#Nominated w.e.f.07.02.2022 
@Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. Sasmit Patra on 01.07.2022 
^Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Vivek K. Tankha on 29.06.2022 
&Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla on 04.07.2022 

 
4 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, hav ing been 
authorized by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present th e One Hundred 
Eighteenth Report on the Subject ‘ Review of Guardianship and Adoption 
Laws'. 
2.  The Committee identified the subject to review the extant L aws on 
Guardianship and Adoption and to identify the lacunae and short comings 
therein and to suggest reforms that can make these enactments m ore child 
friendly, welfare oriented and consonant with contemporary need s and times. 
The subject was, inter-alia, notified in Parliamentary Bulletin  Part-II No.60314 
dated 10th December, 2020. 
3. The Committee first heard the Secretary of Legislative Depar tment, 
Ministry of Law and Justice and Secretary, Ministry of Women an d Child 
Development during the meeting held on 9 th January, 2020. The Committee 
then heard the State Adoption Resource Agency of Maharashtra, s elect adoption 
centres and State Judicial Academy on the subject during study visit to Mumbai 
on 18 th January, 2020. During the third meeting on the subject held on  9 th 
November, 2020 a sub-Committee Comp rising five Members headed b y Shri 
Naresh Gujral was appointed to suggest contours of the subject and to identify 
the vital issues to be taken up by the Main Committee. The sub- committee held 
intense deliberations with the Secretary, Ministry of Women and  Child 
Development on 17th November, 2020. The sub-Committee presented its Report 
to the main Committee on 4 th January, 2021 in which it recommended among 
other things that the Committee should undertake a study visit to some adoption 
centres to have first hand information about the working of ado ption Laws. The 
Committee undertook a study visit to PALNA, a Specialized Adoption Agency  
based in Delhi on 17th November, 2021. 

 
5 
4.  While considering the Subject, the Committee mainly relied upon the 
following documents/information:-  
(i) The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenan ce Act, 1956; Juvenile Justice  Act 
2015; Juvenile Justice (Amendment) Act 2021;  
(ii) Guardians and Wards Act, 1890; The Hindu Minority and Guardians hip 
Act, 1956; Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2010; 
(iii) Adoption Regulations; Juvenile Justice Rules; 
(iv) Report no. 257 of the Law Commission on  "Reforms in Guardiansh ip 
and Custody Laws in India"; 
(v) Background notes and Replies to questionnaires received from Mi nistry 
of Law and Justice, Ministry of Women and Child Development, 
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment and Ministry of Minority Affairs; 
(vi) UNICEF statistics on orphans; 
(vii) 2020 Orphans report of INSAMER (IHH Humanitarian and Social 
Research Centre), PRS summary of JJ Act Amendment, 2021; 
(viii) Study tour report  (14-18 Jan, 2020); 
(ix)  Statistics from the website of CARA; CARINGS portal; 
(x) Replies of CARA to the Parliament; 
(xi) Social Audit Report of NCPCR on Child Care Institutions; and 
(xii) News and authentic sources on the internet. 
5.     The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to  the Secretaries 
of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice and Mini stry of Women 
and Child Development, authorities of CARA and others for furni shing 
necessary information/ documents and rendering valuable assista nce to the 
Committee in its deliberations.  
6.  For the facility of reference and convenience, the observat ions and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 

 
6 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeti ng held on 
the 4th August, 2022. 
    
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
4th August, 2022                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7 
ACRONYMS 
 
CARA  Central Adoption Resource Authority 
 
CARINGS Child Adoption Resour ce Information and Guidance 
System 
 
CCI Child Care Institution 
 
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all forms of 
Discrimination against Women 
 
CWC Child Welfare Committee 
 
DM   District Magistrate 
 
GWA   Guardians and Wards Act  
 
HAMA  Hindu Adoptions a nd Maintenance Act 
 
HMGA  Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act 
 
UNICEF  United Nations Children's Fund 
 
JJ   Juvenile Justice 
 
LGBTQ Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer 
 
NCPCR  National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
 
PAPs   Prospective Adoption Parents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
8 
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The Department related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice has taken up the subject ‘Re view of 
Guardianship and Adoption Laws’ for detailed examination. The C ommittee 
believes that every child deser ves a good future and feels that  t h e r e  i s  a n  
imminent need to empower children and give them access to basic  amenities 
and services. 
1.2 According to UNICEF, almost 10,000 children become orphans ever y 
day. There are about 140 million orphans in the world. The 2020  Orphan Report 
of IHH Humanitarian and Social Research Center (INSAMER) places the figure 
for India at 31 million. Since su ch children constitute the mos t fragile members 
of the society, it is the responsibility of the State to ensure  that they get a better 
childhood by providing them with a home like environment and ca re so that 
they reach their full potential. While there are legislations a nd mechanisms in 
place for facilitating adoption and guardianship in the country, a bird’s eye view 
of the state of affairs reveals that there is a need to reform the enactments 
forthwith. 
1.3 It was against this backdrop that the Committee embarked on a journey to 
review the laws governing adoption and Guardianship and to reco mmend 
measures that can make these enac tments more child friendly, we lfare oriented 
and consonant with contemporary needs and times. 
1.4 The Committee held a series of deliberations with various s takeholders 
during which it heard how the lac unae and inconsistencies in th e extant laws on 
adoption and guardianship are defeating the very spirit of the enactments and 
what can be done to improve their effectiveness. 
1.5 During its first meeting on the subject held on 9 th January 2020, the 
Committee heard the Secretaries of  Legislative Department of Mi nistry of Law 

 
9 
and Justice and Ministry of Women and Child Development. During  t h e  
meeting, Secretaries briefed the Committee on extant laws relat ing to adoption 
and guardianship and also apprised the Committee about the loop holes in the 
existing legislations and the initiatives taken by the Governme nt to overcome 
some of them. The  Chairman and Members spoke at length on the Challenges 
of adoption and guardianship laws  such as lengthy and cumbersom e adoption 
procedure under JJ Act, need for  early deinstitutionalization o f child, need to 
review the old colonial Guardians and Wards Act to suit contemp orary times, 
need for uniform laws on adoption and guardianship, need to do away with the 
term ‘illegitimate’ child in Guardians and Wards Act and Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, Patriarchal tone of the Guardianship laws and growing 
illegal/informal adoptions in the country among others. 
1.6 The Committee held its second meeting on the subject during  study visit 
to Mumbai on 18 th January 2020, during which it heard the State Adoption 
Resource Agency of Maharashtra, S elect adoption Centres and Sta te Judicial 
Academy in Mumbai. During the meeting, the Committee was appris ed that 
Orientation Programmes were conduc ted in the State for Judges w ith an object 
to sensitize the Judges and reduce the pendency of adoption cas es. The 
stakeholders also interacted with  the Committee and put forward  t h e i r  v i e w s  
and suggestions on the subject. 
1.7 During the third meeting on the subject held on 9 th November 2020, the 
Chairman decided to appoint a sub-Committee comprising Shri Nar esh Gujral 
as Convener, Shri Shiv Pratap S hukla, Shri P.Wilson, Shri Maloo k Nagar and 
Smt. Sandhya Ray as Members to s uggest the contours of the subj ect ‘Review 
of Guardianship and Adoption Laws ’ and to identify the vital is sues to be taken 
up by the Main Committee for further deliberation. The sub-Comm ittee held 
intense deliberations with the Secretary, Ministry of Women and  Child 
Development and the representat ives of Central Adoption Resourc e Authority 
on 17th November, 2020. 

 
10 
1.8 The sub-Committee deliberated  on various issues such as child trafficking 
in the guise of adoption, poor conditions in Specialized Adopti on Agencies and 
Child Care Institutions, abandonment of adopted children, incon sistencies 
between Hindu Adoption and Main tenance Act and Juvenile Justice  Act, need 
for greater involvement of the District Magistrates in the reha bilitation of 
Orphan, Abandoned and Surrendered Children among others. 
1.9 The sub-Committee presented its Report to the main Committe e during 
the meeting of the Committee held on 4 th January, 2021. Members suggested 
that the Committee should undertake a study visit to some adopt ion centres for 
an on-the-spot assessment of the subject under consideration. 
1.10 The Committee has undertaken a study visit to PALNA, a Spe cialized 
Adoption Agency based in Delhi, run by Delhi Council for Child welfare, a 
non-profit NGO established in 1952 on 17 th November, 2021. On the spot, the 
Committee examined various in-ho use facilities at PALNA includi ng newborn 
unit, toddler’s room, crisis units , kitchen, pre-school among o thers and 
interacted with care givers. The Committee observed that there are a significant 
number of special needs children at PALNA. During the visit, th e Committee  
interacted with the Joint Secretaries of the Ministries of Law and Justice & 
Women and Child Development, officials of CARA, State Adoption Resource 
Agency, Delhi and the management of PALNA about the lacunae and  
inconsistencies in extant laws on adoption and the reforms that  a r e  n e e d e d  t o  
facilitate smooth adoption and to combat trafficking in children. 
 
  

 
11 
Chapter 2 
Laws on Adoption and Guardianship 
Adoption and Guardianship: 
2.1 ‘Adoption’ is the process through which the adopted child i s permanently 
separated from his biological parents and becomes the lawful ch ild of his 
adoptive parents with all the rig hts, privileges and responsibi lities that are 
attached to a biological child. Guardianship establishes Guardi an-Ward 
relationship and Guardian is a person who takes care of the per son or the 
property of the ward or both person and property. The fundament al difference 
between adoption and guardianship is that the former establishe s a Parent-child 
relationship whereas the latter does not. 
History of Adoption and Guardianship: 
2.2 The first adoption laws were passed by England and Wales. I t was the 
Adoption of Children Act, 1926. Until that date, adoption had n ot been 
recognized as a legal concept. A l arge number of countries enac ted new 
adoption laws in the aftermath of the World War II. 
2.3 The custom and practice of adoption in India dates back to the ancient 
times. Although the act of adoption remains the same, the objec tive with which 
this act is carried out has differed. It usually ranged from th e humanitarian 
motive of caring and bringing up a neglected or destitute child , to a natural 
desire for a kid as an object of affection, a caretaker in old age, and an heir after 
death.  
2.4 The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act enacted in 1956 pro vided for 
the adoption of Hindu children by the adoptive parents belongin g to Hindus. 
This Act was not applicable to other communities. They had reco urse to 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 wherein they become Guardians of children. 
However, both HAMA and GAWA remained silent about orphan, aband oned 
and surrendered children. India became a signatory to the Unite d Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Child in 1992 which prescribed a se t of standards 

 
12 
to be adhered to by all State parties. Against this backdrop, J J Act was enacted 
in 2015 to provide a transparent  and verifiable mechanism of ad option and also 
to streamline the adoption of orphan, abandoned and surrendered children. 
2.5 The law on the subject of guardians and wards was contained  in several 
Acts and Regulations such as – 
a) Act 40 of 1858, passed in the Bengal Presidency and applicable to the 
Punjab, Oudh, in respect of mi nors who were not British subject s and 
who were not under the superintendence of a Court of Wards; 
b) Act 9 of 1861, relating to the cus tody and guardianship of minors who 
were not European British subjects,  and applicable to the whole  o f  
India; 
c) Act 20 of 1864, passed in the Bombay Presidency in respect of m inors 
who were not European British subjects; 
d) Act 13 of 1874, relating to the guardianship of European Britis h 
minors in territories beyond the jurisdiction of Chartered High  Courts; 
and 
e) Acts and Regulations in the Madras code relating to minors in t he 
Madras Presidency who were not European British subjects and we re 
not under the superintendence of Court of Wards. 
2.6 In order to consolidate and amend the law on the subject of  Guardians 
and Wards, the Guardians and Wards Bill was introduced in the C entral 
Legislature and was enacted as the Guardians and Wards Act, 189 0, to 
consolidate and amend the law relating to Guardians and Wards. 
Extant Laws on Adoption and Guardianship: 
2.7     The following are the extant laws governing Adoption and Guardianship 
in India: 
a) The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 
b) The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children Act), 2015 
c) Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 

 
13 
d) The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act. 
The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 
2.8 The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 is an Act to amend and 
codify the law relating to adoptions and maintenance among Hind us.  This Act 
provides for the maintenance and all the rights, privileges and  responsibilities 
that are attached to the relationship of the adopted children s imilar to biological 
child. 
2.9 Presently, the child adoptions among the Hindus are being g overned by 
this Act. This Act does not allow adoption of two children of t he same sex by 
one adoptive couple.  Further, it does not allow for adoption o f a child of the 
same sex as the biological child. 
2.10 Section 2 of the Act provides that this Act shall apply -  
(a) To a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, inc luding a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana o r Arya 
Samaj, 
(b) To a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) To any other person who is not a M uslim, Christian, Parsi or Je w by 
religion. 
2.11  Section 4 of the Act provi des for overriding effect of the Act.  It provides 
that save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,- 
(a) Any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or usage as 
part of that law or any other law in force immediately before t he 
commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respec t to any 
matter for which provision is made in this Act; 
(b) Any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act 
shall cease to apply to Hindus in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the 
provisions contained in this Act. 
2.12     Chapter II of the Act provides for adoption. Section 5  of the Act 
provides that adoptions shall be regulated in accordance with t he provisions 
contained in Chapter II.  Section 6 of the said Act provides fo r the requisites of 

 
14 
a valid adoption.  As per the sai d section, an adoption shall b e valid if (i) the 
person adopting has the capacity, and also the right, to take i n adoption; (ii) the 
person giving in adoption has the capacity to do so; (iii) the person adopted is 
capable of being taken in adoption; and (iv) the adoption is ma de compliance 
with the other conditions mentioned in this Chapter. 
2.13      Section 7 of the Act provides for capacity of a male Hindu to take in 
adoption and Section 8 thereof provides capacity of a female Hi ndu to take in 
adoption.  Both these sections inter alia, provide that any male or female Hindu 
who is of sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to tak e a son or 
daughter in adoption.  Further, section 9 of the said Act provi des for the 
persons capable of giving in a doption.  Sub-section (1) of the said section 
provides that no person expect fat her or mother or the guardian  of a child shall 
have the capacity to give the child in adoption. 
2.14     Section 10 of the said Act provides for the persons wh o may be 
adopted.  As per the said section, no person shall be capable o f being taken in 
adoption unless the following conditions are fulfilled, namely;- 
(i) He or she is a Hindu; 
(ii) He or she has not already been adopted; 
(iii) He or she has not been married, unless there is a custom or usa ge 
applicable to the parties which permits persons who are married  being 
taken in adoption. 
(iv) He or she has not completed the age of fifteen years, unless th ere is 
custom or usage applicable to the parties which permits persons  who 
have completed the age of fifteen years being taken in adoption. 
2.15      Section 11 of the Act p rovides for other conditions f o r  a  v a l i d  
adoption. The following conditions have to be complied with:- 
(i) If the adoption is of a son, the adoptive father or mother must not have 
a Hindu son or even son’s son or son’s son’s son (whether by 
legitimate blood relationship or  by adoption) living at the tim e of 
adoption; 

 
15 
(ii) If the adoption is of a daughter, the adoptive father or mother must not 
have a Hindu daughter or son’s daughter (whether by legitimate blood 
relationship or by adoption) living at the time of adoption; 
(iii) Where a daughter is adopted by a male then it is mandatory that  the 
adoptive father must be at least twenty-one years older than th e 
adoptive daughter; 
(iv) Where the adoption is by female and the child to be adopted is a male, 
the adoptive mother must be at least twenty-one years older tha n the 
person to be adopted; 
(v) It prevents the adoption of the  same child simultaneously by tw o or 
more persons; 
(vi) Adoption must result in actual giving and taking of the child. 
2.16      Section 12 of the Act provides for effects of a doption.  It provides 
that an adopted child shall be deemed to be the child of his or  her adoptive 
father or mother for all purposes with effect from the date of the adoption and 
from such date all the ties of the child in the family of his o r her birth shall be 
deemed to be severed and replaced by those created by the adopt ion in the 
adoptive family. 
2.17      Section 13 of the Act provides that subject to any ag reement to the 
contrary, an adoption does not de prive the adoptive father or m other of the 
power to dispose of their property by transfer inter vivos or by will. 
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 
2.18      The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 201 5 is 
an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to children al leged and 
found to be in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection by 
catering to their basic needs through proper care, protection, development, 
treatment, social re-integration, by adopting a child-friendly approach in the 
adjudication and disposal of matters in the best interest of ch ildren and for 
their rehabilitation through processes provided, and institutio ns and bodies 

 
16 
established, herein under and fo r matters connected wherewith o r incidental 
thereto. 
2.19      This Act has been enacted, keeping in view, among oth er things, the 
Hague Convention on Protection of  Children and Co-operation in respect of 
Inter-country Adoption (1993) a lso.  The Convention requires de signating a 
Central Authority for the purpose of Inter-country adoption.  A ccordingly, 
Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA) was given statutory status 
under section 68 of the Act and has been designated to carry ou t the functions 
of the Central Authority under th e Hague Convention on Protecti on of 
Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter-country Adoption. 
2.20       As per clause (1) of section 2 the Act an “abandoned child” means a 
child deserted by his biological  or adoptive parents or guardia ns, who has 
been declared as abandoned by the Child Welfare Committee after  due 
inquiry.  Clause (42) of section 2 defines that an “orphan” mea n s  a  c h i l d ,  
who is without biological or adoptive parents or legal guardian  o r  w h o s e  
legal guardian is not willing to  take, or capable of taking car e of the child.  
Further, clause(60) of the said section defines that a “surrend ered child” 
means a child, who is relinquished by the parent or guardian to  t h e  
Committee, on account of physical, emotional and social factors  beyond 
their control, and declared as such by the Committee. 
2.21       Chapter VIII of the Act deals with the matters relat ing to adoption.  
In the said Chapter, section 56 provides for adoption.  Sub-sec tion (1) of the 
said section 56 provides that adop tion shall be resorted to for  ensuring right 
to family for the orphan, abandoned and surrendered children as  p e r  t h e  
provisions of this Act, the rule s made there under and the adop tion and the 
adoption regulations framed by the Authority. 
 2.22       Sub-section (3) of s ection 56 of the Act also provi des that nothing 
 in this Act shall apply to the  adoption of children made under  t h e  
 provisions of Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956. Wherea s, in 

 
17 
 terms of sub-section (4) of sai d section all inter-country ado ptions shall be 
 done only as per this Act. 
2.23 Further, section 65 of the Act provides for specialized ad option 
agencies for the rehabilitation of orphan, abandoned or surrend ered children 
through adoption and non-institu tional care.  Further, the said  section also 
empowers the State Government to recognize on or more instituti ons or 
organizations, in each district as a Specialized Adoption Agenc y, in such 
manner as may be provided in the adoption regulations framed by  t h e  
Authority. 
2.24 Section 66 of the Act provides for adoption of children re siding in 
institutions not registered in a doption agencies.  As per the s aid section the 
agencies which may not have be en recognized as Specialised Adop tion 
Agencies shall also ensure that all orphan or abandoned or surr endered 
children under their care are reported, produced and declared legally free for 
adoption, by the Committee under section 38 of the Act. 
2.25 The Central Government had  notified the Adoption Regulatio ns, 
2017 under clause (c) of section 68 of the Act, inter alia prov iding for 
adoption. The regulations provide time-lines for each process a nd the 
responsibilities of different age ncies have been fixed.  Some o f the salient 
regulations are as follows:- 
(1) Procedures related to adoption by relatives both within the 
country and abroad have been defined in the Regulations. 
(2) Validity of Home Study Report has been increased from two to 
three years. 
(3) The time period available to the domestic Prospective Adoptive 
Parents for matching and acceptance, after reserving the child 
referred, has been increased to twenty days from the existing 
fifteen days. 

 
18 
(4) District Child Protection Unit shall maintain a panel of 
professionally qualified or trained social workers. 
(5) There are 32 Schedules annexed to the regulations including 
model adoption applications to be filed in the Court and this 
would considerably address dela ys prevalent in obtaining the 
Court order. 
2.26      Further,  for ensuring a transparent method for the adoption , the 
entire process of adoption is ope rated through an online system  v i z . ,  
“Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System”  
(CARINGS) for facilitating, gui ding and monitoring the adoption  
programme.  
 The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
 2.27    The Guardians and Wards Act has been enacted to consol idate and 
 amend the law relating to guardians and wards. This law regula tes the 
 subject of guardianship and cust ody for all children within the territory of 
 India irrespective of their religion. 
 2.28    Section 4 of the Act defines the term “guardian” to me an a 
 person having the care of the person of a minor or his propert y or both of 
 his person and property. Thus, the definition is wide and incl udes all 
 kinds of guardians such as natural guardians, testamentary gua rdians, etc. 
 2.29 Section 7 of the Act empowers the District Courts to appo int 
 guardians of the person or property of a minor or both if the court is 
 satisfied that it is for the welfare of the minor.  Thus, the father’s right to 
 the custody of his minor child i s no longer absolute and is ci rcumscribed 
 by the consideration of welfare of the minor. The welfare of t he minor is 
 of paramount importance in appointing a guardian.  This Act la ys down 
 the procedure for appointment of guardians and the rights and obligations 
 of the guardians, procedure for their removal and replacement,  and 
 remedies for misconduct by them.  Thus, it is an umbrella legi slation that 

 
19 
 supplements the personal laws governing guardianship issues under every 
 religion. Even if the substantive law applied to a certain cas e is the 
 personal law of the parties, this Act lays down the procedure.  
 2.30     Section 7 of the Act authorizes the Court to appoint a guardian 
 for the person or property or both of a minor, if it is satisf ied that it is 
 necessary for the ‘welfare of the minor’. 
 2.31 Section 8 of the Act provi des for the persons who are ent itled to 
 apply for an order.  No order for appointment of guardian shal l be made 
 unless the person desirous of claiming guardianship of the min or child 
 makes an application to the Court. 
 2.32 Section 17 of the Act provides for matters to be consider ed by the 
 court in appointing guardians. Sub-section (1) of the said sec tion provides 
 that in appointing or declaring the guardian of the minor, the  court shall 
 be guided by what, consistently with the law to which the mino r is 
 subject, appears in the circumstances to be for the welfare of  the minor.  
 Subsection (2) of the said section provides that in considerin g what will 
 be for the welfare of the minor, the court shall have regard t o the age, sex 
 and religion of the minor; th e character and capacity of the p roposed 
 guardian and his nearness of kin to the minor; the wishes, if any, of a 
 deceased parent; and any existin g or previous relation of prop osed 
 guardian with the minor or prop erty of the minor.  Sub-section  (3) of the 
 said section provides that if the minor is old enough to form an intelligent 
 preference, the court may consid er his preference.  Sub-sectio n (5) 
 thereof provides that court shall not appoint or declare any p erson to be a 
 guardian against his will. 
 2.33  Section 19 of the Act provides for cases where guardian may not 
 be appointed by the court.  The courts cannot appoint guardian  in  the 
 following cases- 

 
20 
(i) Where the minor is a married female, and her husband is not unf it 
to be the guardian of her person in the opinion of the court; 
(ii) Where the minor is other than a married female whose father or 
mother is living, and is not unfit to be the guardian of the pe rson of 
the minor in the opinion of court; 
(iii) Where the property of the minor is under superintendence of a 
court of wards who is competent to appoint a guardian of the 
person of the minor. 
 2.34   Section 24 of the Act provides for duties of guardian o f the 
 person.  It provides that guardian of the person of a ward is charged 
 with the custody of the ward and must look to his support, hea lth, 
 education and such other matters as the law to which the ward is 
 subject requires. 
2.35 Section 25 of the Act provi des for title of the guardian t o custody 
 of the ward.  Sub –section (1) of that section provides that i f a ward 
 leaves or is removed from the custody of the guardian, the cou rt can issue 
 an order for the ward’s return, if it is of the opinion that i t is for the 
 welfare of the ward to be returned to the custody of the guard ian. 
2.36 Section 27 of the Act provides for duties of guardian of p roperty.  
 It provides that a guardian of the property of a ward is bound  to deal 
 therewith as carefully as a man of ordinary prudence would dea l with it if 
 it were his own and he may do all acts which are reasonable an d proper 
 for the realisation, protection or benefit of the property. 
2.37 Sections 38 to 42 deal with termination of guardianship i. e. the 
 right of survivorship among join t guardians, removal of guardi an, 
 discharge of guardian, cessation of authority of guardian and appointment 
 of successor to guardian d ead, discharged or removed. 
  The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 
 2.38 The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 is an Act t o 
 amend and codify certain parts of the law relating to minority  a n d  

 
21 
 guardianship among Hindus. Section 2 of the Act provides that the 
 provisions of this Act are supplemental to the Guardians and W ards Act, 
 1890.  Section 4 of the Act defines “guardian” to mean a perso n having 
 the care of the person of a min or or of his property or of bot h his person 
 and property and includes (i) a natural guardian (ii) a guardi an appointed 
 by the will of the minor’s fathe r or mother (iii) guardian app ointed or 
 declared by a court (iv) a person empowered to act as such by or under 
 any enactment relating to any Court of Wards. 
 2.39 Section 3 of the Act provides that this Act shall apply t o- 
(a) To a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, 
including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the 
Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj; 
(b) To a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and 
(c) To any other person domiciled in the territories to which this 
Act extends who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by 
religion. 
 2.40 Section 5 of the Act provides for overriding effect of th e Act.  It 
 provides that save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act ,- 
(a) Any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or 
usage as part of that law or any other law in force immediately  
before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect 
with respect to any matter for which provision is made in this 
Act; 
(b) Any other law in force immediat ely before the commencement 
of this Act shall cease to have effect in so far as it is incon sistent 
with any of the provisions contained in this Act. 
 2.41 Section 6 of the Act specifies who are the natural guardi ans of a 
 Hindu minor.  The natural guardians are- 

 
22 
(a) In the case of a boy or an unmarried girl – the father, and 
 after him, the mother; 
(b) In the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimate 
unmarried girl – the mother, and after her, the father; 
(c) In the case of a married girl – the husband. 
 2.42 Section 7 of the Act provides for natural guardianship of  adopted 
 son.  It provides that the natur al guardianship of adopted son  who is a 
 minor passes, on adoption, to the adoptive father and after hi m to the 
 adoptive mother. Section 8 of the Act provides for powers of n atural 
 guardian and Section 9 provid es for powers of testamentary 
 guardians. Section 11 of the Ac t provides that de facto guardi an shall not 
 deal with minor’s property. It provides that no person shall b e entitled to 
 dispose of, or deal with, the property of a Hindu minor merely  on the 
 ground of his or her being the de facto guardian of the minor after the 
 commencement of this Act. 
 2.43 Section 13 of the Act provides that welfare of minor to b e 
 paramount consideration in the appointment or declaration of a ny person 
 as guardian of a Hindu minor and that no person shall be appoi nted as 
 guardian of Hindu minor if the court is of the opinion that it  will not be 
 for the welfare of the minor. 
 Latest Amendments  
 2.44 The Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2010 has amended the 
 Guardians and Wards Act (GWA), 1890 and the Hindu Adoptions an d 
 Maintenance Act (HAMA), 1956. The following sections have been  
 amended: 
 Under sub-section (b) Section 19 of the GWA, the mother 
was not included as guardian along with the father, but with 
this amendment the mother is included along with father. 

 
23 
 Sub-section (c) of Section 8 of the HAMA and Section 9 
which incapacitates a married woman from taking in 
adoption on the basis of her marital status, stood amended.  
2.45     The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Amendment Bill, 2021, has amended  the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015.  
The amendments include authorizing District Magistrate includin g 
Additional District Magistrate to issue adoption orders under S ection 61 
of the JJ Act in order to ensure speedy disposal of cases and e nhance 
accountability.  
2.46     The District Magistrates have been further empowered under the 
Act, to ensure its smooth implementation, as well as garner syn ergized 
efforts in favour of children in distress conditions. As per th e amended 
provisions of the Act, any Child  Care Institution shall be regi stered after 
considering the recommendations o f the District Magistrate.  Th e DM 
shall independently evaluate the functioning of District Child Protection 
Units, Child Welfare Committees,  Juvenile Justice Boards, Speci alized 
Juvenile Police Units, Child care Institutions. 
2.47      The eligibility parame ters for appointment of CWC mem bers 
have been redefined.  Criteria fo r disqualification of the CWC members 
has also been introduced to ensure that only the persons capable of 
rendering quality service with re quisite competence and integri ty are 
appointed to CWC. 
2.48  On being asked as to what necessitated the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development to amend the Juvenile Justice Act a nd 
authorize the DMs and ADMs to issue adoption orders, the Minist ry stated 
that in view of long delays in an adoption process, the Ministr y felt it 
prudent to culminate the adoption process at the level of Distr ict 
Magistrate.  

 
24 
2.49 Adoption among other communities : The law of adoption is 
unknown to Muslims, Christians a nd Parsis. However, they may ch oose 
to be governed by Juvenile Justice Act and may thereon adopt a child. 

 
25 
Chapter 3 
Review of Laws on Adoption- Observations and recommendations of the       
    C o m m i t t e e        
3.1 The sub-Committee held a meeting with the Secretary of Ministr y 
of Women and Child Development and representatives of CARA on 1 7th 
November 2020. The issues that  came to the fore during the 
deliberations of the Committ ee and the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee in this regard are as follows:  
Uniform and Common Law on adoption: 
3.2 The Committee notes that the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenanc e 
Act, 1956 is a personal Law and is  applicable only to Hindus wh ereas 
the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 is a secular Act and is applicab le to all 
irrespective of religion. The Committee observes that both the 
enactments on Adoption are beset with several anomalies and tha t the 
provisions of HAMA are inconsiste nt with those of JJ Act. The l ist of 
anomalies and inconsistencies th at came to the notice of the Co mmittee 
are as follows: 
  3.2.1  Upper Age Limit for adoption:  Under HAMA, children 
upto 15 years of age can be adopted whereas JJ Act provides tha t 
children upto 18 years of age can be adopted.  
    3.2.2   Eligibility of Parents:  While HAMA stipulates only two 
primary conditions for a person taking a child in adoption i.e the 
adopting male/female should be o f sound mind and should not be a 
minor, JJ Act lays down that the Prospective adoptive parents s hould be 
physically fit, mentally alert, emotionally stable, financially  capable and 
highly motivated to adopt a child for providing a good upbringi ng to 
him. Further, JJ Act also stipulates that the prospective adopt ive parents 
should not have any life threatening conditions. 

 
26 
      3.2.3      S t a b l e  M a r i t a l  r e l a t i o n s h i p : JJ Act lays down that no child 
shall be     given in adoption to a couple unless they have two  years of 
stable marital relationship but no such pre-condition is laid d own in 
respect of adoptions made by Hindu couple under the HAMA.  
             3.2.4  Adoption of a girl child by a single male parent:  HAMA 
does not bar a single male parent from adopting a female child while JJ 
Act doesn’t permit a single male to adopt a girl child. The only condition 
that HAMA stipulates for the adoption of a female child by a single male 
parent is that the adoptive father should be at least 21 years older than 
the girl child to be adopted. 
 3 . 2 . 5 .      Adoption of children of same sex:  Sec 11 of HAMA  lays down 
that  if any adoption is of a son, the adoptive father or mothe r by whom  
the adoption is made must not have a Hindu son, Son’s son or So n’s son’s 
son (Whether by legitimate blood relationship or by adoption) living  at 
the time of adoption and if the adoption is of a daughter, the  adoptive 
father or mother by whom the adoption is made must not  have a Hindu 
daughter or son’s daughter (Whether by legitimate  blood relati onship or 
by adoption) living at the time of adoption. JJ Act does not st ipulate any 
such conditions. 
          3.2.6 Minimum age difference between the adoptive parents and the 
child: HAMA lays down age criterion fo r the adoption of children of 
opposite sex by single parents. The minimum age difference betw een the 
single male parent and female child/ single female parent and m ale child 
should be 21 years. The age cr iterion is not applicable for the  adoption of 
a male child by a single male parent/ female child by a single female 
parent. JJ Act specifies that the minimum age difference betwee n the 
child and prospective adoptive parents shall not be less than 25 years.  
                3.2.7  Inheritance of property vested in the adopted child prior 
to adoption: Section 12 of HAMA and Section 63 of JJ Act  provide that 

 
27 
any property vested in the adopted child before the adoption sh all 
continue to vest in such person subject to obligations, if any,  attaching to 
the ownership of such property, including the obligation to mai ntain 
relatives in the family of his or her birth; Section 12 of HAMA  and 
Section 63 of JJ Act also stipulate that from the date of adopt ion all the 
t i e s  o f  t h e  c hi l d  i n  t h e  f a m i l y  o f  h i s  o r  h e r  b i r t h  s h a l l  b e  d eemed to be 
severed.  
                3.2.8  Maximum age limit of adoptive parents taking a child in 
adoption: HAMA does not prescribe any maximum age limit for 
adoptive parents while JJ Act provides that the maximum age lim it of 
single prospective adoptive parent shall not exceed 55 years an d the 
composite age of the prospective adoptive parents shall not exc eed 110 
years.  
               3.2.9  Adoption of a new born child:  HAMA does not prevent a 
new born child from being placed in adoption whereas under JJ A ct, a 
child should be declared legally free for adoption by the Child  Welfare 
Committee, the process usually takes at least two months to com plete, 
thereby depriving the new born child of parental care.  
           3.2.10 Post adoption follow-up: Under JJ Act, in the event of non-
adjustment of the adoptive child, the Specialized Adoption Agen cy 
arranges the required counselling for the adoptive parents and adoptees 
wherever required. In case of non-adjustment even after counsel ling at 
the stage of pre-adoption foster  care, the adoptive child is ta ken back by 
the SAA and there is scope for annulment of adoption even after  adoption 
order is issued. Unlike JJ Act, HAMA does not provide for a pos t 
adoption follow up.  
          3.2.11  ‘Illegitimate’ child : Section 2 of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act makes use of the word ‘illegitimate’ in referen ce to a 
child born out of wedlock.  

 
28 
               3.2.12  Subsection (1) of Section 5 of HAMA: I n  v i e w  o f  t h e  
enactment of JJ Act, Sub-section (1) of Section 5 of HAMA which  reads 
‘No adoption shall be made after the commencement of this Act b y or to 
a Hindu except in accordance with the provisions contained in t his 
chapter and any adoption made in contravention of the said prov isions 
shall be void’ bears no relevance and needs to be repealed.  
  3.3  The Committee is of the considered view that the Hindu 
 Adoptions and Maintenance Act  and Juvenile Justice Act have th eir 
 own virtues and shortcomings. W hile the adoption procedure lai d down 
 under HAMA is simple and takes less time as compared to that 
 stipulated in JJ Act, adoptions made under JJ Act are transpar ent, 
 accountable and verifiable. However, the Committee also notes that the 
 Adoption Regulations framed und er Juvenile Justice Act provide  for an 
 elaborate and time consuming adoption procedure beset with ino rdinate 
 delays. It is also observed that Specialized Adoption Agencies  a r e  a l s o  
 over burdened with the procedural requirements and massive pap er 
 work stipulated in the regulations.   In view of the above, the Committee 
 feels that there is a need to harmonize both the Laws and brin g out a 
 Uniform and comprehensive legislation on adoption which is mor e 
 transparent, accountable, verifi able, less bureaucratic and ap plicable to 
 all irrespective of religion  in order to make adoptions more easy and less 
 cumbersome. The Law so enacted may prescribe separate adoption  
 procedures for institutionalized children and children living with family. 
 As regards adoption by relatives, the adoption process should be more 
 flexible and simplified and involve less documentation.  
3.4  The Committee is of the view that the new Legislation so    
enacted should avoid using the  term ‘Illegitimate’ as no child is 
illegitimate and the adoption law  should be the same for all ch ildren 
whether born within or out of the wedlock. The Committee notes that   

 
29 
both  the Hindu Adoptions and Ma intenance Act (HAMA) and the 
Juvenile  Justice (Care and Protection of children) Act provide for  the 
adoption of  children by married  couple, single male and single  
female parents. The  Committee feels that the new legislation s hould 
cover LGBTQ  community. 
     3.5  The Committee is of the considered view that the uppe r age 
limit of the adoptee may be fixed at 18 in the new legislation.  T h e  
Committee feels that the new Law should also permit adoption of  
children of the same sex. The Act may stipulate minimum age dif ference 
of 25 years between the adoptive child and prospective adoptive  
parent/s. Further, with regard to eligibility of prospective ad optive 
parents, the new Legislation may incorporate the criterion laid  d o w n  
under JJ Act, such as requiring the PAPs to be physically fit, mentally 
alert, financially stable and wi thout life threatening diseases ; two years 
of stable marital relationship in case of couple and a prohibit ion on the 
adoption of female child by sin gle male parent among others. Th e new 
legislation needs to clearly define the eligibility criterion  of Prospective 
Adoptive Parents in objective terms. 
     3.6 ` The Committee is of the view that the new law on ado ption 
should provide for early de-institutionalisation of the new born as it is in 
the best interest of children. The Committee also opines that the adopted 
child should be entitled to a sh are in the property of his adop tive 
parents and not of his biological parents since adoption replac es 
biological parents with adoptive parents permanently. 
 3.7  The Committee also recommends mandatory post adoption 
follow-up because in the absence of post adoption follow up, it  i s  n o t  
possible to ascertain the progress and well being of the child in the 
adoptive family. It could res ult in vulnerabilities and distres s being 
experienced by the child remaining unnoticed which may not be i n the 
best interest of the child.  

 
30 
 National Adoption Registry: 
    3.8  The Committee notes that under HAMA, adoption of a chi ld is 
 concluded through a registered deed and in case if the parents  a r e  d e a d  o r  
 have completely and finally renounced the world or have abando ned the child 
 or have been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound 
 mind or where the parentage of the child is not known, the gua rdian of the 
 child may give the child in ado ption with the previous permission of the court 
 to any person including the guar dian himself by obtaining orde rs of the court 
 under section 9(5) of HAMA where as JJ Act follows an elaborate  procedure 
 including an adoption order fr om the Court to finalize adoption.  
3.9 HAMA does not have  mechanism for adoption through recognise d    
agencies nor does it provide for compulsory registration of  ad option with 
any agencies. Since the adoption rules framed under JJ Act  dem and, 
transparency and accountability on the part of Specialized adop tion agencies 
and Prospective  adoptive parents (PAPs),  more and more Prospe ctive 
Adoptive Parents are resorting to private  adoptions facilitate d under 
unregulated HAMA.  
 3.10 The Committee notes that while JJ Act has provisions for 
 verifying the source of the child, ascertaining the suitabilit y of 
 prospective adoptive parents and a post adoption follow up, al l these 
 necessary pre-requisites are missing from HAMA Act thereby 
 facilitating the unscrupulous to traffic children in the guise  of adoption. 
 Adoptions made under HAMA are als o not in accordance with the 
 provisions of the Hague Convent ion on Inter-Country Adoption  of  children 
 to which India is a signatory. Juvenile Justice Act demands tr ansparency, 
 accountability and doesn’t per mit parents to ‘choose’ the 
 child,Prospective adoptive Parents are taking circuitous route  by filing an 
 application under Guardians and Wards Act for taking custody o f Orphan, 
 Abandoned and Surrendered (OAS ) Children with a view to 
 undertakeprivate adoption under HAMA through a deed. 

 
31 
 3.11 The Committee observes that CARA maintains data 
 pertaining to adoptions  takin g place under JJ Act. As Parents  
 adopting a child under HAMA are not required to register the a doption 
 deed with CARA, there is virtually no data  on adoptions takin g place 
 under HAMA. Therefore, in the op inion of the Committee, hencef orth, 
 any enactment on adoption must make registration of adoption d eeds 
 with CARA mandatory as it will facilitate it to maintain an AD OPTION 
 R E G I S T E R  s o  t h a t  i t  c a n  m o n i t o r  a l l  a d o p t i o n s  a n d  k e e p  a  c h e c k o n  
 t r a f f i c k i n g .  
    Declining rate of adoption in India: 
 3.12    The Committee notes that as per the adoption statistic s of Central 
 Adoption Resource Authority, the  number of children adopted in  the country 
 declined from 5693 in 2010 to 314 2 in 2020-21 and the number o f children 
 taken in inter-country adoptio n showed a drastic fall from 628  in 2010 to 417 
 in 2020-21 which is a cause of grave concern. The number of ch ildren placed 
 in adoption in India is much lower as compared to other countr ies in the 
 neighbourhood, for instance in China, 15000 and 1685 children were placed 
 in in-country and inter-country adoption in 2018 and in Vietna m, 430 
 children were placed in in-count ry adoption and 2382 children were placed in 
 inter-country adoption during the same year. 
3.13 As per the information furnished by CARA, as on 16.12.2021 , 
26734 prospective adoptive parents have registered with CARA an d are 
waiting for referral for In-count ry adoption and 1205 Prospecti ve adoptive 
parents are awaiting Inter-Country adoption. As per the informa tion furnished 
by the Ministry of Women and Child Development, the average tim e taken 
for Prospective adoptive parents to get a referral for children  in the age group 
of 0-4 years is approximately 2 years. 
3.14  As per the data made available by CARA, as on 16.12.2021,  a total 
of 6996 Orphaned/Abandoned/Surre ndered children are residing in  the Child 

 
32 
Care Institutions linked with SAAs , out of which 2430 are decla red legally 
free for adoption and 4566 children are in process at different  levels prior to 
being declared legally free for adoption by CWC. 
3.15   The Committee takes note of the paradoxical situation where 
on one hand there are a large number of Parents willing to adop t a child, 
on the other, there are not many  children available for adoptio n, all this 
while the 2020 World Orphan Report estimates number of orphans in 
India at 31 million. Also, as per the information furnished by the Ministry 
of Women and Child Development, as per Census 2011 there are  5 5,258 
child beggars in the age group of 0 to 19 years in the Country.  T h e  
Committee is of the view that at the outset, it is important to  get a true 
picture of number of children w ho are orphaned/abandoned throug h a 
district level survey and the data needs to be updated on a reg ular basis. 
A meeting chaired by the District Magistrate should be held in each 
District every month to take sto ck of the situation and to ensu re that 
orphan and abandoned children found begging in streets are prod uced 
before the Child Welfare Committee and are made available for a doption 
at the earliest. The Committee al so feels that it is important to prevent 
illegal and informal adoptions so that larger pool of children are available 
for placing them in adoption with the families registering for adoption 
under JJ Act. 
Child Care Institutions: 
3.16  The Committee notes that Section 41 of the JJ Act makes i t 
mandatory for all CCIs to be reg istered by the States/UTs. A so cial audit 
commissioned by the National Commission for Protection of Child  Rights 
(NCPCR) in 2018 revealed that out of 7,163 CCIs in the country,  as many as 
2,039 (29%) were still not registered with the State Government s. The 
incidents reported in Balika grih at Muzaffarpur (Bihar), Ranch i (Jharkhand) 
and Deoria (Uttar Pradesh) make a case for stringent action inc luding closure 
of such unregistered CCIs. 

 
33 
3.17 A social audit commissioned by NCPCR in 2018 had found tha t 2,764 
CCIs did not have adequate measures to prevent any form of phys ical and 
emotional abuse of children, only 52% CCIs have adequate number  o f  
counsellors, just 26% of them had  adequate number of child welf are officers, 
probation officers, case workers and only 45.5% of them had a medical officer 
or physician including the ‘on call’ doctor. The study also rev ealed that CCIs 
are not equipped with requisite i nfrastructure. For instance, o nly 85% CCIs 
were able to provide one bed per child, 88% had bathrooms and 8 2 % had 
toilets. 
3.18  On being asked as to what measures have b een taken by the  
Ministry of Women and Child Development with respect to unregistered Child 
Care Institutions, the Ministry replied that it has corresponded with States/UTs 
for ensuring that all children in need of care and protection a nd children in 
conflict with law are housed only in the Child Care Institution s registered 
under JJ Act. Further, the Ministry has stated that Secretary, WCD has time 
and again requested states for registration of CCIs. Hon’ble Mi nister has also 
written a D.O. Letter to all MPs and MLAs to take necessary act ion for 
registration of CCIs and also a gainst those institutions which are not 
complying with the requirement. The Ministry also said that it had  
categorically requested the States/UTs time and again to close down the 
unregistered institutions and m ake suitable alternative arrange ments for the 
inhabitants.  
3.19  The Committee notes with serious concern that 762 childre n 
have died in Specialized Adopt ion Agencies between 2018-19 and 2021-22 
which is alarming. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
commission a third party study of all Child Care institutions. The 
Committee also recommends the Min istry to investigate into the causes of 
child deaths in Specialized adoption agencies and furnish a bri ef note to 
the Committee within three months ti me. The Committee recommend s 
the Ministry to amend the JJ Act  and/or Rules, as the case may be, and 

 
34 
empower the District Magistrates to identify and close down unr egistered 
child care institutions functioning within their jurisdiction.  
Need for a single nodal ministry 
3.20  The subject matter ‘pers onal laws’ including adoption fal ls under 
the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution  of India. 
Under the Government of India (A llocation of Business Rules), 1 961 the 
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice is co ncerned with 
three enactments relating to Gua rdianship and Adoption namely, The Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956, Guardians and Wards Act 1890 and the 
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act 1956 as regards legislation  alone. The 
said Acts are administered by State Governments and the rules a nd regulations 
under the said Acts are made by the respective State Governments.   
3.21  The Central Adoption Resource Authority which is the noda l 
agency for the adoption of Indian children and mandated to moni tor and 
regulate in-country and inter-c ountry adoptions comes under the  
administrative control of the Ministry of Women and Child Devel opment. 
Besides these, Ministries of Social Justice and Empowerment, Mi nority 
Affairs, External affairs, Home Affairs and the Department of L egal Affairs 
also a play a crucial role in dealing with the subject matter.  
3.22  The Committee notes that subject matters relating to adop tion 
fall under Concurrent list of the  Seventh schedule to the Const itution. At 
present, adoption related matters  are being dealt with by two M inistries, 
namely, Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Women and C hild 
Development. Under the Government  of India (Allocation of Busin ess) 
Rules, 1961, Legislative Departmen t is concerned with the Hindu  
Adoptions and Maintenance Act for  the purposes of legislation o nly 
whereas the day-to-day functioning of JJ Act is monitored by th e 
Ministry of Women and Child Devel opment at Union Level. The 

 
35 
Committee feels that there is a need to bring Adoption Laws und er a 
single Ministry for better monitoring and implementation. 
Practical issues in the implementation of Juvenile Justice Act: 
3.23  The Committee h as undertaken a study visit to PALNA, a 
specialized adoption agency based in Delhi. The management of PALNA have 
brought certain issues to the notice of the Committee. The Committee was told 
that PALNA used to keep upto 100 children in the past but ever since the JJ 
Act came into force, on an average, only 50 children are availa ble in the 
institution at any given point of time. On being asked about th e reason behind 
the decline in the inflow of children, the management of PALNA apprised the 
Committee that the present rules require that children should b e placed in an 
adoption agency located within the jurisdiction. This jurisdict ion restriction 
has given rise to a situation where some adoption agencies are functioning 
over and above their capacity wh ile others are functioning belo w their 
capacity. 
3.24  The management of PALNA has also expressed concern about the 
recent amendment to JJ Act which authorizes District Magistrate and 
Additional District Magistrate to issue adoption orders and opi ned that this 
procedure may cause more delays given the multifarious responsi bilities that 
DMs and ADMs have and the consequential paucity of time. 
3.25  The management of PALNA also lamented that the adoption f ee is 
too low and doesn’t even cover th e medical expenses incurred on  t h e  c h i l d .  
Further, they went on to state t hat the financial support provi ded by the 
Government is also meagre. The C ommittee was also told that the  timelines 
stipulated in the Adoption Regulations are not being adhered to . The 
Committee was told that, in pract ice, the process of declaratio n of a child as 
legally free for adoption, tak es 8-9 months though the Adoption  Regulations 
prescribe a two month period, largely, due to delay in furnishi ng of NOC by 
Police authorities, lengthy DNA profiling process, delay in pub lication of 

 
36 
advertisement about the Child in local newspapers by District C hild Protection 
Unit among others. 
3.26  The Committee was also aghast to learn that there are man y 
unregistered Child Care Institutions in the Country. The Commit tee was also 
told that adoption agencies are finding it difficult to follow the procedure of 
adoption laid down under JJ Act i s cumbersome, time taking and involves 
tremendous paper work. They went on to mention that adoption ag encies are 
finding it difficult to report to multiple agencies. 
3.27  The Management of PALNA to l d  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  t h a t  t h e r e  i s  a 
drastic decline in the number of  orphan and abandoned children coming to 
adoption agencies over the years and expressed concern about ch ild 
trafficking. 
3.28  The Committee notes that  Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2021 authorizes the Dist rict 
Magistrate (including Additional District Magistrate) to issue adoption 
orders and provides that any person aggrieved by an adoption or der 
passed by the District Magistrate may file an appeal before the  Divisional 
Commissioner. The Committee is of the considered opinion that J udges 
have the competence, experience a nd skills to determine whether  
adoption is in the best interest of the child.  When deciding on adoption, 
Courts review documents, ensu re necessary procedures have been 
complied with, and conduct an i nquiry of the child and adoptive  parents 
and ensure that adoption is for t he welfare of the child. The C ommittee 
feels that it is not appropriate for an administrative authorit y to issue 
adoption orders instead of a judicial body.  However, since the Act has 
been amended and the new system is yet to be tried and tested, the 
Committee recommends that appropriate training should be impart ed to 
District Magistrates & Additional District Magistrates and Divi sional 
Commissioners as well. The Committee recommends the Ministry of  
Women and Child Development to rev iew the functioning of the ne w 

 
37 
system, after a year and present an Assessment Report to the Co mmittee 
accordingly. 
3.29  The Committee feels that while placing a child in any Chi ld 
Care Institution, the  Child Welfare Committee must pay due rega rd to 
the capacity of the institution, its state of infrastructure an d resource 
availability. The Committee recommends the Central Adoption Res ource 
Authority to apprise the Committee if the Juvenile Justice Rule s or 
Adoption Regulations or the Parent Act itself contains any prov ision 
requiring the orphan, abandoned and surrendered children to be placed 
in a Child care institution locat ed in the same jurisdiction where the child 
is found/located. In case, such Rules are notified by any State  Authority, 
the Committee recommends CARA to furnish details of such states  where 
the rule is being implemented.  
3.30  The Committee recommends the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development that certain Child Care Institutions should be earm arked 
for children with special needs. Such institutions should have a team of 
health care professionals, sp ecial educators, therapists and fa cilities for 
medical rehabilitation. 
3.31  The Committee is disheart ened to know that older children and 
children with special needs are usually not preferred for adopt ion by 
Indian Prospective adoptive parents. The Committee feels that a s 
children grow older, they find it difficult to adjust with a ne w socio-
cultural milieu, therefore, the priority is to place a child in adoption at the 
earliest. The Committee notes that the time frame stipulated fo r adoption 
under JJ Act is lengthy and also not being strictly adhered to by the 
authorities concerned. There is a need to simplify the procedur e further 
besides bringing down the time required for placing a child in adoption to 
less than six months. The Committee is of the view that a longe r wait 

 
38 
period often forces the parents willing to adopt a child to res ort to illegal 
adoption.  
3.32  The Committee also expresses serious concern about declin e in 
the number of children coming to adoption agencies over the yea rs. This 
decline, by and large, points to trafficking or a thriving ille gal child 
adoption market. The Committee is of the view that there is a n eed to 
increase surveillance, especially  on unregistered child care in stitutions 
and adoption agencies/hospitals with the past record of trafficking. 
3.33  The Committee finds that th e roles of various bodies invo lved 
in the process of adoption are overlapping. The Committee recom mends 
the Ministry to define the roles  and responsibilities of each b ody clearly. 
The Committee desires that vario us agencies involved in adoptio n should 
shed over cautiousness and act a s facilitators for adoption age ncies. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to submit a note detailing th e 
factors that are preventing the agencies involved in adoption s uch as 
Child Welfare Committees, District Child Protection Units from adhering 
to the timeframe stipulated in the Adoption Regulations.  

 
39 
Chapter 4 
                       Review of Laws on Guardianship- Observations and recommendations of 
the Committee. 
4.1 The Committee held a meeting w i t h  t h e  S e c r e t a r y  o f  L e g i s l a tive 
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice on 9 th January, 2020 during which it 
discussed the loopholes in Guardia nship Laws. The details of vi tal issues that 
emerged during the deliberation and the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee in this regard are stated below:  
Legitimacy of Children 
4.2 The Committee notes that Section 3(1) of the Hindu Minority  and 
Guardianship Act, 1956 reads as follows: 
 
          3 (1) This Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act applies-
 
(a) to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its form s or 
developments, including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo, 
Prarthana or AryaSamaj; 
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion, and 
(c) to any other person domiciled in the territories to which t his Act extends 
who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion unless  it is proved 
that any such person would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by 
any custom or usage as part of that law in respect of any of th e matters dealt 
with herein if this Act had not been passed. 
Explanation.--The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, or Sikhs by 
religion, as the case may be:-- 
 
(i) any child, legitimate or illegitimate , both of whose parents are Hindus, 
Buddhists, Jains or Sikhs by religion; 
(ii) any child, legitimate or illegitimate,  one of whose parents is a Hindu, 
Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion and who is brought up as a m ember of the 
tribe, community, group or family to which such parent belongs or belonged; 
and 
 

 
40 
(iii) any person who is convert or re-convert to the Hindu, Bud dhist, Jain or 
Sikh religion. 
 
4.3 The Committee notes that Section 3(1) of the Hindu Minority  a n d  
Guardianship Act makes use of the term ‘illegitimate’ in refere nce to a 
child born out of wedlock. The Committee strongly feels that th e word 
‘Illegitimate’ should be omitte d as no child is illegitimate an d the law 
should be the same for all children whether born within or out of 
wedlock. 
Need for Gender Equality 
4.4 The Committee notes that Secti on (6) of the Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship Act defines Natural Guardians of a Hindu Minor as follows: 
Section (6) The natural guardians of a Hindu minor; in respect of the minor's 
person as well as in respect of the minor's property (excluding  his or her 
undivided interest in joint family property), are-- 
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl--the father, and after h i m ,  t h e  
mother: provided that the custody of a minor who has not comple ted the age 
of five years shall ordinarily be with the mother 
 (b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimate unma rried girl--the 
mother, and after her, the father; 
(c) in the case of a married girl the husband. 
4.5 Section (7) of the same Act provides for the Guardianship o f Adoptive 
Hindu minors as follows: 
Section (7) - Natural guardianship of adopted son- The natural guardianship of 
an adopted son who is a minor p asses, on adoption, to the adopt ive father and 
after him to the adoptive mother. 
4.6 The Committee is of the considered view that Section 6 of t he Hindu 
Minority and Guardianship Act lays down that in the case of a H indu 
minor boy and a Hindu minor unma rried girl- the father is the n atural 
guardian and ‘after’ him the mother. Section 7 of the same Act provides 

 
41 
that the natural guardianship of  an adopted son who is a minor,  passes, 
on adoption, to the adopted father and ‘after’ him to the adoptive mother. 
The said Act does not provide for joint guardianship nor does it recognize 
the mother as the guardian of the minor legitimate child unless  the father 
is deceased or is found unfit. Since, the Act gives preference to father over 
mother, it goes against the Righ t to Equality and Right against  
discrimination envisaged under Articles 14 and 15 of the Consti tution. 
Further, the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination 
against Women (CEDAW) envisages that state parties shall take a ll 
appropriate measures to eliminate  discrimination against women in all 
matters relating to marriage and f amily relations. The Committe e feels 
that there is an urgent need to amend HMGA and accord equal tre atment 
to both mother and father as natural guardians. 
Primacy to ‘Welfare principle’: 
4.7 The Committee notes that Section 19 (b) of the Guardians an d Wards Act 
states that a Court is not authorized to appoint a guardian to the person of a 
minor, whose father or mother is alive, and who, in the opinion of the Court, is 
not unfit to be a guardian. Section 13 of the Hindu Minority an d Guardianship 
Act declares that, in deciding th e guardianship of a Hindu mino r, the welfare 
of the minor shall be of param ount consideration and that no pe r s o n  c a n  b e  
appointed as a guardian of a Hi ndu minor if the Court is of the  opinion that it 
will not be for the welfare of the minor.  
4.8 The Committee is of the view that under Guardians and Wards  Act, 
parental authority supersedes the welfare principle, while unde r the 
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act , the welfare principle is o f 
paramount consideration in determining guardianship. Thus, for deciding 
questions of guardianship for Hindu  children, their welfare is of 
paramount consideration which will override parental authority.  But for 
non-Hindu children, the Court’s authority to intervene in furth erance of 
the welfare principle is subordin ated to that of the father, as  the natural 

 
42 
guardian. However what constitutes the ‘Welfare’ of the child i s 
undefined. The Committee feels th at there is a need to amend th e 
Guardians and Wards Act to give primacy to the ‘welfare princip le’ over 
parental authority. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to 
define what constitutes the ‘Welfare’ of the child in broader terms in both 
the Acts. 
Custody and Visitation Rights: 
4.9 As the society is rapidly evolvi ng, conjugal and familial relat ionships are 
becoming more and more complex. The basis for ending marriage h as shifted 
from fault finding divorce to mutual consent divorce. There is a need to lay 
down a framework within the legislation within which the divorc ing parents 
and children can decide what custodial arrangement works the best for them. 
4.10   The Committee is of the view that the recommendation mad e by the 
Law Commission be taken into consideration that provisions rela ting to 
Custody, child support, visitati on arrangements should be incor porated 
in the Guardians and Wards Act. Pa rents should be granted equal  rights 
with respect to guardianship and custody. The Act should empowe r the 
Courts to award joint custody to both the parents in circumstan ces 
conducive to the welfare of the  child, or award sole custody to  one parent 
with visitation rights to the other. The Act must also empower the Courts 
to fix an amount specifically for child support to meet basic e xpenses of 
the child. 
Need for a comprehensive legislation on Guardianship 
4.11  The Committee notes that Guardians and Wards Act is a rel igious 
neutral legislation while the Hindu Minority and Guardianship A ct is a 
Personal Law applicable only to H indus. Furthermore, the guardi anship rights 
of the physically challenged and those with mental illnesses ra nging from 
autism to cerebral palsy are not covered under the abovementioned Acts. 

 
43 
4.12  The Committee also notes that both the Acts are applicabl e only to 
minors i.e. persons who have not completed 18 years of age. Fur ther, the Acts 
do not stipulate any timeline for Courts regarding the disposal  of applications 
for appointment or declaration of Guardian or removal of Guardian. 
4.13  The Committee feels that there is a need to enact a single 
comprehensive law covering guardianship aspects of various categories of 
persons and applicable to all irrespective of religion. The Com mittee is of 
the view that the Act must facilitate guardianship of elderly p ersons as 
there may be circumstances where a senior citizen may reach a s tage 
where the health concerns become overwhelming and they may need  a  
guardian to take care of their h ealth and well being, for insta nce, an 
elderly person diagnosed with dementia or lying in a vegetative  s tat e  or 
an aged parent abandoned by his  children. The Committee also 
recommends that timelines may be stipulated in the Act for Cour ts within 
which the application for Guardia nship of the person or/and pro perty of 
the minor or application for the removal of a guardian is to be disposed of 
by the Court to ensure speedy disposal of cases. 
4.14  The Committee is of the considered opinion that if the 
proposed Law on Guardianship is to cover majors, then it should  a l s o  
provide for what is not known as ‘Supported Decision making’, a  system 
gaining popularity in many countr ies around the world. This is an 
alternative to Guardianship.  A person using supported decision-making 
appoints trusted advisors, such as friends, family, or professi onals, to 
serve as supporters. Instead of having a guardian make choices for them, 
the person takes the help of supporters who help them make thei r 
own choices. 
 
 
 

 
44 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-3 REVIEW OF LAWS ON ADOPTION OBSERVATIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 1.  The Committee is of the considered view that the Hindu Adoption s 
and Maintenance Act and Juvenile Justice Act have their own vir tues and 
shortcomings. While the adoption procedure laid down under HAMA  i s  
simple and takes less time as c ompared to that stipulated in JJ  Act, 
adoptions made under JJ Act are transparent, accountable and ve rifiable. 
However, the Committee also notes  that the Adoption Regulations  framed 
under Juvenile Justice Act provide  for an elaborate and time co nsuming 
adoption procedure beset with inordinate delays. It is also obs erved that 
Specialized Adoption Agencies are also over burdened with the p rocedural 
requirements and massive paper work stipulated in the regulatio ns.  I n  
view of the above, the Committee feels that there is a need to harmonize 
both the Laws and bring out a Uniform and comprehensive legisla tion on 
adoption which is more transparent, accountable, verifiable, le ss 
bureaucratic and applicable to all irrespective of religion  in order to make 
adoptions more easy and less cumbersome. The Law so enacted may  
prescribe separate adoption procedures for institutionalized ch ildren and 
children living with family. As regards adoption by relatives, the adoption 
process should be more flexible and simplified and involve less  
documentation.                         
(Para 3.3) 
 2.  The Committee is of the view that the new Legislation so en acted 
should avoid using the term ‘Illegitimate’ as no child is illegitimate and the 
adoption law should be the same for all children whether born w ithin or 
out of the wedlock. The Committee notes that  both the Hindu Ad options 
and Maintenance Act (HAMA) and th e Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of children) Act prov ide for the adoption of childre n by 

 
45 
married couple, single male and single female parents. The Comm ittee 
feels that the new legislation should cover LGBTQ community. 
(Para 3.4) 
 3.  The Committee is of the considered view that the upper age  limit of 
the adoptee may be fixed at 18 in the new legislation. The Comm ittee feels 
that the new Law should also permit adoption of children of the  same sex. 
The Act may stipulate minimum age difference of 25 years betwee n the 
adoptive child and prospective adoptive parent/s. Further, with  regard to 
eligibility of prospective adopti ve parents, the new Legislatio n may 
incorporate the criterion laid down under JJ Act, such as requi ring the 
PAPs to be physically fit, mental ly alert, financially stable a nd without life 
threatening diseases; two years of stable marital relationship in case of 
couple and a prohibition on the adoption of female child by sin gle male 
parent among others. The new legi slation needs to clearly defin e the 
eligibility criterion of Prospective Adoptive Parents in objective terms. 
(Para 3.5) 
 4. The Committee is of the view that the new law on adoption s hould 
provide for early de-institutionalisation of the new born as it  is in the best 
interest of children. The Committee also opines that the adopte d child 
should be entitled to a share in the property of his adoptive p arents and 
not of his biological parents since adoption replaces biological parents with 
adoptive parents permanently. 
(Para 3.6) 
 5. The Committee also recommends  mandatory post adoption follow-up 
because in the absence of post adoption follow up, it is not po ssible to 
ascertain the progress and well being of the child in the adopt ive family. It 
could result in vulnerabilities and distress being experienced by the child 
remaining unnoticed which may not be in the best interest of the child.  
(Para 3.7) 

 
46 
 6. The Committee observes that  CARA maintains data pertaining to 
adoptions taking place under JJ Act. As Parents adopting a chil d under 
HAMA are not required to register the adoption deed with CARA, there is 
virtually no data on adoptions  t a k i n g  p l a c e  u n d e r  H A M A .  T h e r e f ore, in 
the opinion of the Committee, henceforth, any enactment on adop tion 
must make registration of adoption deeds with CARA mandatory as  it will 
facilitate it to maintain an ADOPT ION REGISTER so that it can m onitor 
all adoptions and keep a check on trafficking. 
(Para 3.11) 
 7. The Committee takes note of the paradoxical situation where  on one 
hand there are a large number of Parents willing to adopt a chi ld, on the 
other, there are not many children available for adoption, all this while the 
2020 World Orphan Report estimates number of orphans in India a t 31 
million. Also, as per the informat ion furnished by the Ministry  of Women 
and Child Development, as per Census 2011 there are  55,258 chi ld 
beggars in the age group of 0 to 19 years in the Country. The Committee is 
of the view that at the outset, it is important to get a true p icture of 
number of children who are orphan ed/abandoned through a distric t level 
survey and the data needs to b e updated on a regular basis. A m eeting 
chaired by the District Magistrate should be held in each Distr ict every 
month to take stock of the situation and to ensure that orphan and 
abandoned children found begging in streets are produced before  t h e  
Child Welfare Committee and are made available for adoption at the 
earliest. The Committee also feels that it is important to prevent illegal and 
informal adoptions so that larger pool of children are availabl e for placing 
them in adoption with the families registering for adoption under JJ Act. 
(Para 3.15) 
 8. The Committee notes with serious concern that 762 children have 
died in Specialized Adoption Agencies between 2018-19 and 2021- 22 which 

 
47 
is alarming. The Committee rec ommends the Ministry to commissio n a 
third party study of all Child Care institutions. The Committee  a l s o  
recommends the Ministry to investi gate into the causes of child  deaths in 
Specialized adoption agencies and furnish a brief note to the C ommittee 
within three months time. The C ommittee recommends the Ministry  t o  
amend the JJ Act and/or Rules, a s the case may be, and empower the 
District Magistrates to identify and close down unregistered ch ild care 
institutions functioning within their jurisdiction.  
(Para 3.19) 
 9. The Committee notes that sub ject matters relating to adopti on fall 
under Concurrent list of the Seve nth schedule to the Constituti on. At 
present, adoption related matters are being dealt with by two M inistries, 
namely, Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Women and C hild 
Development. Under the Government of India (Allocation of Busin ess) 
Rules, 1961, Legislative Department is concerned with the Hindu  
Adoptions and Maintenance Act fo r the purposes of legislation o nly 
whereas the day-to-day functioning of JJ Act is monitored by th e Ministry 
of Women and Child Development a t Union Level. The Committee fe els 
that there is a need to bring Ad option Laws under a single Mini stry for 
better monitoring and implementation.  
(Para 3.22) 
 10. The Committee notes that Juvenile Justice (Care and Protec tion of 
Children) Amendment Act, 2021 auth orizes the District Magistrat e 
(including Additional District M agistrate) to issue adoption or ders and 
provides that any person aggrieved by an adoption order passed by the 
District Magistrate may file an appeal before the Divisional 
Commissioner. The Committee is of  the considered opinion that J udges 
have the competence, experience and skills to determine whether  adoption 
is in the best interest of the  child. When deciding on adoption , Courts 

 
48 
review documents, ensure necessary procedures have been complie d with, 
and conduct an inquiry of the child and adoptive parents and en sure that 
adoption is for the welfare of the child. The Committee feels t hat it is not 
appropriate for an administrative authority to issue adoption o rders 
instead of a judicial body. However, since the Act has been ame nded and 
the new system is yet to be tried and tested, the Committee rec ommends 
that appropriate training should be imparted to District Magist rates & 
Additional District Magistrates and Divisional Commissioners as well. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry of Women and Child Developmen t 
to review the functioning of the new system, after a year and p resent an 
Assessment Report to the Committee accordingly. 
(Para 3.28) 
 11. The Committee feels that w hile placing a child in any Chil d Care 
Institution, the Child Welfare C ommittee must pay due regard to  t h e  
capacity of the institution, its  state of infrastructure and re source 
availability. The Committee recommends the Central Adoption Res ource 
Authority to apprise the Commi ttee if the Juvenile Justice Rule s or 
Adoption Regulations or the Parent Act itself contains any prov ision 
requiring the orphan, abandoned and surrendered children to be placed in 
a Child care institution located in the same jurisdiction where  the child is 
found/located. In case, such Rules are notified by any State Au thority, the 
Committee recommends CARA to furnish details of such states whe re the 
rule is being implemented. 
(Para 3.29) 
 12. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development that certain Child Care Institutions should be earm arked for 
children with special needs. Such institutions should have a te am of health 
care professionals, special educators, therapists and facilitie s for medical 
rehabilitation. 

 
49 
(Para 3.30) 
 13. The Committee is disheartened to know that older children and 
children with special needs are usually not preferred for adopt ion by 
Indian Prospective adoptive parents. The Committee feels that a s children 
grow older, they find it difficult to adjust with a new socio-c ultural milieu, 
therefore, the priority is to place a child in adoption at the earliest. The 
Committee notes that the time fr ame stipulated for adoption und er JJ Act 
is lengthy and also not being strictly adhered to by the author ities 
concerned. There is a need to simplify the procedure further be sides 
bringing down the time required for placing a child in adoption  t o  l e s s  
than six months. The Committee is of the view that a longer wai t period 
often forces the parents willing to adopt a child to resort to illegal 
adoption.  
(Para 3.31) 
 14. The Committee also expresses serious concern about decline  i n  t h e  
number of children coming to adoption agencies over the years. This 
decline, by and large, points to  trafficking or a thriving ille gal child 
adoption market. The Committee is of the view that there is a n eed to 
increase surveillance, especially on unregistered child care in stitutions and 
adoption agencies/hospitals with the past record of trafficking. 
(Para 3.32) 
 15. The Committee finds that t he roles of various bodies invol ved in the 
process of adoption are overlapp ing. The Committee recommends t he 
Ministry to define the roles and responsibilities of each body clearly. The 
Committee desires that various agencies involved in adoption sh ould shed 
over cautiousness and act as fac ilitators for adoption agencies . The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to submit a note detailing the factors 
that are preventing the agencies involved in adoption such as C hild 

 
50 
Welfare Committees, District Ch ild Protection Units from adheri ng to the 
timeframe stipulated in the Adoption Regulations. 
(Para 3.33) 
CHAPTER-4  REVIEW OF LAWS ON GUARDIANSHIP- OBSERVATIONS 
AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE. 
16. The Committee notes that Section 3(1) of the Hindu Minority  a n d  
Guardianship Act makes use of the term ‘illegitimate’ in refere nce to a 
child born out of wedlock. The Committee strongly feels that th e word 
‘Illegitimate’ should be omitted  as no child is illegitimate an d the law 
should be the same for all children whether born within or out of wedlock. 
(Para 4.3) 
17. The Committee is of the considered view that Section 6 of t he Hindu 
Minority and Guardianship Act lays down that in the case of a H indu 
minor boy and a Hindu minor unma rried girl- the father is the n atural 
guardian and ‘after’ him the mother. Section 7 of the same Act provides 
that the natural guardianship of an adopted son who is a minor,  passes, on 
adoption, to the adopted father and ‘after’ him to the adoptive  mother. 
The said Act does not provide for joint guardianship nor does i t recognize 
the mother as the guardian of t he minor legitimate child unless  the father 
is deceased or is found unfit. Since, the Act gives preference to father over 
mother, it goes against the Right to Equality and Right against  
discrimination envisaged under Articles 14 and 15 of the Consti tution. 
Further, the Convention on the E limination of all forms of Disc rimination 
against Women (CEDAW) envisages that state parties shall take a ll 
appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in all 
matters relating to marriage and family relations. The Committe e feels 
that there is an urgent need to amend HMGA and accord equal tre atment 
to both mother and father as natural guardians. 
(Para 4.6) 

 
51 
18. The Committee is of the view that under Guardians and Wards  Act, 
parental authority supersedes the welfare principle, while unde r the 
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, the welfare principle is o f 
paramount consideration in det ermining guardianship. Thus, for deciding 
questions of guardiansh ip for Hindu children, their welfare is of 
paramount consideration which will override parental authority.  B u t f or  
non-Hindu children, the Court’s authority to intervene in furth erance of 
the welfare principle is subordinated to that of the father, as  the natural 
guardian. However what constitutes the ‘Welfare’ of the child i s 
undefined. The Committee feels that there is a need to amend th e 
Guardians and Wards Act to give p rimacy to the ‘welfare princip le’ over 
parental authority. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to 
define what constitutes the ‘Welfare’ of the child in broader t erms in both 
the Acts. 
(Para 4.8) 
19. The Committee is of the view that the recommendation made b y the 
Law Commission be taken into consideration that provisions rela ting to 
Custody, child support, visitatio n arrangements should be incor porated in 
the Guardians and Wards Act. Paren ts should be granted equal ri ghts 
with respect to guardianship and custody. The Act should empowe r the 
Courts to award joint custody to both the parents in circumstan ces 
conducive to the welfare of the child, or award sole custody to  one parent 
with visitation rights to the other. The Act must also empower the Courts 
to fix an amount specifically fo r child support to meet basic e xpenses of 
the child. 
(Para 4.10) 
20. The Committee feels that there is a need to enact a single 
comprehensive law covering guardianship aspects of various cate gories of 
persons and applicable to all irrespective of religion. The Com mittee is of 

 
52 
the view that the Act must fac ilitate guardianship of elderly p ersons as 
there may be circumstances where a senior citizen may reach a s tage 
where the health concerns beco me overwhelming and they may need  a  
guardian to take care of their health and well being, for insta nce, an 
elderly person diagnosed with dementia or lying in a vegetative  state or an 
aged parent abandoned by his children. The Committee also recom mends 
that timelines may be stipulate d in the Act for Courts within w hich the 
application for Guardianship of the person or/and property of t he minor 
or application for the removal o f a guardian is to be disposed of by the 
Court to ensure speedy disposal of cases. 
(Para 4.13) 
21. The Committee is of the considered opinion that if the prop osed Law 
on Guardianship is to cover majors, then it should also provide for what is 
not known as ‘Supported Decision making’, a system gaining popu larity in 
many countries around the world. This is an alternative to Guar dianship. 
A person using supported decision -making appoints trusted advisors, such 
as friends, family, or profess ionals, to serve as supporters. I nstead of 
having a guardian make choices fo r them, the person takes the h elp of 
supporters who help them make their own choices. 
(Para 4.14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 
54 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9 thJanuary, 2020 in 
Committee Room No.- 3, Block – ‘ A’, First Floor, Parliament Hou se Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi – 110001.   
Following Members and witnesses were present:- 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral 
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
4. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
6. Shri P. Wilson 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Sanjibhai Delkar 
8. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
9. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
10. Shri Malook Nagar 
11. Shri Suresh Pujari 
12. Shri A. Raja 
13. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
14. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.A. Rao, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
4. Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Additional Director 
5. Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary 

 
55 
 
WITNESSES 
I. Ms. Smita Chakraburtty, Researcher 
II. Legislative Department (Ministry of Law & Justice) 
1.   Dr. G. Naryana Raju, Secretary 
2.   Ms. Veena Kothavale, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
3.    Shri R. S. Jayakrishnan, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
4.   Shri Navneet Patial, Superintendent (Legal) 
III. Ministry of Women and Child Development 
1. Shri Ajay Tirkey, Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Aastha Saxena Khatwani, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Manoj Kumar Singh, CEO, CARA 
IV.      National Commission for Women 
   Shri Asoli Chalai, Joint Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committe e and 
apprised them of the agenda of th e day i.e. to hear presentatio n of Ms. Smita 
Chakraburtty on the subject ‘Strengthening the Justice Delivery  Process’ & 
Secretary, Legislative Department and Additional Secretary, Min istry of 
Women and Child Development on th e Subject ‘Review of Guardians hip and 
Adoption Laws’.  
3 .   *         *       *  
He further requested Members to gi ve their preference for the s ub-Committees 
on “Review of the working of Lega l Aid under NALSA” and “Review  o f  
Guardianship and Adoption Laws” which are to be constituted soon for detailed 
examination of those subjects. 
 
4 .  *         *       *  
 
*relates to other matters 

 
56 
5. *         *                                                     * 
6.       *                  *       * 
7.       *                                                  *                                                     *                     
(Witness then withdrew) 
8. The Chairman welcomed Secretary, Legislative Department, Add itional 
Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development and other of ficers to the 
meeting of the Committee. He requested them to brief the Commit tee about the 
existing laws relating to adoption and guardianship in the coun try. He also 
requested them to apprise the Committee of the major lacunae an d issues 
concerning existing adoption and guardianship practices and law s & initiatives 
taken by the Government to overcome those issues. 
 
9. The Secretary, Legislative Department made a brief presentat ion on the 
subject. While making his presentation, the Secretary made following 
submissions:- 
 Major laws for guardianship are Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 &  
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956; 
 Major laws for adoptions are the  Hindu Adoption and Maintenance  Act, 
1956 & the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) A ct, 
2015 &; 
 Guardianship and adoption laws are governed by both civil and p ersonal 
laws; 
 Adoption among minority communiti es like Muslims and Christians  are 
governed by civil laws.  
 In addition to the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 & the 
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956, civil laws are applic able to 
Hindus also. 
10. The Chairman and Members asked the representatives of Legis lative 
Department & Ministry of Women a nd Child Development to apprise  t h e  
Committee of the challenges in imp lementation of guardianship a nd adoption 

 
57 
laws and Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act (1956), relevant reports of  the 
Law Commission and Supreme C ourt judgments in writing.  The Chairman and 
Members, thereafter, sought various clarifications viz, existin g provisions for 
adoptions and guardianship among Muslim and Christian communities, uniform 
adoption laws for all communities, challenges  before Hindu ado ption laws, 
property rights of adopted children vis-à-vis natural born children, total number 
of orphans in the country and average time taken for adoption i n the country, 
effectiveness of Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, gist of the rec ommendations 
contained in the Law Commission re ports & Supreme Court judgmen ts on 
adoption and guardianship etc.  
 
11.    The Secretary clarified certain queries raised by the Me mbers and assured 
the Committee to send detailed replies of the Department in wri ting to the 
Secretariat.  The Chairman desired that a detailed questionnaire may also be 
forwarded to the witnesses and based on that, the witnesses may  be invited 
again to clarify further. 
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
12. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept. 
13. The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 11.00 am on F riday, 10
th 
January, 2020. 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                       MAHESH TIWARI 
9
th January, 2020                                                                            DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
58 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
 The first sitting of the Departm ent-related Parliamentary Stan ding 
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances Law and Justice, after  its 
reconstitution, was held at 3.00 PM on Monday, 9 th November, 2020 in 
Committee Room No. 4, Block-A, Parliament House Annexe Extensio n 
Building, New Delhi. Following Members were present:- 
    1. Shri Bhupender Yadav              -     Chairman 
 RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Naresh Gujral 
3. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
4. Shri P.Wilson 
LOK SABHA 
5.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
6.  Shri P.P.Mohammed Faizal 
7.  Shri Raghurama Krishna Raju kanumuru 
8.  Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
9.  Shri Malook Nagar 
10.  Shri B.Venkatesh Netha 
11.  Shri Suresh Pujari 
12.  Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
13.  Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
14.  Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
15.  Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary 
 

 
59 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson, welcomed Members and congrat ulated 
them on being re-nominated/nominated to the Committee for the y ear 2020-21. 
He looked forward to their meaningful participations in deliber ations of the 
Committee. While initiating discussion, he updated Members about the status of 
subjects identified by the Comm ittee during its previous tenure . Elucidating 
further, he mentioned that the Committee had presented six Repo rts including 
Reports on Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration in Certain  Revenue and 
Banking Institutions and Selected  Central Public Sector enterpr ises and Interim 
Report on Functioning of Virtual Courts/Court Proceedings throu gh Video 
Conferencing. Thereafter, he requested Members to express their  views on the 
subjects.  
3. Members unanimously congratulated the Chairperson on being a ppointed 
to chair this Committee for fourth  time in succession and hoped  that the 
Committee would prepare and present valuable Reports to Parliam ent under his 
guidance. 
4. *        *              * 
5. *        *              * 
6. *                 *              * 
7. *        *                                                    * 
8. The Chairman constituted a ‘five members’ Sub-Committee comp rising 
Shri Naresh Gujral, Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla, Shri P. Wilson, Sh rimati Sandhya 
Ray and Shri Malook Nagar under th e convenorship of Shri Gujral  to suggest 
broad outlines of the facets to be deliberated by the main Comm ittee on the 
subject - ‘Review of Guardianship and Adoption Laws’.  
9. *                            *      *  
*relates to other matters 

 
60 
 
10. The sitting was adjourned at  3:30 PM to meet again at 3:00 PM on 
Wednesday, 18th November, 2020. 
  
NEW DELHI                                                                      ASHOK K.SAHOO 
9th November, 2020.                                                                       DIRECTOR 
  
To 
The Chairman and Members of the 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
61 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
 The Sub-Committee of the Departm ent-related Parliamentary Stan ding 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. 
on Tuesday, the 17 th November, 2020 in Committee Room No.4, Parliament 
House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Following Members were present:- 
1. Shri  Naresh Gujral-     Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
3. Shri P.Wilson 
LOK SABHA 
4.  Shri Malook Nagar 
5.  Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT  
 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary. 
 
 Witnesses 
 
I. Ministry of Women and Child Development 
1. Shri Ram Mohan Mishra, Secretary;  
2. Smt. Aastha Saxena Khatwani, Joint Secretary; 
3. Shri Sanjay Barshilia, Director, (CARA); and 
4. Shri Jaganath Pati, Joint Director, (CARA). 
 
II. Legislative Department 
5.      Shri Vinay Kumar Mishra, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 
 

 
62 
2. At the outset, the convenor welcomed the Members to the firs t sitting of 
the Sub-Committee on Review of Guardianship and Adoption Laws a nd 
apprised them that the Sub-Committee has to present a report outlining contours 
of the subject to the Main Committee after making extensive int eractions with 
select stakeholders. Thereafter, he welcomed the Secretary, Min istry of Women 
and Child Development together w ith representatives from Centra l Adoption 
Resource Authority (CARA) and Legislative Department of Ministr y of Law 
and Justice. He requested the Secretary to make a brief present ation inter-alia 
covering aspects relating to extant lacunae in existing legal a nd regulatory 
framework for formal and informal adoptions in the country, rea sons for 
declining rate of formal adoption and increase of informal adop tion, challenges 
for adoption, etc.  
 
3. The Joint Secretary of Ministry of Women and Child Developme nt made 
a power point presentation inter-alia highlighting international convention, laws 
and rules/regulations concerning inter-country and inter-state adoptions. She 
apprised the procedure of adoptio n under the Juvenile Justice A ct, 2015 and 
rules, regulations framed there under for adoption including adoptions by Non- 
Resident Indians (NRIs) and Fore igners; roles and function of v arious agencies 
(Central Adoption Resource Authority, State Adoption Resource A uthority, 
District Child Protection Unit, Child Welfare Committee, Birth Certificate 
Issuing Authority and Regional Passport Office, etc). She also touched upon 
Child Adoption Resource Informa tion and Guidance System (CARING S) and 
role of Ministry in providing requisite support and guidance to  adoption 
agencies and carrying out advocacy and awareness activities for  promotion of 
adoption in the country.    
 
4. Highlighting bureaucratic del ay in adoption process which ha s resultant 
impact on psychological developmen t of the child, the convenor desired to be 
apprised of rate of adherence of  timeline stipulated under model juvenile justice 
rules and adoption regulations a long with findings of internal audit conducted 
by the Ministry thereon. Thereafter, he sought reasons for low adoption rate in 

 
63 
our country compared to adoption in other developed countries; causes of delay 
in obtaining court order for adoption; details of cases of chil d trafficking in the 
guise of adoption and impact of Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 on s uch child 
trafficking cases, etc.  
5. Details regarding cases of surrendering of adopted child aft er begetting 
child by the adopted parents; attempts by the orphanages to fin d biological 
parents of abandoned child; statistics of orphan child, distric t wise, etc. were 
sought. Members also wanted to know rationale of age gap of 21 years between 
adopted parent and adopted child; rationale of having property rights of adopted 
child in the property of adopted  parents as well as his/her bio logical parents 
under Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956. It was pointed  that the 
extant adoption law does not cover issues relating to parental kidnapping; 
visitation rights of parents, a doption of child having autism a nd mental 
retardation, guardianship for an adult becoming insane or slipp ing into coma, 
etc. The Committee also sought views of the Ministry about the requirement of 
educational and income criteria for prospective parents to ensure up keeping of  
adopted child, renewal of fee charged by adoption agencies for adoption; 
issuance of licensing for longer duration for adoption agencies. 
 
6. The Secretary replied to some of the queries in brief and agreed that there 
is a requirement of harmonisati on of the Hindu Adoption and Mai ntenance Act, 
1956 and the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 for better interface an d seamless 
protocol between adoption and oversight agencies. He assured the Committee to 
furnish data along with replies to the queries and observations  of Members in 
writing. 
 
7. The Sub-Committee also felt that the main committee may inte ract with 
Ministries of Home Affairs, External Affairs, Law and Justice t o make better 
appraisal of adoption and guardianship laws. Some of the adopti on 
agencies/orphanages in Delhi may be visited by the main Committee for making 
on the spot assessment of the requirement of those institutions  f o r  m a k i n g  
adoption smooth.  

 
64 
8. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept. 
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
9.      The meeting adjourned at 04.15 PM. 
 
NEW DELHI ASHOK K. SAHOO 
The 17thNovember, 2020. DIRECTOR 
 
To 
The Convener and Members of the Sub-Committee of the Department-
 related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
 Law and Justice on Review of Guardianship and Adoption  Laws. 
  

 
65 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
      Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Pe rsonnel 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 2.00 PM on Monday, 4 th January, 
2021 in Committee Room No. 4, Block-A, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi.  
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav              -     Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
3. Shri Naresh Gujral 
4. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha  
6. Shri P.Wilson 
7. Shri Hardwar Dubey 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
9. Shrimati Veena Devi 
10. Shri Malook Nagar 
11. Shri Suresh Pujari 
12. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
13. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
14. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
           Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
           Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary 
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Hardwar Dubey , MP, Rajya 
Sabha the recently nominated Member to this Committee and then also 
welcomed other Members to the m eeting of the Committee. He appr ised them 
that the Committee has invited Secretary, Central Government Pe nsioners 
Welfare Association; Secretary, Department of Pension and Pensi oners’ 
Welfare; and Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Financ e on the 

 
66 
subject 'Pensioner’s Grievances - Impact of Pension Adalats & C entralized 
Pension Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPENGRAMS) fol lowed 
by an internal discussion on draft Report of the sub-Committee on ‘Review of 
Guardianship and Adoption Laws’. 
3.  *        *              * 
3.1 *        *              *  
 
4. *        *              *  
4.1 *        *              * 
 
5.  *        *              * 
5.1 *        *              *  
5.2 *        *              *  
6.  *        *              * 
 
7.  *        *              * 
(Witnesses withdrew) 
8. Members were requested to give their suggestions, if any, on  the Draft 
Report of the Sub Committee on ‘Review of Guardianship and adoption Laws’.   
 
9. Members then suggested the Chairman that the Committee shoul d 
undertake study visit to some of the adoption centres of the co untry for an on-
the-spot assessment of the subject under consideration.  
 
10. Verbatim record of the meeting was kept.11.      The meetin g adjourned at 
3.20 PM.  
  
NEW DELHI                                                                           Goutam Kumar  
4th January, 2021.                                                                  Deputy Secretary 
  
To 
The Chairman and Members of the 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
______________________ 
*relates to other matters  

 
67 
XXV 
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Per sonnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 05:00 PM on 04.08.202 2 in 
Committee Room No. 4, Block-A, P arliament House Annexe Ext. Bui lding, 
New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi -  Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iii) Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
(iv) Shri P. Wilson 
(v) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
 Lok Sabha  
(vi) Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
(vii) Smt. Veena Devi 
(viii) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(ix) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(x) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xi) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
(xv) Smt. Kalaben Mohanbhai Delkar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Legislative Department  
(i) Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Secretary; and  
(ii) Shri K.R.Saji Kumar, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel. 
 

 
68 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meet ing of the 
Committee. He apprised them that t he Committee will first consi der and adopt 
two reports and subsequently hear the Secretary, Legislative De partment on the 
subject ‘Review of Personal Laws’. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the 118
th Report on ‘Review of 
Guardianship and Adoption Laws’ and 119 th Report on ‘Action Taken on 111 th 
Report of the Committee on Stren gthening of Grievance Redressal  Mechanism 
of the Government of India’.  
4. *        *              * 
5. *        *              * 
6. *        *              * 
7. *        *              * 
8.  *        *              * 
9.  *        *              * 
10. *        *              * 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
11. A Verbatim record of the pr oceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The meeting adjourned at 05.57 PM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN  
4
th August, 2022                                                                         DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
*relates to other matters 