4threport of Committee on personnel, public grievances, law and justice
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Personnel,%20PublicGrievances,%20Law%20and%20Justice/4threport.htm[05-07-2016 11:00:32]
 
CS(P&L)-7
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
 
FOURTH REPORT
 
ON
THE ANDHRA PRADESH LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL BILL, 2004
 
      (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 24TH MARCH, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 24TH MARCH, 2005)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2005/CHAITRA, 1926 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                  
 2.     INTRODUCTION                                                                                          
 3.     REPORT                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                             
*4.   RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
*5.   ANNEXURES:
 
(i)
                           The Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Bill, 2004  (As introduced in
                 Lok Sabha);                                              
            
(ii)                         List of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee;
 
(iii)
                  Views/suggestions of individuals/organisations on the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Bill, 2004 and
comments of Government thereon; and
 
           
___________________________________________________________________________
*  To be appended at printing stage.
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2004-05)
 

4threport of Committee on personnel, public grievances, law and justice
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Personnel,%20PublicGrievances,%20Law%20and%20Justice/4threport.htm[05-07-2016 11:00:32]
1.         Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan ¾   Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                  Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3.                  Shri Balavantalias Bal Apte
4.                  Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5.                  Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa
6.                  Shri Ram Jethmalani
7.                  Dr. P.C. Alexander
8.                  Shri Tariq Anwar
9.                  Shri Raashid Alvi
10.              Vacant
 
 LOK SABHA
 
11.
              Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
12.              Smt. Bhavani Rajenthiran
13.              Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar
14.              Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa
15.              Shri Shailendra Kumar
16.              Smt. Kiran Maheshwari
17.              Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel
18.              Shri Brajesh Pathak
19.              Shri Harin Pathak
20.              Shri V. Radhakrishnan
21.              Shri Vishwendra Singh
22.              Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
23.              Prof. Vijaya Kumar Malhotra
24.              Kumari Mamata Banerjee
25.              Shri S.K. Kharventhan
26.              Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
27.              Shri A.K. Moorthy
28.              Shri Ramchandra Paswan
29.              Vacant
30.              Vacant
31.              Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Fourth Report on the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Bill, 2004.
 
2.         In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman,
Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred* the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Bill, 2004 as
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 16
th December, 2004 for examination and report.

4threport of Committee on personnel, public grievances, law and justice
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Personnel,%20PublicGrievances,%20Law%20and%20Justice/4threport.htm[05-07-2016 11:00:32]
 
3.         The Committee considered the Bill in two sittings held on the 16th February and 10th March, 2005.
 
4.         The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) in
its sitting held on 16th February, 2005.
 
5.         To elicit views of the political parties, interested organisations and individuals on the provisions of the Bill, a Press
Communique was issued which was published in the national and regional dailies with predominant circulation in Andhra
Pradesh. 
 
6.         Twenty Memoranda containing suggestions on the Bill were received from representatives of the Political Parties,
Teachers’ Associations/Federations of Andhra Pradesh and NGOs.  
 
7.         In its sitting held on 22
nd March, 2005 the Committee considered the draft report on the Bill and adopted the same.
 
8.         The Committee in its meeting held on 10
th March, 2005 heard views of representatives of the Chief Minister of
Andhra Pradesh, Teachers’ Associations/Federations/NGOs and other persons interested in the subject matter. 
 
9.         The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on the 16th March, 2005.
 
10.       In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background note on the Bill received from the
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department), suggestions received from organizations/experts; comments of the
Ministry on the views received from organizations/individuals/political parties and queries raised by the Members on the
Bill in the meetings.
 
11.       For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed
in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 
12.       On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made by senior
representatives of Political Parties/eminent individuals/organizations who deposed before the Committee and submitted
their valuable suggestions on the Bill.
 
NEW DELHI:
March 22, 2005
E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
Chairman
Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice
REPORT
 
Need of Second Chambers in States
 
1.         Evolution of modern system of bicameral legislature in States can be traced in the observations of Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar, Chairman of the Constitution Drafting Committee during the course of deliberations of the Constituent
Assembly on 6 th January, 1949.  The Constituent Assembly envisaged the composition of Legislative Councils as a
transitional provision in the Constitution.  Opinion of the Assembly on whether provinces should have their second
chamber was divided and concern was expressed by Members about effectiveness of bicameral legislature.  Dr.
Ambedkar,   allaying the fears of the Members, replied that:-
“The question of whether to have a second Chamber in the provinces or not had been discussed by the Provincial
Constitution Committee, which was appointed by this House.  The decision of that Committee was that this was a
matter, which should be left to the decision of each province concerned.  If any particular province decided to have
a second chamber, it should be allowed to have a second chamber; and if any particular province did not want a
second chamber, a second chamber should not be imposed upon it.  In order to carry out this recommendation of

4threport of Committee on personnel, public grievances, law and justice
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Personnel,%20PublicGrievances,%20Law%20and%20Justice/4threport.htm[05-07-2016 11:00:32]
the Provincial Constitution Committee, it was decided that the Members in the Constituent Assembly representing
the different provinces, should meet and come to a decision on this issue.  The Members of the different provinces
represented in this Assembly, therefore, met in groups of their own to decide this question and as a result of the
deliberations carried on by the Members, it was reported to the office that the provinces had agreed to have a
second chamber for their provinces.  Ever since the French Constituent Assembly met, there had been consistently
a view which was opposed to second chambers.  The view of those who are opposed to second chamber could
better be put in the words of Abbe Seiyes.  His criticism was two-fold.  He said that if the Upper House agreed with
the lower one, then it was superfluous.  If it did not agree with the lower House, it was a mischievous body and we
ought not to entertain it.  The first part of the criticism of Abbe Seiyes was undoubtedly valid, because it was so
obvious.  But nobody had agreed with the second part of the criticism of Abbe Seiyes.  Even the French nation had
not accepted that view they too had consistently maintained the principle of having a second chamber.  The
Constitution was to introduce the second chamber, purely as an experimental measure.  We had not, by the Draft
Constitution, given the second chamber a permanent place; we had not made it a permanent part of our
Constitution.  It was a purely experimental measure, as I said” (C.A Deb. Vol.  7; 6.1.49;C. 1317).
 
Constitutional provisions regarding creation/abolition and composition of Legislative Councils
 
2.         As a corollary to the debate of the Constituent Assembly on the need of bicameral legislature in States and in
keeping with the views expressed by Dr. Ambedkar, the Constitution of India has embodied the provisions for
creation/abolition and composition of Legislative Councils.  The relevant articles of the Constitution are reproduced
below:-
“169. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 168, Parliament may by law provide for the abolition of the
Legislative Council of a State having such a Council or for the creation of such a Council in a State having no such
Council, if the Legislative Assembly of the State passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total
membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members of the Assembly present
and voting”.
           
“171. Composition of the Legislative Councils – (I) The total number of Members in the Legislative
Council of a State having such a Council shall not exceed one-third of the total number of Members in the
Legislative Assembly of that State:
 
Provided that the total number of Members in the Legislative Council of a State shall in no case be less than
forty.
 
(2) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the composition of the Legislative Council of a State shall
be as provided in clause (3).
 
(3) Of the total number of Members of the Legislative Council of a State-
 
(a)
                as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by electorates consisting of Members of
municipalities, district Boards and such other local authorities in the State as Parliament may be law
specify;
 
(b)
               as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates consisting of persons residing in the
State who have been for at least three years graduates of any university in the territory of India or have been
for at least three years in possession of qualifications prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament as
equivalent to that of a graduate of any such university;
 
(c)
                as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates consisting of persons who have
been for at least three years engaged in teaching in such educational institutions within the State, not lower
in standard than that of a secondary school, as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament;
 
(d) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by the Members of the Legislative Assembly of the State
from amongst persons who are not Members of the Assembly;
 
(e) the remainder shall be nominated by the Governor in accordance with the provisions of clause (5).

4threport of Committee on personnel, public grievances, law and justice
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Personnel,%20PublicGrievances,%20Law%20and%20Justice/4threport.htm[05-07-2016 11:00:32]
 
(4)        The Members to be elected under sub-clauses (a), (b) and
(c) of clause (3) shall be chosen in such territorial constituencies as may be prescribed by or under any law
made by Parliament, and the elections under the said sub-clauses and under sub-clause (d) of the said clause
shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single
transferable vote.
 
(5) The Members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (e) of clause (3) shall consist of
persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely:-
 
Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service.”
           
Present scenario
3.         At present there are Legislative Councils in five States, namely, Bihar, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and
Jammu and Kashmir.  The Legislative  Councils which were in existence in the States of West Bengal, Punjab and Tamil
Nadu were abolished by separate Parliamentary enactments with effect from 1
st August, 1969 and 1 st January, 1986
respectively.  Similarly, the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1985 (No.34 of 1985) abolished the
Legislative Council of the State, which was created in 1957 by the Legislative Councils Act, 1957 (37 of 1957).
           
 
Efforts for revival of Legislative Council in Andhra Pradesh
4.         Between then and now, efforts have been made to revive the Legislative Council in Andhra Pradesh.  On persistent
demand of political groups/individuals, the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly passed a resolution for revival of the
Legislative Council on 22
nd January, 1990.  A Bill to revive the Legislative Council in the State (alongwith the State of
Tamil Nadu) was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 10 th May, 1990 and passed by that House on 28 th May, 1990.  This
Bill, however, lapsed on the dissolution of the Ninth Lok Sabha.  It could not, be processed further till the year 2004, when
the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly passed a resolution on 8 th July, 2004 by a majority of the total Membership of
the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members present and voting for creation of the
Legislative Council in the State, and forwarded it to the Central Government for taking follow up action thereon as per the
provisions of article 169(1) of the Constitution. 
5.         Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Bill, 2004 (Annexure......) was introduced in Lok Sabha on 16
th December,
2004.  The Bill seeks to provide for creation of a Legislative Council in the State of Andhra Pradesh, with a total strength
of 90 Members, 31 of which are to be elected by the local authorities, 8 each are to be elected by the Graduates and
Teachers constituencies, 31 by the Legislative Assembly and the remaining 12 are to be nominated by the Governor.  The
local authorities being represented in the Legislative Council are Municipal Corporations, Municipalities, Nagar
Panchayats, Cantonment Boards, Zila Praja Parishads and Mandal Praja Parishads.  The constitution of the Legislative
Council is, therefore, the same as it had existed prior to its abolition, except for the local bodies constituting the local
authorities’ constituency.
Views of the Government
 
6.         Explaining the circumstances and the developments necessitating the introduction of the Andhra Pradesh
Legislative Council Bill, 2004, the Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) stated that creation of
Legislative Councils in States had always been a debatable subject and there had been arguments for and against creation
of the Legislative Councils.  First it was felt that a second chamber was necessary for adequate representation of certain
sections of the society, not sufficiently represented in the lower House.  The other argument was that the second chamber
would act as a revising chamber.  Thirdly, consideration by a second chamber would involve some delay in the passing of
a Bill and such delay was needed to enable the opinion of the people to be expressed on the measure, particularly in
matters of a controversial nature on which the views of the public were not clear.  It was essential to allow the necessary
time so that public opinion on the matter crystallized itself.  A second chamber would help in eliminating the errors of the
other House.   It was also thought that a second chamber would help in easing the pressure of time on the lower House, in
as much as important but comparatively non-controversial matters could be initiated in the Upper House and after full
discussion in the Upper House, the matters could be taken to the Lower House.  After such a full discussion in the Upper
House, the Lower House would not require much time to dispose of the matter.  Further, when the Lower House was fully
pre-occupied otherwise, the time of the Upper House could be utilized for discussion on urgent matters for which the
Lower House was not able to find time. 

4threport of Committee on personnel, public grievances, law and justice
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Personnel,%20PublicGrievances,%20Law%20and%20Justice/4threport.htm[05-07-2016 11:00:32]
7.         The Secretary further stated that there were arguments against having a second chamber in the State Legislatures. 
One such argument was that the Councils comprised of indirectly elected representatives, and as such impeded progressive
legislations.  It was also considered to be drain on the public exchequer.  Moreover, it was felt that the second chamber
was used to delay the Bills. 
8.         Referring to the debate in the Constituent Assembly and the views expressed by Dr. Ambedkar on the need of
bicameral legislature, the Secretary stated that earlier the concept of second chamber was considered a wasteful exercise.  
But in modern times the common man had to go to Court to get his concern heard.  So one needed more and more public
fora like the Legislative Council, where one could voice one’s grievance through the public representatives who could
bring matters of public importance/interest to the notice of the Government. 
9.         Further, the second chamber could address the inadequacy of addressing the concerns of the common man.  The
secretary also stated that as far as the legislative role was concerned, the contribution of the second chamber could not be
minimized.   There was no bar on introduction of Government as well as Private Members Bills in the second chamber.  It
had been experienced that debates on Private Members Bills could lead to some important decisions on the part of
Government, sooner or later.  
10.       The Committee considered suggestions received on the Bill from the representatives of NGOs, the various State
Teachers’ Associations/ Federations and Political Organisations and heard views of Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, Convenor
Lok Satta, Dr. Ravi Mallu, Ex-M.P and nominee of the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, Shri Kantheti Satyanarayana
Raju, Chief Minister’s nominee, Shri J.D. Seelam, M.P., Rajya Sabha, Shri B. Kamalaker Rao and Shri B. Mohan Reddy,
President, Progressive Recognized Teachers’ Union, Andhra Pradesh, Dr. A. Chakrapani, Senior Advocate, Andhra
Pradesh Court,  among other representatives of Teachers’ Federations of the State. 
11.       Suggestions received on the Bill were forwarded to the Government for comments thereon.  Statement showing
comments received from the Government alongwith suggestions are appended to the Bill (Annexure......)
12.       The Committee observed that while there was unanimity on the provisions of the Bill still the demand of the
various Teachers’ Associations for voting rights to primary school teachers has, by and large, remained unfulfilled.  The
Government’s response to this effect is that the issue of the voting rights to primary school teachers has been under
consideration of the Government since 1957 but no firm decision, however, has been possible because of absence of
unanimity in views of various bodies connected with the issue.  The Committee is, however, of the view that in the
changed circumstances primary teachers’ demand can not be said to be totally unjustified.  There has been a sea change in
socio-economic fabric as a result of which now a days all the teachers in primary schools are highly educated and as such
their demand for enrolment in the list of teachers’ constituency may be re-looked   by the Government.
13.       Having considered suggestions/views of the representatives of Government of Andhra Pradesh, NGOs, Jurists,
various Associations of Teachers of Andhra Pradesh, Parliamentarians, and others, the Committee arrives at the conclusion
that there is an overwhelming support in favour of creation of the Legislative council in the State.  The Committee notes
that even the Constituent Assembly, while debating on the question of necessity of second chambers in States, had
advocated a transitional provision in the constitution for creation of bicameral legislature.  Since then, Legislative Councils
have been constituted in States to fulfill the aspirations of the people and address concern of common man.  Not only this,
many advanced countries of the modern world too have a system of bicameral legislature.  It also note that the Andhra
Pradesh Legislative Council was abolished in 1985 and since then till now, there have been untiring efforts for its revival
in the State.  This, in a way, reflects the zeal and urge of the people of the State, both to represent interests of the people
and get heard adequately in the changed socio-political and socio-economic scenario.
14.  Viewed in the light of the above, the Committee feels that bringing this legislation to revive the Legislative Council in
Andhra Pradesh after twenty years of its abolitions is a right step in the right direction, which will ensure not only
proportional representations of the Local Body Institutions, Assembly Constituency, Teachers’ Constituency and Graduate
Constituency, but also have benefit of experience and views of the distinguished persons nominated to the Council.  
15.       The Committee, favouring creation of the Legislative Council in Andhra Pradesh, extends its all out support to the
Bill and recommends adoption of the clauses 2-5 of the Bill.
Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title
16.       Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were of consequential or
drafting nature, namely, the figure “2004” and the words and “Fifty-fifth” to be substituted by the figure “2005” and the
words “Fifty-sixth”, respectively.
 
 
------
 