 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023 / Shravana, 1945 (Saka) 
  
REPORT NO. 
131 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF RECRUITMENT ORGANISATIONS 
OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 03rd August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 03rd August, 2023) 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

3 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S           PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 4  
2. INTRODUCTION 5-6 
3. ACRONYMS    7  
4. REPORT 8-43 
 CHAPTER 1 
 INTRODUCTION 8-9 
 CHAPTER 2  
 FUNCTIONING OF RECRUITMENT ORGANIZATIONS-OBSERVATIONS  
         AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 10-45  
 5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE                                        46-54   
6.     RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE MEETINGS                                        55-70 
7. ANNEXURE             71-72 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
              
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
2. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Chinmayee Chakravarty, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
__________________________ 
* vacant due to change in nomination of Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand w.e.f. 08.12.2022 

5 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee on 
its behalf, do hereby present the 131 st report on the Subject „Review of Functioning of 
Recruitment Organizations of Government of India‟. 
 
2. The Committee identified the subject to examine the present working pr ocedure and 
timeline followed by the various Recruitment Organizations like UPSC, SSC and NRA,  
CAPFs (ITBP, SSB, BSF, AR, CRPF and CISF), IBPS, RRB  as the Subject concerns future 
of various aspirants across the country and have a wider impact on functioning of these 
recruitment organizations. The Committee aims to identify the hindrances faced by these 
organizations and to suggest effective measures for streamlining the overall recruitment 
process. The subject was inter-alia notified in Parliamentary Bulletin Part -II No.62570, dated 
06th December, 2022. 
 
3.   The Committee inter-alia heard the Secretary, DoPT; Secretary, UPSC; Chairperson, 
SSC; Chairperson, NRA on the abovementioned subject during the meeting held on 27 th July, 
2022. The Committee at its meeting held on 04 th November, 2022 inter-alia heard 
Additional Secretary, DoPT and other high ranking officers of IBPS and RRB. Further, the 
views of Additional Secretary, DOPT and UPSC and other high ranking officers of DOPT, 
UPSC, SSC, MHA, ITBP, SSB, AR and BSF were heard by the Committee at its meeting 
held on 20.12.2022. A deta iled list of all the representatives of the organizations who were 
present to depose before the Committee at its various meetings as mentioned in the 
preceding statements, are enclosed as Annexure I. During the meetings, the Committee 
discussed various aspects of the current recruitment process being followed in the country 
and reforms suggested by expert committees with respect to recruitment system as well as 
recruiting agencies and the status of implementation of their recommendations. 
 
4.  While conside ring the Subject, the Committee mainly relied upon the following 
documents/information:-  
(i)  Background notes, power point presentations of the various recruiting 
organizations of DoPT, UPSC, SSC etc;  

6 
 
(ii)  Replies furnished by DoPT, UPSC, SSC, NRA,  CAPFs (ITBP, SSB, BSF, AR, 
CRPF and CISF), IBPS, RRB to the questionnaires furnished by the Secretariat;  
(iii) Website of the Department of Personnel & Training, UPSC, SSC, NRA, CAPF s 
(ITBP, SSB, BSF, AR, CRPF and CISF), IBPS and RRB; and  
(iv)  News articles, editorials and material from the internet.  
 
5.     The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the Secretary, DoPT for 
furnishing necessary information/ documents and rendering valuable assistance to the 
Committee in its deliberations.  
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 31st 
July, 2023. 
 
 
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
3rd August, 2023                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
PT  Preliminary Test 
CrPC   Criminal Procedure Code 
IPC  Indian Penal Code 
IT  Information Technology 
RERA Real Estate Regulatory Authority 
SC                 Scheduled Caste 
ST  Scheduled Tribe 
OBC Other Backward Class 
EWS Economically Weaker Section 
VH Visually Handicapped 
DoPT Department of Personnel and raining 
ED Executive Director 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
GD General Duty  
SI Sub Inspector 
AC Assistant Commandant 
LWE  Left Wing Extremism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1. The process of identifying, attracting, interviewing, choosing, hiring, and onboarding 
personnel is referred to as recruitment. In other words, it covers everything from identifying a 
staffing requirement to filling it. The Government of India and its many  ministries run 
recruitment procedures to ensure that every deserving person has an equitable opportunity to 
work in the government sector. In simple words, recruitment is the entire process by which 
suitable applicants are selected for a position in a particular sector.  
1.2. The private job sector in India may have grown by leaps and bounds in recent decades 
but a government job remains a popular choice even today among the youth. Other than 
reasonable pay, a government job comes with social status, job s ecurity, health insurance, 
housing, and a host of other benefits.  
1.3 Among common citizens, Government jobs have an aura and a perceived high social 
status. The big allure for government jobs is based on the following major factors:  
 Fixed tenure, regular salaries, which are now comparable with private -sector 
salaries, housing, health and travel facilities.   
  Aspirants also look at government jobs as a means of serving the country and 
society. This is especially true for posts that in volve some degree of 
administrative responsibilities, such as the state or central administrative 
services. The jobs also offer aspirants a sense of recognition in society. The 
ability to give back to society and gain acknowledgment for the same also aids 
in making government jobs more popular. 
 
1.4. Every year several job opportunities are offered by the Indian Government and its 
departments. As new vacant positions arise in the government departments, recruitment 
notifications are released simultaneously.  
 The recruitment process in government sector takes a lot of time to select suitable 
candidates for the position. It involves the following steps- 
a) Release of Recruitment Notification 
b) Filling out application forms 
c) Conducting Assessment or Screening for selecting suitable candidates 
d) Shortlisting of candidates 
e) Final selection process 
f) Suitable candidates recruited 
 

9 
 
This whole process helps in selecting suitable candidates for different positions or vacancies. 
 
1.5. Prime Minister gave a clarion call to the various government departments and 
ministries to recruit 10 lakh candidates on a “mission mode” in the next 18 months. Prime 
Minister made this announcement to address the issue of unemployment in India. This will 
help a large number of aspirants who were waiting for government job opportunities to secure 
their future and who are facing the problem of unemployment even after having a graduate 
degree. Taking into account this announcement, it is all the more importan t now that the 
government Recruitment Agencies in India start working on war footing to complete the 
process of recruitment in a time bound and seamless manner. 
1.6 The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice has taken up the subject „Review of Functioning of Recruitment 
Organizations of Government of India‟ for detailed examination.  
1.7 The Committee is of the view that the much awaited National Recruitment Agency 
(NRA), which was mandated to conduct examinations for Group 'B' and group 'C' 
employees, should have been fully functional by now . Accordingly, the Committee initiated 
discussions on various aspects of the current recruitment process, reforms suggested by 
expert committees with respect to the recruitment system as well as recruiting agencies and 
the status of implementation of their recommendations. 
1.8 The Committee inter-alia held intensive deliberations with the Secretary, 
Department of Personnel & Training and  Union Public Service Commission and with 
Chairman of Staff Selection Commission and National Recruitment Agency on 27 th July, 
2022. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Additional Secretary, DoPT, Director 
& Executive Head, Institute of Banking an d Personnel Selection and Principal Executive 
Director, Railway Recruitment Board at its meeting on 04 th November, 2022. Further, in 
the last meeting held on 20 th December, 2022, deliberations were held inter -alia with 
Additional Secretary, Department of Personnel & Training and Union Public Service 
Commission and Ministry of Home Affairs, Member of Staff Selection Commission, 
Director General of Indo -Tibetan Borde r Police and Assam Rifles and Additional Director 
General of Sashastra Seema Bal and Border Security Force. During the meetings, the 
Committee discussed the different features of current recruitment process, challenges faced 
by the organizations and reforms that can be made. The Committee also asked the agencies to 
apprise of the targets and roadmaps in respect of the announcement made by the Government 
of India to conduct 10 lakh recruitment in the next one year.  

10 
 
Chapter 2 
REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF RECRUITMENT ORGANIZATIONS OF 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA - OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
2.1 Following is a list of organizations that carry out majority of recruitment for the 
Public Sector: 
 
(i) Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) 
(ii) Staff Selection Commission (SSC) 
(iii) Railway Recruitment Board (RRB) 
(iv) Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
(v) Indian Army Services Selection Board 
(vi) Indian Air force Armed Forces Selection Board 
(vii) Indian Navy 
(viii) Indian Coast Guard 
(ix) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) 
(x) Border Security Force (BSF) 
(xi) Income Tax Department 
(xii) Institute of Banking Personnel Selection (IBPS) 
(xiii) National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development 
 (NABARD) 
(xiv) Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(xv) National Rural Health Mission 
(xvi) National Highways Authority of India 
(xvii) National Airport Authority of India 
(xviii) National Human Rights Commission 
(xix) All Ministries 
(xx) All Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) 
 
UPSC, SSC and NRA 
The Committee during its meetings interacted with the representatives of some of the 
recruitment agencies to learn about their functi oning, mandate and challenges being faced by 
them. Brief about them is given below: 
  

11 
 
2.2 UPSC:  
 UPSC is a body created under Article 315 of the Constitution of India. Articles 315 -
323 deal with various aspects of the Commission viz. appointment, terms and removal of 
Chairman and members, conditions of service of the staff members, functions of the 
Commission etc. The UPSC conducts various examinations in accordance with the Rules of 
examination as notified by the Government of India in a j ust, fair and impartial manner  for 
making a merit based selection and recommendation of candidates for various Gro up A and 
some Group B Services of the Govt. of India. The Commission comprises of a Chairman and 
10 members and is assisted by a Secretariat headed by a Secretary. 
2.3 Functions of UPSC:  
1. The UPSC is mandated to conduct examinations for appointments to the 
services/ posts of the Union in accordance with its annual calendar, and shall be 
consulted: 
a. on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for 
civil posts; 
b. on the principles to be followed in making appointments to civil servi ces 
and posts and in making promotions and transfers from one service to 
another and on the suitability of candidates for such appointments, 
promotions or transfers; 
c. on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the 
Government of India inclu ding memoranda or petitions relating to such 
matters; 
d. on any claim by or in respect of a person who is serving or has served 
under the Government of India in a civil capacity, that any costs incurred 
by him in defending legal proceedings instituted against  him in respect of 
acts done or purporting to be done in the execution of his duty should be 
paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India; and  
e. on any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries sustained by 
a person while serving under the Gover nment of India in a civil capacity, 
and any question as to the amount of any such award, and it shall be the 
duty of a Public Service Commission to advise on any matter so referred 
to them and on any other matter which the President may refer to them. 
2. Provided th at the President in respect of the all - India services and also in 
respect of other services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, may 
make regulations specifying the matters in which either generally, or in any particular 
class of case or in any particular circumstances, it shall not be necessary for a Public 
Service Commission to be consulted. 

12 
 
2.4 The Committee observes that UPSC and SSC conduct various examinations each 
year and allocate recommended candidates to different posts. For instance, through the 
Civil Services examination, UPSC selects about 1000 candidates every year and these 
candidates are posted across 19 different services.  With reference to this the Committee 
notes that the same process and yardstick is being applied to select candidates who 
would be manning the top administrative posts in various services. It may happen 
sometime that the aptitude and interest of the candidate selected may not be suitable for 
that particular post.  
2.5 To assuage the concern of the Committee regarding aptitude and interest of candidates 
for a particular post, it was clarified by the UPSC that that, in light of the provisions of  extant 
Rules of the Civil Services Examination, candidate‟s mental alertness, critical power of 
assimilation, clear and logical exposition, balance of judgement, variety and depth of interest, 
ability for social cohesion and leadership, intellectual and m oral integrity are assessed 
through the interview/PT. 
2.6 The Committee was informed about the details of the different academic backgrounds 
of the candidates selected through civil services examination during the last ten years which 
is tabulated as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Total 
Number of 
Candidates 
Selected 
Number of 
candidates 
with 
engineering 
background 
Number of 
candidates 
with medical 
background 
Number of 
candidates 
with 
Humanities 
background 
Others 
1.  2011 1001 460 (46%) 142 (14%) 273 (27%) 126  
(12.5%) 
2.  2012 1091 408 (37%) 156 (14%) 433 (40%) 94 (8%) 
3.  2013 1228 623 (51%) 168 (14%) 339 (28%) 98 (7%) 
4.  2014 1363 699 (51%) 183 (13%) 387 (28%) 94 (8%) 
5.  2015 1164 642 (55%) 160 (14%) 294 (25%) 68 (6%) 
6.  2016 1209 717 (59%) 125 (10%) 264 (22%) 103 (9%) 
7.  2017 1056 699 (66%)  59 (5%) 230 (22%) 68 (7%) 
8.  2018 812 509 (62%) 48 (6%) 199 (24.5%) 56 (7.5%) 
9.  2019 922 582 (63%) 56 (6%) 223 (25%) 61 (6%) 
10.  2020 833 541 (65%) 33 (4%) 193 (23%) 66 (8%) 
11.  2021 Complete information is not available at present, as Reserve List in respect of 
Civil Services Examination 2021 is yet to be released. 
 
* Figures in brackets show the percentage out of total candidates recommended 

13 
 
 
2.7 The Committee notes that  it is quite evident from the table, the maximum 
number of officers recruited are from Technical and medical background. Above 70 per 
cent of the recruits in the civil service by UPSC nowadays are from technical streams. 
Every year, hundreds of technocrats are thus being lost, who are likely to work in other 
specific areas which is also a requirement for the nation.  So, doctors and top 
technocrats are being lost who can perform as very good doctors and engineers.  The 
allurement to become civil servant is p erhaps also adversely affecting other fields of 
working.  Hence, the Committee opines that it is high time to have a rethink about the 
whole process of recruitment for the Civil Service. 
2.8 On the question of long time taken to complete the recruitment cycle, the UPSC 
resubmitted that it has been the constant endeavour of Union Public Service Commission  
to reduce the time- cycles of its Examinations. Due to COVID situation during the last 
couple of years, the Commission‟s Examinations were rescheduled wh ich are now back  on 
track. Now the Examinations are being held timely and results are being declared on time 
2.9 The Committee notes that the each recruitment test conducted by UPSC as of 
now, takes anywhere between six months to one year to complete. This  long drawn 
process involves a lot of expenses for the competing candidates and also contributes to 
the erosion of human capital. In view of this, the Committee desires to know  whether 
UPSC is contemplating to make any change in the pattern of civil services 
examination to curtail the length of the examination cycle. 
 
 In its reply, the UPSC informed that the examination process involves several steps 
including Notification of Examination Rules as well as reporting of vacancies by the 
Government. The Commission publishes the Calendar of Examinations well in advance and 
these examinations are conducted as per the calender. It is the topmost priority to conduct 
exams on time. And for maximizing efficiency, it has also been ensured that technology is 
used to the maximum feasible extent to ensure that the things which were being done 
manually, which took eight to ten months can be shortened into a shorter period of time. 
The time cycle of all the Examinations of the Commission have already been optimized to 
the maximum possible extent. 
2.10 The Committee deliberating upon the performance of civil servants, their 
training and evaluation felt that there is a decline in the quality of ad ministration, maybe, 

14 
 
because of obvious reasons like the increasing workload. Earlier the workload was less as 
the number of schemes was also perhaps less giving them space to go to the people.  
Nowadays, it is very difficult for the civil servants to find time and go to the people.   
2.11 The Committee observes and appreciates that with changing times, the 
Government has brought in several significant changes in the training methodology. 
However, the efficiency, energy and intensity of the officers still needs to improve and 
the officers need to be further trained for working in adverse situations, particularly 
to tackle law and order problems effectively.   
2.12 The Committee feels that a Civil Servant is an interface between the 
government and common public and works at the grassroot level  which requires 
considerable human touch and sensitive approach towards the people. He/ she works 
among the poor people most of the times and not the elite. If there is lack of sensitivity 
one cannot be a good administrator. So, Committee wishes to emphasi ze that the civil 
servant has to be given training in such a way that he develops a more humane and 
empathetic approach towards any issue. The Committee also observed that the 
present day civil servant did not possess the same legal prowess as their predecessors. 
2.13 In its reply, the UPSC apprised the Committee that following topics under the law 
Module are presently being imparted to the Officer Trainees of the Foundation 
Course, IAS Phase-I and IAS Phase-II: 
Foundation course:  
1. Criminal Law. 
2. Civil Procedure Code (CPC). 
3. Provision  of Law pertaining  to people with  disability. 
4. Sexual Harassment  at Work  Place. 
5. Alternative Dispute Resolution in India. 
6. Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. 
7. Indian  Contract  Act, 1872. 
8.   Administrative Law. 
9. Interpretation of Statutes. 
10. Fighting Court Cases. 
11. SC/ST  (Prevention  of Atrocities) Act. 
12. Human Rights  Law  in India. 
13. Legal Framework supporting Climate Change Mitigation. 

15 
 
14. Information Technology Act. 
 
IAS Professional Course Phase-I: 
1. 144 CrPC. 
2. Civil Procedure Code. 
3. IPC. 
4. Inquest. 
5. Registration Act. 
6. Indian Evidence Act, 1972. 
7. Contract. 
8. Essential Commodities Act. 
9. Arms Act. 
10. Juvenile Justice Act. 
11. Disaster Management Act. 
 
 
IAS Professional Course Phase-II: 
 
1. Law Presentation. 
2. Understanding Court Procedure. 
3. Handling Court Work. 
4. Contempt of Court. 
5. Understanding IT Act. 
6. Understanding RERA Act. 
 
2.14 The Committee feels that there is a need to impart better training in the legal part 
as they are also quasi judicial officers so that the officers when they take the final 
assignment, address the judicial problems more meticulously than what they are doing  
nowadays. 
2.15 In September 2020, Government of India launched Mission Karmayogi - a National 
Programme for Civil Services Capacity Building (NPCSCB). It aims to create a competent 
civil service who is well rooted in Indian ethos and whilst having a clear understanding o f 
India‟s priorities, can work in harmonization for effective and efficient public service 
delivery. The Mission seeks to keep the civil service at the center of all change, empowering 
them to deliver in challenging environments. The focus of NPCSCB is als o on enhancing the 
government-citizen interaction, with officials becoming enablers for citizens and business. 

16 
 
Thus, by design, Mission Karmayogi adopts a citizen -centric approach for civil service 
reforms.  
   
 
 
2.16 The Committee feels that renderin g services to common people is the primary task 
of the Civil Servants and inclination to serve the society with human touch must be an 
essential quality amongst the Civil Servants. The Committee therefore, recommends that 
while examinations are conducted a nd the question paper is prepared, these factors also 
need to be taken into account apart from the subject and intelligence. The Committee is of 
the view that these factors probably could help in moulding the prospective/selected 
candidate to work for betterment of the society. 
2.17 The Committee sought details of litigations pending before the Supreme Court/High 
Courts/Central Administrative Tribunal where UPSC is a party on date. 
2.18 In response thereto  the UPSC submitted  the number of litigations pending in Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court/High Court/Central Administrative Tribunals (CATs) across the Country as on 
16.08.2022 as under: 
 
 
 
 


17 
 
Defending Case  
Total 
Non-defending Case  
Total 
Supreme 
Court 
High 
Court CATs Supreme 
Court 
High 
Court CATs 
45 275 598 918 27 282 825 1134 
The Committee was informed that the Commission defends those cases where the action 
of the UPSC has been directly challenged by way of filing counter affidavit / petition etc. These 
cases are closely monitored by the Commission. In other cases where Commis sion has been 
impleaded as a respondent but its actions have not been challenged, the Commission requests 
the concerned Ministries/Departments/State Governments to defend such cases on behalf of 
Commission and also take care of the interests  of the Commission. Such cases are treated as 
non-defending. 
2.19 The Committee recommends that the UPSC may draft a policy on mediation or 
arbitration with the aggrieved parties in cases where the Commission has been 
challenged.  It is equally important to apply rules that take into account the likelihood 
of victory and the time consumed for each case. Thus, UPSC can direct the concerned 
ministries/ departments to set up Groups whose job is to examine all pending litigation 
and rank these on the basis of value and  ‘winnability’, and then take a call on whether 
they should be carried on. Only those cases which have a strong winning possibility 
should be continued to be fought in court and the rest should be settled via arbitration 
and mediation. 
2.20 SSC: 
 The Commit tee was informed that the Staff Selection Commission is one of the 
largest recruiting agencies of the Government of India which is mandated with the 
task of making recruitment to all Group „B‟ (Non - Gazetted) and Group „C‟ (Non –
Technical) posts in various Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India and 
their Attached and Subordinate Offices and various Constitutional  Bodies/ Statutory 
Bodies etc. except those posts which are specifically exempted from the purview of 
the Commission. In addition, the Commission, from the year 2016, has been assigned 
the additional responsibility of making recruitments to Group „B‟ (Gazetted) posts of 
Assistant Accounts Officer and Assistant Audit Officer for the Indian Audit and 
Accounts Department. Highlights of the achievements of SSC are as follows: 
 Twelve All India Open Competitive Examinations were conducted (in stages) by the 
Commission during the year 2021 -22. A total of 1,98,58,482  candidates applied/ 
qualified to appear for different stages of various examinations. This includes 

18 
 
1,86,87,654 candidates for the All India Open Competitive Examinations and 
11,70,828 candidates for Selection Posts Examinations. 
 The Commission made conce rted efforts to promote the participation of women 
candidates in its examinations. During the year 2021 -22, out of 1,54,06,743 
candidates who registered for various All India Open Competitive Examinations of 
the Commission, 48,76,066 were women candidates. In percentage terms, the share of 
women candidates was 31.65%.   
 The Commission endeavors to fill up all the vacancies of SC/ST/ OBC/EWS as 
reported by the User Departments. During the said year, 4456 -SC, 2053 -ST, 9305 -
OBC and 1981- EWS, aggregating to a total of 17795 candidates, were recommended 
for appointment through All India Open Competitive examinations. Similarly, as 
against 1092 Selection Posts, 121-SC, 65-ST, 255-OBC and 56-EWS candidates were 
recommended for appointment aggregating to a total of 497 candidates. 
 The Commission makes a conscious effort to provide Persons with Disabilities 
(PwD), an easy, safe and hassle free access to the venues of examination. The 
Commission also extends the facility of providing Scribes, Passage Readers and 
compensatory time of 20 minutes per hour to the eligible PwD candidates. Further, 
alternate questions are given to the PwD (VH) candidates in place of questions with 
graphs and diagrams. During the year 2021 -22, 575 PwD candidates were 
recommended for appointme nt through All Indian Open Competitive examinations. 
Similarly, 23 candidates were recommended for appointment against Selection Posts. 
 During the last 08 years and the current year (up to 30.06.2022), the Commission has 
recommended 3,40,661 candidates for  appointment to various posts in the 
government. Out of these 1,11,747 recommendations have been made during the post 
Covid-19 period.  
 
2.21 On the issue of filling up  of existing and backlog  vacancies which are there in 
various Ministries/Departments of the Central Government, the Committee notes that  
the Staff Selection Commission itself is short of staff as out of 541 sanctioned strength, it 
has only 329.   The Committee feels that unless SSC itself has complete staff, how can it 
expect to conduct its activities and functions with utmost efficiency and in a time bound 
manner. Hence, the Committee recommends that SSC needs to fill the vacant positions 
in its organization at the earliest in order to carry out the other recruitment processes 
smoothly. 
2.22 The Committee was informed that filling  up of vacancies including backlog 

19 
 
reserved vacancies, is a continuous process. In each recruitment drive, a few vacancies 
remain unfilled on account of either non-joining of selected candidates, upward movement of 
reserved category candidates in to general category because of their own merit etc. The status 
of backlog vacancies in respect of SCs, STs and OBCs, as on 01.01.2022,  as received from 
ten major Ministries/Departments is 17343, 13675 and 17889 respectively. DoPT has already 
issued instructions to all Ministries/Departments to constitute an In -house committee for 
identification of backlog reserved vacancies, to study the root cause of such vacancie s, to 
initiate measures to remove the factors causing such vacancies and to fill  them up through 
Special Recruitment Drives and Each Ministry/Department of the Central Government is 
required to designate an officer of the rank of Deputy Secretary and above, as Liaison 
Officer, to ensure due compliance of the orders and instructions pertaining to reservation. A 
workshop was held on 31.05.2022 with these 10 Ministries/Departments in which they were 
asked to fill the backlog vacancies as soon as possible.   
2.23 Workshops for Liaison Officers have also been organized at ISTM, each of two days  
duration, during 9th -10th June, 2022 and on 23rd-24th June, 2022, to make them familiar 
with the reservation/backlog related issues so that they ensure  clearing up of backlog  
vacancies in their respective Ministries. 
2.24 The total sanctioned strength and current strength in UPSC as on 01.08.2022, is 
1768 and 1236  respectively. The total sanctioned strength and current strength in 
SSC is 541 and 334 respectively.  DoPT is taking action in a mission mode for filling 
up of vacant posts in these recruiting agencies, in a time bound manner. 
2.25 As far as shortage of staff in SSC is concerned, Staff Selection Commission is not 
the Cadre Controlling Authority for most of the vacant posts which belong to the 
clerical grade, Central Secretariat Service and Central Secretariat Stenographer Service. 
The Commission is the cadre controlling authority for the post  of Multi Tasking Staff, 
Data Entry Operator , Staff Car Drivers and  the Canteen Staff only. The Commission 
takes necessary steps to fill up the vacancies available in these cadres from time to time. 
2.26 The Committee appreciates the Staff Selection Commission for the massive 
recruitment they have been doing over the last  five years, the Committee noted that the 
maximum number of candidates have been recruited by SSC during the pandemic year 
itself. Even with a meagre workforce during the pandemic time, SSC has done a 
commendable job.  
2.27 With reference to examination co nducted by Staff Selection Commission, the 

20 
 
average time taken· for Combined Graduate Level and Combined Higher Secondary 
Level Examination right from the  Tier-I stage to the declaration of final result is 
approximately, 12 - 15 months.  
2.28 In order to expedite the recruitment process, the Committee strongly 
recommends that computer based examination should be brought into practice 
wherever possible to reduce the timeline of the examination which will enable the 
Commission to mitigate the time taken for sorting of applications, preliminary 
examination, mains examination, publication of results and interviews. 
2.29 Implementation of the recruitment rules in every organization needs to be 
attended on a regular basis.  Once rules have been approved, they are neither being 
operationalized nor being implemented.  The Committee recommends that there should 
be some robust monitoring system for formulation of recruitment rules. This 
monitoring system so devised should take every step possible to implement the 
approved rules without any delay.  
2.30 After the advice is issued by Union Public Service Commission on framing/ 
amendment of Recruitment Rules / Service Rules, the Ministries / Departments are expected 
to notify these rules within a period of ten weeks. A statement showing the number of cases 
where the Recruitment Rules/ Service Rules were not notified by the Ministrie s / 
Departments along with the period of delay is also included in the Annual Report of the 
Commission which is laid on the table of both the Houses of Parliament. 
2.31 The details of advice of the Commission given on proposals relating to framing/ 
amendment of Recruitment Rules during last 5 years are as under: 
 
S. No. Financial Year Number of advice issued 
1. 2017-18 595 
2. 2018-19 607 
3. 2019-20 575 
4. 2020-21 240 
5. 2021-22 242 
 
2.32 Pending notifications of Recruitment Rules/Service Rules are continuously followed 
up with the concerned Ministries/Departments to expedite notification. As on 16.08.2022,  the 
details of pending notification, as per the records available with the Union Public Service 
Commission, are as follow: 

21 
 
 
Pending Notifications (as 
on 31.01.2022) 
Pending notifications (as on
 16.08.2022) (including Advice 
Letters issued upto 16.08.2022) 
 505 3
8
4 
 
The Recruitment Rules Formulation, Amendment, Monitoring System (RRFAMS) was 
made operational in UPSC w.e.f. 03.12.2018. 
2.33 For Staff Selection Commission, the Recruitment Rules are finalised by the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments. After finalisation of the Recruitment Rules, the 
Ministries/Departments share the recruitment rules with the SSC. The provisions 
contained in the Recruitment Rules are incorporated in the notices of the concerned 
examinations published by SSC. Thus, the provisions of the Recruitment Rules are 
operationalised  through the notices of the examination. 
 
2.34  The Committee wants to know about the feedback mechanism and suggestions 
of candidates taking civil services and other  examinations. Also, whether UPSC and 
SSC publish the key of civil services preliminary examination before finalizing the 
result of prelims and selecting candidates for Mains. Whether UPSC invites objections 
from candidates and reviews the key before finalizing the result of preliminary 
examination. 
2.35 The representatives of UPSC informed t he Committee that a „Feedback‟ tab is 
available on the website of the Commission i.e. https://www.upsc.gov.in. Besides, the citizens 
of the country have the option to send their views/ comments/ suggestions through  e-mail to 
the Commission. The Commission also opens a window on its website for seeking 
representations in respect  of the questions asked in any Examination from the candidates and 
the said window remains open for a period of 7 days. 
2.36 The Commission opens the Online Question Paper Representation Portal for one week 
after the conduct of the Examination. The representations are examined by  the subject experts 
before declaration of the results for the same. Further, Answer Keys  of the Civil Services 
(Preliminary) Examination are declared by the Commission only after the entire process of 
Civil Services Examination of that year is over i.e. after the declaration of the final result of 
the Civil Services Examination for that particular year. 
 
2.37 Representatives of Staff Selection Commission informed that it also follows a 

22 
 
transparent· system of examination and cont inuous feedback  from the examinees is an 
integral part of the system. As part of the process of the examination system, the ans.wer keys 
of the questions are finalised  after getting due feedback from the candidates. The 
Commission has also  recently started the practice of giving a window for correction of · 
application forms. This has enabled the candidates to rectify the mistakes, if any, committed 
by them during the filling up of online applications. 
 
2.38 There is a practice of placing the tentative answer keys of all computer based 
examinations on the Commission's   website,   affording  the candidates  with an opportunity  
to make representations / challenges against discrepancies if any, in question paper / tentative 
answer keys . On receipt of the challenges , the Commission , through a panel of experts 
exercises due diligence before preparing the final answer keys : Thereafter, the r esult is 
declared on the basis of the final answer keys .  These final answer keys are a lso uploaded on 
the website of the Commission, whereby the candidates are able to judge the ir performance in 
the examinations. 
 
2.39 The Committee appreciates the UPSC and SSC for conducting the diligence 
exercises before publishing the answer keys. However, the Committee is of the view that 
this will become further more credible if the feedback of the candidates are taken 
through a dedicated portal and then keys are published. The Committee hopes that this 
process will be followed in future. Further, UPSC should explore the feasibility of 
declaring the answer key of Civil Services Preliminary exams after the Preliminary 
Exam stage is ov er and not after the declaration of final results of the Civil Services 
examination. Candidates should be allowed to raise objections at this stage only and on 
that basis any discrepancies related to the answer key of the Preliminary examination 
should be resolved.  This should be taken into account before publishing the result of 
candidates qualifying for the next stage, i.e. Civil Services Mains examination.  
 
2.40 Representatives of Staff Selection Commission informed the Committee that a  
total number of 2378 cases are pending as on date before the Supreme Court / High Court / 
Central Administrative Tribunals where SSC is a party. 
 
2.41 The Committee is of the opinion that there are a large number of pending cases 
(especially where SSC is a party), most of which are students’ related. These students 
mainly comprise individuals who have appeared/ are appearing for the various 
recruitment examinations conducted by SSC. Since these students are mostly 
unemployed, fighting such litigations is a  huge financial and psychological burden for 

23 
 
them, especially at the start of their career journey.  The Committee is therefore of the 
view that the Commission should analyze the cases filed by the students and if it is an 
exam related matter steps should be taken to settle those out of court. In the matters of 
exam related ones, the Commission should persuade the Government Counsel to place 
the facts before the respective courts and request the courts to dispose off the cases as 
quickly as possible. This w ill help the Commission to concentrate on its core function, 
i.e. conducting examination and filling the vacancies, rather than spending time in 
Courts. 
  
2.42 The Committee appreciates the work done by Staff Selection Commission in 
terms of the quantum of recruitment and large number of candidates selected by it for 
various departments and posts even during Covid outbreak, it continued its recruitment 
process via online mode.  
2.43 NRA: 
 1. The Committee was informed that NRA was set up by the Government of 
India vide Order dated 28.08.2020 to provide the same test platform to all candidates 
at the nearest District HQ, particularly those in rural areas/ Aspirational Districts, and 
set a new standard of equity and inclusiveness. It is an autonomous and self -reliant 
body to conduct Common Eligibility Test (CET) to shortlist the candidates for 
vacancies of Group „B‟ Non -Gazetted posts, Group „B‟ Gazetted pos ts (which are 
exempted from consultation with UPSC); Group „C‟ posts in the Government and 
equivalent posts (where no such classifications exist) in instrumentalities of the 
Government, through a computer-based online Tier-I examination. 
 
2. The main objectives of NRA are to: 
 
 To mitigate the hardship faced by candidates who have to appear for multiple 
 examinations conducted by multiple agencies, where similar eligibility conditions 
 have been prescribed; 
 To bring in savings to the candidates towards multiple application fees and  travelling 
 cost to appear in these examinations; 
 To improve access to rural candidates by setting up a test centre in  every district, 
 particularly in the 117 Aspirational Districts; 
 To facilitate candidates to schedule tests and choose centre of their choice; 
 To reduce the time taken in the selection process; and 

24 
 
 To facilitate employment generation - in the longer run, the CET score could be 
shared with other recruiting agencies in the Central  Government, State 
Governments/Union Territories, Public Sector Undertaking and Private Sector on 
MOU/Cost sharing basis, for  appointment in their organizations. This would help 
such organizations  in saving costs and time spent on recruitment. 
 The NRA has been registered as a Society  on 24.12.2020 under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 with its HQ in Delhi NCR. There is a  Governing Body 
consisting of Chairman (NRA), Secretary, DoPT or his representative, representative 
of M/o Railways, representative of D/o Financial Services, Cha irman (SSC), 
Chairman (RRB), Chairman (IBPS),  two experts from the field of academics as 
Members, Secretary -cum -Controller of Exam (NRA) as Member -Secretary. The 
NRA will have six  Regional Offices in the North, East, West, South, Central & 
North East, each headed by a Director/Deputy Secretary level officer. 
 
2.44 The NRA has been made functional from its office at New Delhi. However, in order 
to conduct Common Eligibility Test (CET), there is need to finalize the syllabus, scheme of 
examination, fee structure, normalization, etc. for which an Expert Advisory Committee 
(EAC) has been set up. The EAC will give recommendation and guidance on assessment 
besides technologies to be adopted for conducting the tests. Representatives of NRA  in the 
meeting of 27th July, 2022 informed that the final Report of the Committee is expected soon.  
2.45 Further, in order to build a digital platform for NRA, the NIC has submitted a project 
proposal which is under examination. A review meeting under Chairmanship of Secretary, 
DoPT has been held and the feedback received on the project proposal, from various  
authorities/stakeholders, has been sent to NIC for appropriate action. Once the revised 
proposal is received, the same would undergo appraisal by competent authority. NIC will 
require 8 to 10 months to make NRA digital portal fully functional in all aspec ts. Once the 
draft proposal being prepared by NRA is submitted and a decision on the same is 
conveyed, NRA would be in a position to prepare examination calendar to conduct first  
CET (This is as per the position existing on 27 th July, 2022, i.e. the date o n which 
meeting was held with representatives of NRA). 
2.46 The Committee emphasizes that the much awaited National Recruitment Agency 
(NRA), which was mandated to conduct examinations for Group 'B' and group 'C' 
employees, is not fully functional as of now and hence Committee keenly wants to be 
apprised of by when NRA foresees to become completely operative.  

25 
 
2.47 SSC has been conducting online  examinations for quite some time now. NRA 
thus may consult SSC for finalizing the modalities involved in the process of conducting 
the exam. This, the Committee feels will give NRA a broad idea about the way in which 
competitive exams are conducted.  
2.48 The Committee also recommends that NRA should consult Railway Recruitment 
Board as well regarding the recruitment proposal being prepared, so that NRA can 
finish the task within the given timeline and without any criticism. Also, it needs to 
work on the m odalities of actual conduct of examination and publication of results 
cautiously and on immediate basis. As two years have already lapsed, NRA cannot take 
another two years to get fully functional. 
2.49 The Committee recommends that NRA should move very fa st and start from the 
reverse direction since if it conducts examination for class 10, the number will be huge. 
Hence, the Committee advises NRA to start with graduate level examination so that the 
number of candidates with required eligibility is reduced.  In case it starts with an exam 
which requires eligibility of class 10 th, all graduates will automatically become eligible 
and hence the numbers would be large and unmanageable.   
RAILWAY RECRUITMENT BOARD (RRB) & INSTITUTE OF BANKING 
PERSONNEL SELECTION (IBPS) 
2.50 RAILWAY RECRUITMENT BOARD (RRB): 
 The Committee was informed that direct recruitment to Group „C‟ vacancies 
(including Level 1) of Indian Railways are filled through Railway Recruiting Agencies 
{Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs) & Railway Recruitment Cells (RRCs)}.  There are, at 
present, 21 RRBs & 16 RRCs located all over the country for catering to direct quota 
recruitment requirements of various  Group „C‟ posts of Zonal Railway(s)/Production Unit(s). 
2.51 One major concern raised by the  Committee was that not enough centres of 
examinations are presently being allocated for conduct of such a large scale examination. On 
this issue, the RRB informed that the entire process of examination has been centralized now, 
as a result of which, the candidates can fill up any centre of his or her own choice to appear in 
the examination and RRB tries to allocate the centre closest to the candidate‟s present 
residence. Though it has been observed that there were certain candidates who did have to end 
up travelling a little more in recent past, adequate measures  are being taken to ensure that 

26 
 
candidates do not have to travel more than 500 kms. For women and persons with disabilities, 
this travelling distance is being reduced even further.  
2.52 The Committee emphasized that number of centers have to be increased for the 
candidates appearing for the examination. The examination centre should be within the 
zone where the candidate is residing, precisely within the State.  
 
2.53 The Committee notices that a term which has time and again been used in 
connection with the examination and recruitment process conducted by RRBs is NTPC, 
i.e. Non Technical Popular Categories. The Committee is of the view that this term 
NTPC creates a lot of confusion as it has been noticed that even when it is published in 
newspapers, it is  mistaken with the Organization NTPC, i.e. Natio nal Thermal Power 
Corporation. Hence, the name of NTPC, being currently used for railway examination 
should be changed and the same abbreviation shall not be used.   
 
2.54 IBPS: 
 IBPS is an autonomous body registered under Society‟s Registration Act, also 
a public trust under Bombay Public Trust.  It was also recognized as a Centre for 
higher studies and research by SNDT University.  The institute is governed by a 
governing board c onsisting of ED of RBI, Chairmen and MDs of public sector 
Banks, NABARD and professionals from IITs and other such institutes of higher 
learning.  This institute was set up by RBI, public sector banks and central financial 
institutions and it provides expe rt services in the area of recruitment, placement and 
promotion.   
 
 IBPS was a part of NIBM, which was set up in 1969.  It was a personnel 
selection services unit, PSS unit.  In 1969, when banks were nationalised, need was 
felt for a specialized body which  could demonstrate to the banks how recruitment, 
placement and promotion should be done?' The PSS unit was set up with that 
objective but with passage of time, it was realized that it involves a lot of operational 
work, so this particular unit should conti nue beyond the consultancy and research 
work.  IBPS actually popularized OMR based technology in India. 
 
 IBPS is a self-sustaining organization.  So, IBPS does not take any grant from 
the banks nor do they receive any funds from the Government of India or State 

27 
 
Government or any member organization.  To meet the expenditure for the CRP, a 
fee is levied on the candidates.  Out of that fee, projects are managed.   
 
2.55 The Common Recruitment Process (CRP), which was started in 2011, was successfully 
completed by IBPS in 2011 and participating banks now do not have to incur any expenditure 
for these recruitments.  These projects are managed from the fee which is received.  So, banks 
as well as the Regional Rural Banks get their manpower through this Common Rec ruitment 
Process conducted by IBPS. At present, these examinations are conducted for clerical as well 
as Officer level in 14 regional languages.  On an average, every year 30,000 employees are 
given by IBPS through CRP to the public sector banks (except fo r SBI) and regional rural 
banks. A reserve list of candidates is also maintained by IBPS for these banks.   
2.56 The Committee notes that IBPS and RRB are amongst the premier recruitment agencies 
in the country. The RRB is mandated to recruit personnel to man one of the largest rail 
networks in the world and the IBPS to man the large network of Public Sector Banks and other 
financial institutions. However, in recent times there have been complaints regarding alleged 
malpractices during public examinations, the time taken for the entire cycle of the recruitment 
process, cancellation of examination, quality of questions etc. Sometimes, the recruitment 
agencies take too much time in advertising the vacancies. All these and some other issues, time 
and again, come in the public domain.  
2.57 The recently set up National Recruitment Agency (NRA) by Central Government, 
mandated to shortlist candidates for vacancies of Group 'B' and 'C' through  a computer -based 
online Tier-I examination is expected to become operati onal very soon. And this will affect 
IBPS and RRB also.  
2.58 The Committee discussed the pattern of the examination and the changes which need to 
be incorporated in the recruitment process to meet the modern day banking requirements.  
2.59 With respect to the examination conducted by IBPS, eligibility of the candidates for a 
particular post is decided by the member organizations in consultation with IBPS.  IBPS also 
generates a lot of research studies for member organizations. It carries out  data analysis to gain 
insights into the performance of the selected candidates. At present, the minimum qualification 
is graduation.  The syllabus or the structure of examination also is decided based on other 
organizations' experience and interaction wit h client organizations.   IBPS also conducts some 
validation studies to learn whether a specific test has led to selection of right/ good candidates 
or not.  

28 
 
2.60 The philosophy of speed and accuracy required by bankers are changing from 
time to time.  Around ten years back, the workload and the nature of work perhaps did 
not need any speed or accuracy.  But today, speed and accuracy play a very important 
role owing to the hundreds of Central and State schemes being executed by the bankers 
and the nature  of pro -poor schemes launched by the Government. The Committee 
emphasises that because of the technology being used nowadays, whether it is e -banking 
or online banking, Public Sector Banks have to cater to large number of customers 
including the Jan -Dhan Yojana account holders and hence bankers have to be very fast 
with public dealing and also absolutely updated on the latest technology.  They should not 
face any kind of glitches and slow down in the process of service delivery.  
2.61 The Committee further observed that barring a few recruiting organisations in 
India, in most of the organisations, whatsoever be the nature of the job, the recruitment 
pattern and the question pattern are almost the same.  Perhaps the examination 
conducted by the UPSC under the  National Defence Academy is something different.  To 
become a pilot, they used to conduct an examination which is called Pilot Aptitude 
Battery Test (PABT).  That is conducted exclusively to measure the aptitude of a 
particular person, whether he will fit  in the mission or the job.  The Committee firmly 
believes that as on today, neither the speed and accuracy nor the service is improving at 
large, So, the Committee wants to know whether there is any such special examination, 
(like Pilot Aptitude Battery T est), say banker aptitude battery test, being conducted or 
contemplated by IBPS to test the speed and accuracy of the bankers being recruited.  The 
Committee is keen to know how the syllabus is being designed and the guidelines for the 
examination being conducted to cater to the current changing scenario and keeping pace 
with it. 
2.62 The Committee is of the view that the pattern of the examination needs to be 
changed from time to time taking into account the nature of work of the bankers so that 
accuracy and speed of the prospective candidates is properly evaluated.  The Committee 
further recommends revamping the syllabus to meet the changing demands in banking 
sector, that have emerged due to wide use of technology in the field.  
 2.63  The Committee insist s on maintaining sanctity and fairness in conduct of 
examination by these organizations. With most of examinations being conducted online 
and many of the work related to  the conduct of examination and short -listing of 
successful candidates  being outsourced  to external agencies, organizations need to 
ensure the sanctity and fairness of the system and  overall control over the entire 

29 
 
process.  
2.64 The Committee was informed that in case of examination conducted by RRB, certain 
individual activities like online registration of applications, Computer Based Test (CBT) in 
different cities/ centers and short listing of candidates etc. are done in collaboration with 
external agencies under the strict guidance of Railways Recruitment Boards (RRBs). CBTs are 
organized by RRBs under overall control of Chairpersons of 21 RRBs who ensure proper 
invigilation through Railway officers and employees deputed for this task from Zonal 
Railways. Backup of all CBT record is kept in hard disks at command centers of all RRBs and 
also at RRCB, Command Centre. Command Centers also ensure monitoring of CBT at the 
highest level and to take immediate decision in case of any issue arising in smooth conduct of 
CBT. At every stage of examination candidate related data are displayed on website to ensure 
transparency and fairness during examination. Important SMS/Email alerts are sent to the 
candidates. Mock tests are conducted before actual examination. Candidates  are shown their 
Question Papers, Answer Booklets alongwith correct Answer Keys.  The candidates are given 
an opportunity to raise objection, if any, on the questions and answers of their exam. Such 
objections are reviewed with subject matter experts before finalising the results.  
2.65 The Committee was also informed that checking various malpractices is very important 
for RRBs too.  There is Aadhaar -based authentication which has been introduced.  In the exam 
centre place of exam is given about ten days b efore the actual date of exam and the actual 
venue is made available to the candidate only four days before the exam.  All this is done 
entirely through a computerised randomised generation without any manual intervention.  The 
place that the candidate get s and his exact centre is determined by randomised computerised 
allotment.  Inside the centre, the lab and the node allotted to the candidate is automated and 
generated at the last minute. So there is no way that a candidate can zero in or decide in 
advance in any way in any of these cases. There is manual frisking, metal detectors and 
checking of Biometrics during the exam.  Aadhaar is an important authentication. The question 
paper is in highly encrypted form.  Last minute decryption happens only when the  candidate 
actually logs in and is into the system.  The other significant thing is that no two people will 
get the same pattern of questions, same options. Everything is randomized and shuffled.  
Nobody can really plan a strategy or claim that they know a nything in advance.  Strict 
vigilance is done and invigilators are shuffled periodically.  CCTV surveillance is there.  With 
regard to call logs, there is a complete log maintained for each person which determines how 
he has attempted the questions.  Anyth ing abnormal like too many questions done suddenly 
towards the end or any such abnormal patterns are also detected and analyzed.  All these 
measures guarantee that the examination is as foolproof as possible.  Despite that, there may be 

30 
 
some cases with som e instances of malpractices like having chits, trying to use Bluetooth or 
other devices.  Such cases are zeroed in and those are handled separately like filing of FIR and 
other legal activities.  No RRB examination has been cancelled during the last five y ears.  
During the last five years, RRBs have issued seven fresh centralized notifications and half of it 
is over and the other half is under finalization. 
2.66 Representatives of IBPS informed that it had started big scale online initiatives from 
2006 with  the involvement of service providers.  However, IBPS does not entrust the test 
content (Question Paper) with the service provider. The service provider does not have access 
to the content before or during the exam process. Post exam process and preparation  of result 
is done in -house and not through service provider. The Examination Command Centre  
controls and monitors all exams on real time basis.  Recently the Examination  Command 
Centre has been further  upgraded to support real-time live video feed from the Centres for 
more effective monitoring. IBPS keeps complete control and cross-checks at each stage of the 
examination.  They use jammers in the main examination where Bluetooth devices are 
disabled.  One cannot communicate through jammers.  For remote access also, their service 
provider has certain crosschecks.  IBPS also trains its staff and venue officers.  While 
invigilating, they keep a check on any abnormal activities on the screen of the candidates. 
Analysis of responses and log is done.   
2.67 The Committee notes that of late, there have been instances where students copy 
to the clip board and by a touch  of finger, they cut and paste it.  Sometimes, they use 
bluetooth devices.  They sabotage web cameras and use multiple monitors etc.  There are 
impersonations. They use external storage devices.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that steps need to be tak en to prevent or detect these types of cheating by 
using improvised software and having advanced technologies to overcome this type of 
challenge. It further recommends to train the examiners for smooth and foolproof 
conduct of examinations.   
2.68  The Committee asked to know about the strategy adopted by IBPS and RRB for 
managing ever increasing  number of applications. Whether, manpower and monetary 
constraints were being faced by these organizations due to this. 
2.69 Representative of Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs) informed that they have been 
hiring Application Management Agencies for assisting management of applications received 
from candidates. Only agencies having expertise & infrastructure and proven track reco rd are 
engaged for managing applications online for recruitment processes. From year 2014 -15 the 
applications are invited and validated through online mode only. Calling of online applications 

31 
 
helps in providing correction link to the candidates in case th ere is need to give opportunity to 
them for corrections. Moreover, the application forms have been simplified. Nodal RRB for 
each notification is entrusted to process the applications. They are assisted by RRBs/ RRCs. 
The availability of man power in RRBs and the fund provisions are adequate. 
 
2.70 During last five years, RRBs have issued 07 fresh Centralized Employment 
Notifications (CENs) for a total of 2,83,747 vacancies of various Group „C‟ & Level 1 
(erstwhile Group „D‟) posts on Indian Railways. Recru itment process for 1, 43,034 vacancies 
against 04 CENs has already been completed as per timeline. Further, the status of other three 
Centralized Employment Notifications (CENs) for a total of 1,40,713 vacancies, for which 
recruitment process had got impac ted due to COVID 19 pandemic and resultant lockdowns 
imposed by various states are at different stages of completion. 
2.71 Representatives of IBPS informed that it handles about an average of 1.25 crore 
registered candidates every year. The  numbers have no t fluctuated much over the years. 
However, the number of sessions is on the  increase due to limited capacity  in a session for 
online exams and  therefore more test Question Paper  (QP) sets are needed. Because of 
Language translation the overall work has increased and IBPS has  doubled its faculty and 
technical staff strength putting added constraints on its financial resources. However, IBPS 
is a self-sustaining organization and no funding is required. 
2.72 IBPS completes the CRP - its flagship projects in 6 to 8 months from Advertisement to 
Provisional Allotment. Except for slight delay  during lockdown period  there have not  been 
any delays.  
2.73 The Committee notes that not more than one lakh  students or examinees can 
appear at one go.  This number is very small.  IBPS needs to take steps to increase the 
number of students who can appear at one go for the examination.  It means IBPS will 
have to increase the number of the centres.  As on today , maximum number is one lakh 
or one lakh twenty thousand.  So, they need to work out on the modalities on how to 
execute this computer based exam so that the number of candidates who appear in the 
exams can be increased at one ego. 
2.74 The Committee was informed that all the examinations are held in stages. The number 
of candidates appearing is based on the number of vacancies.  But whosoever applies and is 
eligible is called for the examination.  So, since examination is conducted for all those who 
have applied, there is no question of refunding the fee because expenditure is incurred in the 

32 
 
first examination (stage) also. However, in fee, there is a concession given to SC/ST 
candidates.  It's not a uniform fee which is for all the candidates. And also for  women 
candidates, there is a concession 
2.75 The Committee is of the view that there should be some mechanism for refunding 
the fees for those who have not appeared, as majority of the students who are appearing 
for these exams are very poor people.  A mechanism by which money could be refunded 
to such candidates who could not appear and majorly belonging to very poor 
background may be explored. 
2.76 The Committee advocates to examine the following in details: 
 An assessment of the cost for an applicant t o reach to the examination centre 
from his house and pay the fee.   
 The strike rate for a candidate to get a job.   
 An assessment of the cost of an unemployed person to only apply and not get the 
job.   
 The Committee notes that on an average approximately 95 per cent of the 
candidates who apply are not able to get selected and left without job. However, 
everyone is being charged and mostly they are unemployed.  Hence, the 
Committee recommends that it would be fair and can be explored that the State 
or the Central Government bear part of that cost so that it does not burden the 
unemployed youth.   
 
2.77 The Committee notes the travelling undertaken by the candidates to appear in 
the examination and advises RRBs and IBPS to analyze and assess from which areas 
they get a large number of applications. If from a particular State or area they are 
getting a large number of applications, then contemplate increasing the number of 
centers in that area so that the agencies which are being hired for conducting exams set 
up more centers. It should be planned in such a way that it would be convenient for 
candidates. They should not travel more than 100 kms. or 200 kms. Also, for 
candidates who are travelling from far away distances to sit in the examinations, it 
should be ensured that measures are taken to make the travel more humane and 
comfortable. Some special trains may be run for the purpose. The Committee feels 
these measures would ease the burden of the candidates. 
 
 

33 
 
CENTRAL ARMED POLICE FORCES (CAPFs) 
 
2.78 CAPFs:  
 The Committee was informed that there are 6 organizations under the ambit of 
Central Armed Police Forces. These are: 
(i)  Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) 
(ii)  Border Security Force (BSF) 
(iii)  Assam Rifles (AR) 
(iv)  Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) 
(v)  Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) 
(vi)  Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) 
 
 Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) namely Border Security Force (BSF), Central 
Industrial Security Force (CISF), Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), Indo -Tibetan Border 
Police (ITBP), Sashastra S eema Bal (SSB) and one Central Paramilitary Force (CPMF) 
namely Assam Rifles (AR) under the Ministry of Home Affairs. Out of these, AR, BSF, 
ITBP and SSB are the 'Border Guarding Forces', while CRPF is deployed to assist the Civil 
Administration under the State Governments/UT Administrations in matters relating to 
maintenance of public order, internal security and counter insurgency. The Rapid Action 
Force (RAF) and Commando Battalion for Resolute Action (CoBRA) are specialized wings 
of the CRPF to deal wit h the riots and Left Wing Extremism/insurgency respectively. CISF 
provides security and protection to vital installations of national/strategic importance 
2.79 The Committee heard the following organizations in its various meeting to look into 
the recruitment modules and functioning of these and the issues which need to be addressed.  
2.79 (a)     SASHASTRA SEEMA BAL  (SSB) 
 In the wake of the Chinese conflict in 1962, it was felt that the borders of the 
country could not be protected with the force of rifles alone. It required the 
backing and resolute will of a committed border population. In addition, it needed 
an in-depth understanding and familiarity of the ter rain as well as the culture and 
ethos of the border population. A  need was, therefore, realized for the creation of 
a unique, unconventional yet specialized organization, which would function in 
the far, flung, vulnerable, strategic, remote, climatically a nd topographically 

34 
 
difficult border areas and motivate the border population across several states 
towards the cause of protecting our national sovereignty. 
 
 Sashastra Seema Bal is an Armed Force of the Union, for ensuring the security of 
the borders of India and performing such other duties as may be entrusted to it by 
the Central Government. As per  SSB Act &  Rules the  tasks of the Force are 
defined as under- 
 
(i) Safe guard the security of assigned borders of India and promote  
  sense of security among the people living in border area. 
(ii) Prevent trans-border crimes, smuggling and any other illegal activity; 
(iii) Prevent unauthorized entry into or exit from the territory of India; 
(iv) To carry out Civic Action Programme in the area of responsibility ; 
(v) To perform any other duty assigned by the Central Government. 
 
 The Force is deployed for three type of duties (a) Border guarding (b) Anti -
Naxal operations and (c) Internal security (long term and short term). 
 
 
2.79 (b) BORDER SECURITY FORCE (BSF) 
 Till 1965 India‟s border with Pakistan were manned by the State Armed Police 
Battalion. The inadequacy of the State Armed Police to cope with armed aggression 
was exposed during the 1965 war with Pakistan. The Government of India felt the 
need for a specialized  centrally controlled Border Security Force, which would be 
armed and trained to man the International Border with Pakistan. As a result of the 
recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries, the Border Security Force came 
into existence on 01st Dec 1965. 
 
 The role of the Force, as defined in the BSF Act 1968, is to safeguard the security of 
the borders of India and promote a sense of security among the people living in the 
border areas and prevent trans -border crimes, smuggling, unauthorized entry into or 
exit from the territory of India. BSF is entrusted with the role of security of the India -
Pakistan and India -Bangladesh border, Anti Naxal operation, United Nations Peace 
keeping operations, disaster management, Border Area development programmes 
(BADPs) and Civic Action programmes (CAPs). 
 

35 
 
2.79 (c) ASSAM RIFLES (AR) 
 Assam Rifles informed came into being in 1835, as a militia called the „Cachar Levy‟. 
With approximately 750 men, this Force was formed to primarily protect British Tea 
estates and their settlements against tribal raids. Subsequently, all these Forces were 
reorganised and renamed as the „Frontier Force‟. This Force significantly con tributed 
in opening the region to administration and commerce. In 1870, existing elements 
were merged into three Assam Military Police Battalions, named as Lushai Hills, 
Lakhimpur and Naga Hills. The „Darrang‟ Battalion was raised just before the onset 
of World War –I. In 1917, recognising their work during the Great War, fighting 
shoulder to shoulder with Rifle Regiments of the regular British Army, the name of 
the Force was changed to „Assam Rifles‟. 
 
 Today the Force remains deployed in some of the most re mote and under developed 
areas and provides security to locals.  
 
2.79 (d) CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE (CRPF) 
 Central Reserve Police Force came into existence as Crown Representative‟s Police 
on 27th July 1939. It became the Central Reserve Police Force on enactment of the 
CRPF Act on 28th December 1949. The mission of the Central Reserve Police Force 
is to enable the government to maintain Rule of Law, Public Order and Internal 
Security effectively and efficiently, to Preserve National Integrity and Prom ote Social 
Harmony and Development by upholding supremacy of the Constitution. 
 
2.79 (e) CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE (CISF) 
 CISF came into existence in 1969 to provide integrated security cover to certain 
sensitive public sector undertakings. The CISF also has its own Fire Wing which 
provides services to 104 of the above establishments. 
 
 The CISF security umbrella includes India‟s most critical infrastructure facilities like 
nuclear installations, space establishments, airports, seaports, power pla nts etc. In 
addition, the CISF also protects important government buildings, iconic heritage 
monuments and the Delhi Metro. The CISF also has a specialized VIP Security 
vertical providing round the clock security to important protectees. 
 
 

36 
 
2.80  Recruitment in CAPFs: 
Recruitment in CAPFs is done at various level  i.e. Constable/GD, SI/GD through SSC and 
AC/GD by UPSC. Posts of Non -GD cadres are filled up by the respective forces. Details of 
nodal force as recruiting agency for conducting the recruitment are as under 
 
Posts Nodal Force Recruitment Agency 
Constable/GD CRPF SSC 
Sl/GD BSF SSC 
AC/GD ITBP UPSC 
Medical Officer ITBP ITBP 
Non-GD cadres Respective Force Respective Force 
 
2.81 Allocation of vacancies: 
 
With a view to provide more job opportunities to the youths of border and militancy -affected 
areas, allocation of vacancies is now made in the following manner. 
 
a. 50% of the vacancies in CAPFs and AR are allotted amongst States/ UTs on the 
basis of population ratio. 
b. 25% of the vacancies to be allotted to Border Districts (in the Border Guarding 
Forces viz. AR, BSF, ITBP and SSB, the vacancies are allotted to districts under 
the areas of responsibility of the respective Border Guarding Force. However, in 
Non Border Guarding Forces i.e. CRPF and CISF the vacancies will be allotted to 
all Border Districts 
c. 25% of the vacancies are allotted to areas affected by militancy/LWE. 
d. In respect of those State(s)/Area(s)/Region(s) where a very high number of 
vacancies remain unfilled after completion of the recruitment process through 
SSC, the Ministry of Home Affairs directs the Force concerned to hold Special 
Recruitment Rallies to fill the vacancies of that particular 
State(s/Area(s)/Region(s) as per the recruitment scheme. 
 
2.82 The Committee was informed that t he Government has announced that it would 
recruit 10 lakh people in mission mode over the next one -and-a-half years. For fulfilling this, 
MHA has directed all CAPFs & Assam Rifles to undertake the recruitment in a Mission 
Mode against vacant posts in GD and Non -GD Cadres in a time bound manner. Action plans 
have been drawn up by the forces for filling up the vacant posts for the year 2022 and 2023. 
Further: 
(i) 28,722 vacancies have been filled in two tranches under Mission Recruitment 
 since November. 

37 
 
(ii) As per deposition of representatives of Another 50,395 vacancies pertaining 
 to 2022 & 2023 for various posts in CAPFs, SSF, Rifleman (GD) in Assam 
 Rifles and Sepoy in NCB have been reported to SSC for taking up recruitment 
 in a Mission Mode and to complete it by July 2023. Recruitment in respect of 
 27,672 posts of Non -GD Cadres is under progress and likely to be completed 
 by July 2023. 
 
2.83 Forces maintain a planning calendar for recruitment for Non -GDs and senior officers 
regularly monitor the same. Some forces have developed recruitment tracking software for 
better monitoring. Also, DS/Director in MHA closely monitors the progress of filling vacant 
posts of their respective forces. 
2.84 The Committee was apprised about the d etails of vacancies in CAPFs & AR as on 
01.01.2023 which are  as under : 
Force Gazetted 
Officers(GOs) 
Subordinate 
Officers(SOs) 
Other Ranks 
(ORs) 
Total 
AR 44 33 1589 1666 
BSF 464 1314 18209 19987 
CISF 493 7196 11786 19475 
CRPF 278 9687 19318 29283 
ITBP 322 1114 3007 4443 
SSB 522 1137 6614 8273 
Total 2123 20481 60523 83127 
 
In terms of instructions issued by DoPT vide notification dated 04.10.2012, ten percent of 
the vacancies in the posts upto  of the Assistant Commandant in all para -military forces, are  
reserved for  Ex-servicemen. 
 
2.85 The Committee emphasizes on filling up of all vacancies on mission mode in 
consonance with the Government’s policy. The Committee recommends that there has 
to be a robust mechanism to monitor how many people are retiring from forces, how 
many vacancies created and whether people have been appointed to the vacant posts, 
i.e. vacancies created should be filled regularly a nd backlogs to be avoided.  All 
departments should be strictly directed at all places that they  send details of vacancies 
well in time to MHA and not take years and years to send the details of vacancies.   
2.86 The Committee notes that the personnel from  Army, Navy or other Defence 
forces who retire early as per extant rules, after retirement are not able to get suitable 
jobs. Though they have a particular skill trade which have been imparted during the 

38 
 
service period, those are not taken as valid and thi s puts them in further hardship. The 
Committee is therefore of the view that the trade skill certification should be made 
valid, which will enable them to get suitable jobs.  
2.87 The Committee wishes to point out another imperative issue that is the percentage of 
women in Central Forces.  As on today, only 3.65 per cent of vacancies for women have been 
filled till now.  In BSF and SSB, it is only 14 per cent to 15 per cent, in CISF  it is 6.35 per 
cent and in ITBP it is 2.83 per cent.  So there are certain constraints which are preventing 
women from joining the forces.  
2.88 The representation of women personnel in CAPFs &  AR is 3.76% as on 30.09.22. 
There is no specific reservation for women in CAPFs. However, in order to enhance the 
representation of women in CAPFs, in 2011, based on the recommendations of Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Empowerment of Women, directions were issued to bring percentage 
of women in the forces to 5% within 3 years. As such  
2.89 The strength of women personnel in CAPFs and AR force -wise and level wise as on 
30.09.2022 is  as  under : 
Force Group-A Group-B Group-C Total 
AR 22 123 1749 1894 
BSF 138 508 6824 7470 
CISF 64 1429 7823 9316 
CRPF 471 952 8004 9427 
ITBP 125 237 2152 2514 
SSB 44 124 3489 3657 
Total 864 3373 30041 34278 
2.90 Steps taken by CAPFs to increase the strength of women personnel in 
their respective forces : 
 Recruitment is being conducted by making wide publicity through print/electronic 
media. All women candidates are exempted from payment of application fee. 
 There are relaxations in Physical Standard Test (PST) and Physical Efficiency Test 
(PET) for all women candidates for recruitment in CAPFs in comparison to men 
candidates. 
 Facilities like Maternity leave, Child Care Leave etc are also available to CAPFs 
women personnel. 
 One woman member is detailed as member of the board for making recruitment of 
women personnel. 

39 
 
 Creches and Day care Centres have been provided by the CAPFs to women 
employees. 
 Committees have been constituted at all levels to check sexual harassmen t and to 
expeditiously deal with the complaints of women personnel. 
 Women personnel are given equal opportunity in their career progression  i.e 
promotion/seniority as per the RRs on par with male counter parts. 
 A women candidate pregnant of 12 weeks standing or over is declared temporarily 
unfit and her appointment is held in abeyance until the confinement is over. She is re -
examined for Physical Efficiency Test (PET), six weeks after the date of confinement. 
If found fit, she is appointed to the post  kept reserved for and allowed the benefit of 
seniority in accordance with the norms. 
 
2.91 The Committee advocates that all necessary steps should be taken by MHA to 
encourage women to join Forces to the maximum possible extent. A major constraint 
that prevents women from joining forces is the difficult terrains and conditions in which 
they might have to work. So, a policy may be explored for  women officers being given 
soft postings and not subjecting them to extremely strenuous and difficult working 
conditions, unless required in extreme circumstances like war, armed rebellion etc and 
that too when there is absolute shortage of males who can be deployed by the Forces. 
 
2.92 The Committee also recommends that some sort of reservation may also be given 
to Transgenders. Steps may be taken to recruit transgenders as well so that they can be 
integrated well with mainstream society in near future.  
 
2.93 The Committee also wanted to be apprised of the percentage of the personnel drawn 
from border districts in each of the border guarding forces at different levels and the 
recruitment that has taken place in States like Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand or Kashmir.  More 
details were also sought on what has been done to make sure that 25 per cent of recruitment is 
done from local areas.   
2.94 The Committee was informed that as per existing guidelines, 25% of the total 
vacancies of CT/GD in CAPFs & AR are filled out of the candidates from border districts. 
Details as provided by respective forces are as under:- 
Name of force Strength of Border District Personnel  
Assam Rifles 3704 
BSF Not maintained 

40 
 
ITBP 7581 
SSB 17.9% Constable(GD) belong to Border 
Districts. 
 
2.95 As per extant instructions, in Constable (GD) in CAPFs and Rifleman( GD) in Assam 
Rifle Examination,  50% vacancies in CAPFs and AR are allotted to all States/UTs in the 
population ratio, 25% vacancies of border guarding forces allotted to border districts under 
the area of responsibility of respective force. 25% vacancies of Non Border Guarding Forces 
i.e CRPF and CISF will be allotted to all border districts and 25% vacancies are allotted to 
areas affected by militancy/LWE.   
2.96 The Committee recommends that with respect to border districts, it is 
paramount to recruit maximum youngsters from these areas. Special recruitment drives 
may be conducted for recruitment of local youngsters from states like Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, North Eastern states and Kashmir. It should be ensured that the 25 per 
cent of reservation for area s affected by militancy/LWE and 25% vacancies of border 
guarding forces allotted to border districts is fulfilled immediately so that the energy 
and talent of youth of these areas are channelized and they do not deviate toward 
extremism and terrorism.  
2.97 The Committee also enquired about the “Agnipath Scheme” of Government of India 
and the “Agniveers” recruited under it.  
 
2.98 The Committee was informed that Agnipath Scheme in the Indian Armed Forces is a 
scheme wherein the selected candidates will be e nrolled as Agniveers for a period of four 
years. On completion of the four year period, Agniveers will return to the society as 
disciplined, dynamic, motivated and skilled work force for employment in other sectors to 
pursue their career in job of their ch oice. Based on the organizational requirement and 
policies promulgated by Armed Forces, Agniveers after completing their engagement period 
will be offered an opportunity to apply for enrolment in the permanent cadre. Of these upto 
25 per cent of Agniveers will be selected to be enrolled in the Armed Forces as a regular 
cadre. India‟s youth is set to play a crucial role in realising the dream of building an Aatma 
Nirbhar, Sashakt Bharat. And Agnipath scheme will take them a step closer. It is a unique 
opportunity to fulfil their dream of joining the Armed Forces & serving the Nation. 
 
2.99 The Committee desired to know whether there is any proposal for the reservation of 
vacancies in CAPFs for Agniveers.  The Committee illustrated that there are some issues 

41 
 
because Agniveers will be working for four years and when they come to join the para -
military forces, there may be requirement of relaxation of age and relaxation of physical test 
also.  
2.100 The Committee was informed that regarding this Scheme, a decision has been taken to 
reserve 10% of vacancies for ex -Agniveers in the recruitment to the post of Constable 
(General Duty) /Rifleman in the Central Armed Police Forces and Assam Rifles. Further, a 
provision has been made for relaxation in upper age li mit and exemption from the Physical 
Efficiency Test. An age relaxation of three years has also been given to Agniveers. 
 
2.101 The Committee suggests that they may explore the possibility of bringing an Act 
to govern recruitment under this scheme.  The Committee notes that after serving four 
years on the job, 75 per cent of the soldiers will be discharged from their services, and 
only 25 per cent would be inducted into the armed forces, as per the extant rules, the 
question that remains is about the rest. To prevent disaffection amongst these 
Agniveers, which comprises of youth of this country, Committee suggests that the 
remaining Agniveers may be given reservation/ preference in other Government jobs so 
that trained persons and the skills acquired by them during the service in Forces can be 
utilised to the maximum extent possible. Some jobs where it is practical to provide 
preference to them are Police Forces, Parliament Security Service and any other 
Combat Force.  
2.102 The Committee also sought information on the feedback mechanism in place for the 
applicants who apply for the examination conducted for CAPFs.  
2.103 The Committee was informed that there is  no feedback mechanism as of now. The 
examinations such as Constable (GD), Sub -Inspector(GD) are conducted by the SSC in 
which lakhs of candidates participate in online written examination. However, every year 
scheme of examina tion is reviewed in consultation with all participating forces and 
improvement are made. Following measures have been introduced to bring in improvement 
in recruitment process: 
(i) Yearly recruitment for the post of Constable (General Duty) for which a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed with Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC).  
(ii) For coordinating recruitment to General Duty posts, a Nodal Force each for 
recruitment in the rank of Constable (General Duty), Sub -Inspector (GD) and 
Assistant Commandant (General Duty) has been nominated on long term basis. 
 

42 
 
 (iii)  Directions have been issued to all Central Armed Police Forces and Assam 
Rifles to undertake recruitment against vacant posts in Non -General Duty 
cadres in a time-bound manner.  
 
(iv)  Time take n in the Medical Examination has been reduced to expedite the 
recruitment. 
 
2.104 The Committee suggests that a standard feedback module be prepared by the 
organizations which are responsible for conduct of the examinations. Once the students 
have completed the examination cycle, they may be given an option to fill in this 
standardized module. This module may contain various heads like syllabus, time taken 
to complete the exam, constraints faced, infrastructure issues like internet connectivity 
etc, logistical issues and so on. This will help the organizations make the recruitment 
cycle even more streamlined. 
2.105 The Committee was informed that regarding the issue of cadre restructuring , 
Government has given instructions to the CAPFs and AR to carry out ca dre review once in 
five years.  The details of the last cadre review conducted by each forces are given below: 
Name of Force Inputs of forces 
AR  The details of present status of cadre review in respect of AR  is as under:- 
SN 
 
Name of Cadre Date/Year of last Cadre Review 
1 Group-A Cadre review sent to AR for some 
clarification. Cadre review  is under 
examination with AR. 
2 Group-B & C 
(General Duty) 
Cadre review proposal is under 
consideration with IFD. 
3 Group – B & C(Non 
Ministerial) 
Cadre review proposal  was examined in 
consultation with IFD , MHA. IFD,MHA 
has sought some clarification which is under 
examination  with AR. 
4 Group-B & C 
(Ministerial) 
Cadre review proposal is under examination 
with MHA. 
 
BSF The cadre review proposal of various cadre of BSF are submitted to MHA 
after a gap of five years from the date when previous cadre review was 
approved by MHA.  The details of cadre review carried out during last 5 
years are as under: 
(1) Cadre Review of Group-A Posts of GD Officers, (2) Cadre Rev iew 
of Communication Cadre,(3)Cadre Review of Ministerial Cadre,(4) 
Cadre Review of Stenography Cadre,(5) Cadre Review of 
Tradesmen Cadre. 
CISF The last cadre review of the Force was approved vide MHA letter dated 

43 
 
30.01.2018 for GOs and 05.02.2018 for NGO s. As per periodicity 
prescribed by the DoP&T, the next Cadre Review of CISF would be due 
after completion of 05 years of last cadre review i.e in 2023. 
CRPF  The details of last cadre review conducted in CRPF is as under:- 
SN 
 
Name 
of 
force 
Name of Cadre Date/Year of last 
Cadre Review 
1 CRPF Cadre Review of  Group -„A‟ 
Executive Officer 
2016 
2 Group-„A‟, „B‟ & „C‟ Ministerial 2016 
3 Group-„A‟, „B‟ & „C‟ Stenographer  2017 
4 Group-„B‟ & „C‟ General Duty 2019 
5 Group-„B‟ & „C‟ Motor Mechanic 
(Now Mechanic  Motor Vehicle) 
2021 
6 Group-„B‟ & „C‟ Armourer 2018 
7 Group-„B‟ & „C‟ Signal 2018 
8 Group-„A‟, „B‟ & „C‟ Para Medical  2019 
9 Group-„A‟, „B‟ & „C‟ Official 
Language 
2020 
10 Group-„B‟ & „C‟ Motor Transport Cadre Review 
proposal under 
consideration with 
MOF. 
11 Group-„B‟ & „C‟ Tailor -- do -- 
12 Group-„C‟ Tradesmen / Executive 
(Erstwhile Group „D‟ Followers) & 
Cobbler 
Cadre Review 
proposal under 
consideration with 
MOF.  
13 Group-„B‟ & „C‟ Band Cadre Review 
proposal under 
consideration with 
IFD. 
14 Group-„C‟ Carpenter  Cadre Review 
proposal under 
consideration with 
MOF. 
15 Group-„C‟ MTS Cadre Review cum 
re-structuring 
submitted to BSF 
for further action. 
16 Group-„C‟ Kitchen Service -- do -- 
Note:- Cadre Review of Sl.No.1,2 & 3 have been initiated and the same 
are under consideration with MHA. 
 
ITBP  The last cadre review of ITBP except for Paramedical cadre was carried 
out during 2019. Accordingly next cadre review will be carried out in 

44 
 
2024. 
SSB   The status of cadre review in SSB is as under: 
S.No Name of cadre  Last Cadre 
Review done 
Present Status 
Combatised Cadres 
General Duty 
1 Group-A General Duty 
(Combatised) Posts 
02.01.2018 New Cadre 
Review under 
consideration at 
FHQ SSB 
2 Group-B & C GD cadre 544 new posts 
sanctioned by 
MHA in 
Sept,2020 
-do- 
Communication Cadre 
3 Communication cadre 
Group A,B & C 
02 new 
Battalions were 
raised in the 
year 2018 and 
cadre strength 
increased 
-do- 
Ministerial cadre 
4 Group A,B & C 
Ministerial cadre 
02 new 
Battalions were 
raised in the 
year 2018 and 
cadre strength 
increased 
-do- 
5 Stenographer cadre Group 
A,B & C 
02 new 
Battalions were 
raised in the 
year 2018 and 
cadre strength 
increased 
-do- 
Medical Cadre 
6 Group A Medical Cadre 31.08.2022 - 
7 Group B & C Para 
Medical Cadre 
31.03.2022  
JAG Cadre 
8 JAG cadre New JAG set -
up with 19 posts 
was sanctioned 
on 29.10.2010 
Cadre Review 
will be initiated 
after filling of 
vacant posts as 
only one officer 
posted. 

45 
 
MT & Mech Cadre 
9 Group B & C MT & Mech 
Cadre 
02 new 
Battalions were 
raised in the 
year 2018 and 
cadre strength 
increased 
New Cadre 
Review under 
consideration at 
FHQ SSB 
Tech (Armament ) Cadre 
10 Technical Cadre New Posts were 
created in 2011 
Cadre Review 
will be initiated 
after revival of 
11 posts placed 
at “Deemed 
Abolished” 
Engineering Cadre 
11 Engineering cadre  02 new 
Battalions were 
raised in the 
year 2018 and 
cadre strength 
increased 
Posts of 
DC/Engg, 
Comdt/Engg 
and DIG/works 
are lying 
vacant. Cadre 
Review will be 
initiated after 
filling of vacant 
posts. 
Tradesmen(Followers) Cadre 
12 Tradesman & 
Engineering(Group B 
& C) 
02 new Battalions 
were raised in the 
year 2018 and cadre 
strength increased 
New Cadre 
Review under 
consideration at 
FHQ SSB 
13 Non-Combatised 
Cadre 
18.10.2017 19 out  of 24 
Cadres 
transferred to 
IB in 2019. 
 
 
2.106 The Committee recommends that regular studies should be undertaken to 
prevent any kind of stagnation at various levels of promotion. Cadre Review of each 
Para-Military Force must be conducted in every five  years without fail. A permanent 
committee should be inplace for looking into the grievances.  In case there is stagnation 
in promotion at any level or there is no further scope of promotion, the option of giving 
an extra increment may be explored.  
  

46 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
Chapter 2 
Functioning of Recruitment Organizations-Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee 
 
1. The Committee observes that UPSC and SSC conduct various examinations each 
year and allocate recommended candidates to different posts. For instance, through the 
Civil Services examination, UPSC selects about 1000 candidates every year and these 
candidates are posted across 19 different services.  With reference to this the Committee 
notes that the same process and yardstick is being applied to select candidates who 
would be manning the top administrative posts in various services. It may happen 
sometime that the aptitude and interest of the candidate selected may not be suitable for 
that particular post. The Committee also notes the maximum number of officers 
recruited are from Technical and medical background. Above 70 per cent of the 
recruits in the civil service by UPSC nowadays ar e from technical streams. Every year, 
hundreds of technocrats are thus being lost, who are likely to work in other specific 
areas which is also a requirement for the nation.  So, doctors and top technocrats are 
being lost who can perform as very good docto rs and engineers.  The allurement to 
become civil servant is perhaps also adversely affecting other fields of working.  Hence, 
the Committee opines that it is high time to have a rethink about the whole process of 
recruitment for the Civil Service.      (Para 2.4 and 2.7) 
 
2.  The Committee notes that the each recruitment test conducted by UPSC as of 
now, takes anywhere between six months to one year to complete. This long drawn 
process involves a lot of expenses for the competing candidates and also contributes to 
the erosion of human capital. The Committee feels that the timeline of conduct of the 
entire process should not be more than six months. In view of this, the Committee 
desires to know whether UPSC is contemplating to make any change in the p attern of 
civil services examination to curtail the length of the examination  cycle                                                                                                              
In order to expedite the recruitment process, the Committee str ongly recommends to 
SSC also that computer based examination should be brought into practice wherever 
possible to reduce the timeline of the examination which will enable the Commission 
to mitigate the time taken for sorting of applications, preliminary ex amination, mains 
examination, publication of results and interviews.           (Para 2.9 and 2.28) 

47 
 
3. The Committee observes and appreciates that with changing times, the 
Government has brought in several significant changes in the training methodology. 
However, the efficiency, energy and intensity of the officers still needs to improved 
and the officers need  to be further trained for working in adverse situations, 
particularly to tackle law and order problems effectively. The Committee feels that a 
Civil Servant is an interface between the government and common public and works 
at the grassroot level which re quires considerable human touch and sensitive 
approach towards the people. He/ she works among the poor people most of the times 
and not the elite. If there is lack of sensitivity one cannot be a good administrator. So, 
Committee wishes to emphasize that t he civil servant has to be given training in such 
a way that he develops a more humane and empathetic approach towards any issue. 
The Committee also observed that the present day civil servant did not possess the 
same legal prowess as their predecessors.  The Committee feels that there is a need to 
impart better training in the legal part as they are also quasi judicial officers so that 
the officers when they take the final assignment, address the judicial problems more 
meticulously than what they are doing nowadays.           (Para 2.11, 2.12 & 2.14)                                                                                                                                                                                  
4. The Committee feels that rende ring services to common people is the primary 
task of the Civil Servants and inclination to serve the society with human touch must be 
an essential quality amongst the Civil Servants. The Committee therefore, recommends 
that while examinations are conducted and the question paper is prepared, these factors 
also need to be taken into account apart from the subject and intelligence. The 
Committee is of the view that these factors probably could help in moulding the 
prospective/selected candidate to work for b etterment of the society.                                 
                        (Para 2.16)                                                
5. The Committee recommends that the UPSC may draft a policy on mediation or 
arbitration with the aggrieved parties  in cases where the Commission has been 
challenged.  It is equally important to apply rules that take into account the likelihood 
of victory and the time consumed for each case. Thus, UPSC can direct the concerned 
ministries/ departments to set up Groups whose job is to examine all pending litigation 
and rank these on the basis of value and ‘winnability’, and then take a call on whether 
they should be carried on. Only those cases which have a strong winning possibility 
should be continued to be fought in co urt and the rest should be settled via arbitration 
and mediation.                         (Para 2.19) 

48 
 
6. On the issue of filling up of existing and backlog vacancies which are there in 
various Ministries/Departments of the Central Government, the Committee notes that 
the Staff Selection Commission itself is short of staff as out of 541 sanctioned strength, it 
has only 329.   The Committee feels that unless SSC itself has complete staf f, how can it 
expect to conduct its activities and functions with utmost efficiency and in a time bound 
manner. Hence, the Committee recommends that SSC needs to fill the vacant positions 
in its organization at the earliest in order to carry out the other recruitment processes 
smoothly.                                                                                                                (Para 2.21)  
                                                                 
7. The Committee opines that Implementation of the recruitment rules in every 
organization needs to be attended on a regular basis.  Once rules have been approved, 
they are neither being operationalized nor being implemented.  The Committee 
recommends that there should be some robust monito ring system for formulation of 
recruitment rules. This monitoring system so devised should take every step possible to 
implement the approved rules without any delay.              (Para 2.29) 
8. The Committee appreciates the UPSC and SSC for conducting the diligence 
exercises before publishing the answer keys. However, the Committee is of the view that 
this will become further more credible if the feedback of the candidates are taken 
through a dedicated portal and then keys are published. The Committee hopes that this 
process will be followed in future. Further, UPSC should explore the feasibility of 
declaring the answer key of Civil Services Preliminary exams after the Preliminary 
Exam stage is ov er and not after the declaration of final results of the Civil Services 
examination. Candidates should be allowed to raise objections at this stage only and on 
that basis any discrepancies related to the answer key of the Preliminary examination 
should be resolved.  This should be taken into account before publishing the result of 
candidates qualifying for the next stage, i.e. Civil Services Mains examination.  
 (Para 2.39) 
9. The Committee is of the opinion that there are a large number of pending cases 
(especially where SSC is a party), most of which are students’ related. These students 
mainly comprise of the individuals who have appeared/ are appearing for the various 
recruitment examinations conducted by SSC. Since these students are mostly 
unemployed, fighting such litigations is a huge financial and psychological burden for 
them, especially at the start of their career journey.  The Committee is therefore of the 
view that the Commission should analyze the cases filed by the students and if it is an 

49 
 
exam related matter steps should be taken to settle those out of court. In the matters of 
exam related ones, the Commission should persuade the Government Counsel to place 
the facts before the respective courts and request the courts to dispose off the cases as 
quickly as possible. This will help the Commission to concentrate on its core function, 
i.e. conducting examination and filling the vacancies, rather than spending time in 
courts.                    (Para 2.41)   
     
10. The Committee emphasizes that the much awaited National Recruitment Agency 
(NRA), which was mandated to conduct examinations for Group 'B' and group 'C' 
employees, is not fully functional as of now and hence Committee keenly wants to be 
apprised of by when NRA foresees to become completely operative.            (Para 2.46)   
11. The Com mittee suggests that  NRA thus may consult SSC for finalizing the 
modalities involved in the process of conducting the exam as SSC has been conducting 
online mode of examination for quite some time now. This, the Committee feels will give 
NRA a broad idea about the way in which competitive exams are conducted.   
                       (Para 2.47)   
12. The Committee recommends that NRA should consult Railway Recruitment 
Board as well regarding the recruitment proposal being prepared, so that NRA can 
finish t he task within the given timeline and without any criticism. Also, it needs to 
work on the modalities of actual conduct of examination and publication of results 
cautiously and on immediate basis. As two years have already lapsed, NRA cannot take 
another two years to get fully functional.                       (Para 2.48)   
13. The Committee recommends that NRA should move very fast and start from the 
reverse direction since if it conducts examination for class 10, the number will be huge. 
Hence, the Committee advises NRA to start with graduate level examination so that the 
number of candidates with required eligibility is reduced. In case it starts with an exam 
which requires eligibility of class 10 th, all graduates will automatically become eligible 
and hence the numbers would be large and unmanageable.                       (Para 2.49)   
14. With respect to Railway Recruitment Board, the Committee emphasized that 
number of centers have to be increased for the candidates appearing for the 
examination. The examination centre should be within the zone where the candidate is 
residing, precisely within the State.                        (Para 2.52) 

50 
 
 
15. The Committee notices that a term which has time and again been used in 
connection with the examination and recruitment process conducted by RRBs is NTPC, 
i.e. Non Technical Popular Categories. The Committee is of the view that this term 
NTPC creates a lot  of confusion as it has been noticed that even when it is published in 
newspapers, it is mistaken with the Organization NTPC, i.e. National Thermal Power 
Corporation.  Hence, the name of NTPC, being currently used for railway examination 
should be changed and the same abbreviation shall not be used.     
                                    (Para 2.53) 
16. The Committee notes that the philosophy of speed and accuracy required by 
bankers are changing from time to time.  Around ten years back, the workload and the 
nature of work perhaps did not need any speed or accuracy.  But today, speed and 
accuracy play a very important role owing to the hundreds of Central and State schemes 
being executed by the bankers and the nature of pro -poor schemes launched by the 
Government. The Committee emphasises that because of the technology being used 
nowadays, whether it is e -banking or online banking, Public Sector Banks have to cater 
to large number of customers including the Jan -Dhan Yojana account holders and hence 
bankers have to be very fast with public dealing and also absolutely updated on the latest 
technology.  They should not face any kind of glitches and slow down in the process of 
service delivery.                (Para 2.54) 
17. The Committee further observed that b arring a few recruiting organisations in 
India, in most of the organisations, whatsoever be the nature of the job, the recruitment 
pattern and the question pattern are almost the same.  Perhaps the examination 
conducted by the UPSC under the National Defen ce Academy is something different.  To 
become a pilot, they used to conduct an examination which is called Pilot Aptitude 
Battery Test (PABT).  That is conducted exclusively to measure the aptitude of a 
particular person, whether he will fit in the mission  or the job.  The Committee firmly 
believes that as on today, neither the speed and accuracy nor the service is improving at 
large, So, the Committee wants to know whether there is any such special examination, 
(like Pilot Aptitude Battery Test), say banke r aptitude battery test, being conducted or 
contemplated by IBPS to test the speed and accuracy of the bankers being recruited.  The 
Committee is keen to know how the syllabus is being designed and the guidelines for the 

51 
 
examination being conducted to cate r to the current changing scenario and keeping pace 
with it.               (Para 2.61) 
 
18. The Committee is of the view that the pattern of the examination needs to be 
changed from time to time taking into account the nature of work of the bankers so that  
accuracy and speed of the prospective candidates is properly evaluated.  The Committee 
further recommends revamping the syllabus to meet the changing demands in banking 
sector, that have emerged due to wide use of technology in the field.        (Para 2.62) 
 19.  The Committee insists on maintaining sanctity and fairness in conduct of 
examination by these organizations. With most of examinations being conducted online 
and many of the work related to  the conduct of examination and short -listing of 
successful candidates being outsourced to  external agencies, organizations need to 
ensure the sanctity and fairness of the system and  overall control over the entire 
process.                   (Para 2.63) 
20. The Committee notes that of late, there have been instances where students copy 
to the clip board and by a touch of finger, they cut and paste it.  Sometimes, they use 
bluetooth devices.  They sabotage web cameras and use multiple monitors etc.  There are 
impersonations. They use external storage devices.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that steps need to be taken to prevent or detect these types of cheating by 
using improvised software and having advanced technologies to overcome this type of 
challenge. It further recommends to train the examiners for smooth and foolproof 
conduct of examinations.                  (Para 2.67) 
21. The Committee notes that for exam conducted by IBPS, not more than one lakh 
students or examinees can appear at one go.  This num ber is very small.  IBPS needs to 
take steps to increase the number of students who can appear at one go for the 
examination.  It means IBPS will have to increase the number of the centres.  As on 
today, maximum number is one lakh or one lakh twenty thousa nd.  So, they need to 
work out on the modalities on how to execute this computer based exam so that the 
number of candidates who appear in the exams can be increased at one ego. 
                      (Para 2.73) 
 
22. The Committee is of the view that there should be some mechanism for refunding 
the fees for those who have not appeared, as majority of the students who are appearing 

52 
 
for these exams are very poor people.  A mechanism by which money could be refunded 
to such candidates who could not appear  and majorly belonging to very poor 
background may be explored.        (Para 2.75) 
 
23. The Committee advocates to examine the following in details by IBPS: 
 An assessment of the cost for an applicant to reach to the examination centre 
from his house and pay the fee.   
 The strike rate for a candidate to get a job.   
 An assessment of the cost of an unemployed person to only apply and not get the 
job.   
 The Commi ttee notes that on an average approximately 95 per cent of the 
candidates who apply are not able to get selected and left without job. However, 
everyone is being charged and mostly they are unemployed.  Hence, the 
Committee recommends that it would be fair  and can be explored that the State 
or the Central Government bear part of that cost so that it does not burden the 
unemployed youth.                  (Para 2.76) 
 
24. The Committee notes the travelling undertaken by the candidates to appear in 
the examination and  advises RRBs and IBPS to analyze and assess from which areas 
they get a large number of applications. If from a particular State or area they are 
getting a large number of applications, then contemplate increasing the number of 
centers in that area so that the agencies which are being hired for conducting exams set 
up more centers. It should be planned in such a way that it would be convenient for 
candidates. They should not travel more than 100 kms. or 200 kms. Also, for 
candidates who are travel ling from far away distances to sit in the examinations, it 
should be ensured that measures are taken to make the travel more humane and 
comfortable. Some special trains may be run for the purpose. The Committee feels 
these measures would ease the burden of the candidates.           (Para 2.77) 
 
25. The Committee emphasizes on filling up of all vacancies on mission mode in 
consonance with the Government’s policy. The Committee recommends that there has 
to be a robust mechanism to monitor how many people are retiring from Central Police 
Armed Forces, how many vacancies created and whether people have been appointed to 
the vacant posts, i.e. vacancies created should be filled regularly and backlogs to be 

53 
 
avoided.  All departments should be strictly directed at all places that they  send details 
of vacancies well in time to MHA and not take years and years to send the details of 
vacancies.                    (Para 2.86) 
 
\ 
 
 
26. The Committee notes that the personnel from Army, Navy or other Defence 
forces who retire early as per extant rules, after retirement are not able to get suitable 
jobs. Though they have a particular skill trade which have been imparted during the 
service period, those are not taken as valid and this puts them in further hardship. The 
Committee is therefore of the view that the trade skill certification should be made 
valid, which will enable them to get suitable jobs.                                (Para 2.87) 
 
27. The Committee advocates that all necessary steps should be taken by MHA to 
encourage women to join Forces to the maximum possible extent. A major constraint 
that prevents women from joining forces is the difficult terrains and conditions in which 
they might have to work. So, a policy may be explored for  women officers being given 
soft postings and not subjecting them to extremely strenuous and difficult working 
conditions, unless required in extreme circumstances like war, armed rebellion etc and 
that too when there is absolute shortage of males who can be deployed by the Forces.
                         (Para 2.91) 
 
28. The Committee recommends that some sort of reservation may also be given to 
Transgenders. Steps may be taken to recruit transgenders as well so that they can be 
integrated well with mainstream society in near future.               (Para 2.92) 
 
29. The Committee recommends that with respect to border districts, it is 
paramount to recruit maximum youngsters from these areas. Special recruitment drives 
may be conducted for recruitment of local youngsters from states like Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, North Eas tern states and Kashmir. It should be ensured that the 25 per 
cent of reservation for areas affected by militancy/LWE and 25% vacancies of border 
guarding forces allotted to border districts is fulfilled immediately so that the energy 
and talent of youth o f these areas are channelized and they do not deviate toward 
extremism and terrorism.                        (Para 2.96) 

54 
 
30. The Committee suggests that they may explore the possibility of bringing an Act 
to govern recruitment under Agniveer Scheme.  The C ommittee notes that after serving 
four years on the job, 75 per cent of the soldiers will be discharged from their services, 
and only 25 per cent would be inducted into the armed forces, as per the extant rules, 
the question that remains is about the rest.  To prevent disaffection amongst these 
Agniveers, which apparently comprises of youth of this country, Committee suggests 
that the remaining Agniveers may be given reservation/ preference in other 
Government jobs so that trained persons and the skills acqu ired by them during the 
service in Forces can be utilised to the maximum extent possible. Some jobs where it is 
practical to provide preference to them are Police Forces, Parliament Security Service 
and any other Combat Force.               (Para 2.101) 
31. The Committee suggests that a standard feedback module be prepared by the 
organizations which are conducting recruitment for CAPFs. Once the students are done 
with the complete examination cycle, they may be given an option to fill in this 
standardized module. This module may contain various heads like syllabus, time taken 
to complete the exam, constraints faced, infrastructure issues like internet connectivity 
etc, logistical issues and so on. This will help the organizations to make the recruitment 
cycle even more streamlined and fast.                    (Para 2.104) 
32. The Committee recommends that regular studies should be undertaken to 
prevent any kind of stagnation at various levels of promotion in CAPFs. Cadre Review 
of each Para -Military Force mus t be conducted in every five years without fail. A 
permanent committee should be inplace for looking into the grievances.  In case there is 
stagnation in promotion at any level or there is no further scope of promotion, the 
option of giving an extra increment may be explored.           (Para 2.106) 
 
                        
****** 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XXIV 
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on 27.07.2022 in 
Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi – 
110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iii) Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
(iv) Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
(v) Shri P. Wilson 
(vi) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
 Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
(viii) Smt. Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(x) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xi) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
(xv) Smt. Kalaben Mohanbhai Delkar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
 

57 
 
WITNESSES 
 
I. DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING (DoPT) 
(i) Ms. S. Radha Chauhan, Secretary; and  
(ii) Ms. Rashmi Chowdhary, Additional Secretary. 
 
II. UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (UPSC)  
(i) Ms. Vasudha Mishra, Secretary;  
(ii) Shri Pushpendra Rajput, Additional Secretary;   
(iii) Ms. Vinakshi Gupta, Additional Secretary;  
(iv) Shri Rajkumar Gathwal, Advisor;  
(v) Shri Puneet Yadav, Joint Secretary;  
(vi) Shri Rajkumar, Joint Secretary;  
(vii) Shri R.K. Tiwari, Joint Secretary; 
(viii) Shri Kamal Saxena, Joint Secretary; and 
(ix) Shri A.K. Mishra, F&BO. 
 
III. STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION (SSC) 
(i) Shri S. Kishore, Chairman;  
(ii) Shri Rajiv Shrivastava, Member; and 
(iii) Shri D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary.  
 
IV. NATIONAL RECRUITMENT AGENCY (NRA) 
(i) Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola, Chairman;  
(ii) Shri Sanjeeb Kumar Mishra, Secretary-cum-CEO; and 
(iii) Shri Hemant Kumar Patil, Director.  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the Secretary, DoPT has been invited to 
present her views on the subject „Review of functioning of Recruitment 
organizations‟. He also apprised them that the draft report on Review of 
Guardianship and Adoption Laws will be taken up for consideration and 
adoption soon and that the draft will be circulated to them for their perusal.  
(After arrival of witnesses) 
 3. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, DoPT and other officials to the 
meeting of the Committee. In his opening remarks, he highlighted two aspects 

58 
 
of the current recruitment process that n eed to be attended to, the first aspect 
being application of the same process and yardstick to select candidates for 
administrative posts of different nature without taking the aptitude, interest and 
suitability of the candidate into account. The second as pect is that the long and 
protracted nature of recruitment. He then, requested the Secretary to enlighten 
the Committee about various aspects of the current recruitment process, reforms 
suggested by expert committees with respect to the recruitment system as well 
as recruiting agencies and the status of implementation of their 
recommendations. 
4. The Secretary, DoPT gave a brief description about the mandate and  
functioning of UPSC, SSC and NRA. She, then, requested the Chairpersons of 
SSC and NRA and Secretary of UPSC to make their respective presentations. 
5. Thereafter, the Chairperson, SSC apprised the Committee about the 
reforms introduced in the recruitment process in recent times such as 
operationalization of vacancy portal, introduction of computer based 
examination, online registration of applications and an option to edit it, real time 
monitoring of examination centres through a command centre, use of jammers, 
finalization of answer key, use of SMS facility to communicate with candidates 
among othe rs. He opined that these reforms have brought about the required 
transparency in the recruitment process. 
6. The Chairperson, NRA, briefed the Committee about its mandate and 
current status. He mentioned that the rationale behind creating NRA is to 
obviate the need for candidates to appear for multiple examinations conducted 
by multiple bodies. He informed the Committee that NRA is in the process of 
finalizing the set up and that it will soon become fully operational. 
7. Thereafter, the Secretary, UPSC brou ght to the notice of the Committee, 
the difficulties being faced by recruiting organizations in conducting 
recruitment tests in view of increasing number of applicants. 
8. Members raised queries and sought clarifications on various issues such 
as status of backlog vacancies pertaining to marginalized communities in central 

59 
 
government; steps taken by DoPT to equip recruiting agencies with adequate 
manpower; reasons for inordinate delay in notification of recruitment rules 
approved by UPSC; measures taken by UPSC to expedite submission of DPC 
proposals among others. 
9. The Chairman suggested that an expert Committee should be constituted 
to study the impact of changes made in the scheme and syllabus of Civil 
Services Examination over the last ten years on aspi rants, quality of candidates 
recruited and administration at large. One of the members suggested that the 
performance of civil servants should be evaluated continuously and that they 
should be trained in law.  
10. Members were of the view that NRA should h ave been fully functional 
by now and requested DoPT to provide a timeline indicating as to when NRA 
will commence the recruitment process. The Chairman suggested that recruiting 
agencies should have a mechanism for collecting feedback/suggestions from 
candidates. The Secretary, DoPT and heads of recruiting agencies responded to 
some the queries raised by the members. 
11. The Chairman then thanked all the witnesses and asked them to furnish 
replies to the queries raised during the meeting, in writing.   
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
12. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 4.39 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
27th July, 2022                                                                                   DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 

60 
 
                                  
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:30 PM on 04.11.2022 in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – „A‟, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(iii) Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
(iv) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(v) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
 
 Lok Sabha 
(vii) Smt. Veena Devi 
(viii) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(ix) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(x) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xi) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xii) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
(xiii) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
 
 

61 
 
WITNESSES 
 
I. DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING (DoPT) 
(i) Ms. Rashmi Chowdhary, Additional Secretary. 
 
II. INSTITUTE OF BANKING PERSONNEL SELECTION (IBPS)  
(i) Shri Harideesh Kumar B., Director & Executive Head; and 
(ii) Prof. V. K. Chilana, Sr. Professor & Advisor;   
 
III.  RAILWAY RECRUITMENT BOARD (RRB)  
(i) Smt. Aruna Nayar, Principal Executive Director (Staff); and 
(ii) Shri Rajiv Gandhi, Executive Director;  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare who 
was nominated to the Committee. The Chairman apprised the Members that the 
Committee is examining the subject 'Functioning of Recruitment Organizations' 
and has already heard DoPT, UPSC, SSC, NRA and now IBPS and RRB have 
been invited to present their views on the same subject. He also s uggested the 
Members that the invited agencies could be asked for targets and roadmaps in 
respect of the announcement made by the Government of India to conduct 10 
lakh recruitment in the next one year. 
(After arrival of witnesses) 
 3. The Chairman welcomed the Additional Secretary, DoPT and officials of 
IBPS and RRB to the meeting of the Committee. In his opening remarks, the 
Chairman pointed out the mandate of both IBPS and RRB. The Chairman also 
mentioned some of the issues faced by recruitment agencies,  nowadays, such as 
alleged malpractices, cancellation of examination etc. Further, the Chairman 
requested the RRB and IBPS to enlighten the Committee about the different 
features of current recruitment process, challenges faced by the organizations 
and reforms that can be made. 
4. The Senior Professor and Advisor, IBPS gave a brief overview of the 
composition and history of IBPS. He made the Committee aware of the fact that 
in 1985 IBPS popularized the OMR based technology which was followed by 

62 
 
UPSC and other organizations. He further apprised the Committee that in 2012 
bigger examinations were conducted online for the first time and later in 2015 
IBPS became fully online. He then gave details of the self -sustained economic 
model of the organizat ion in which IBPS is not taking grants from banks, 
Government of India, State Government or any Member organization. In 
response to request made by the Chairman the Senior Professor and Advisor, 
IBPS answered in brief the questionnaire sent by the Secretar iat. Members 
raised queries and sought clarifications on various issues such as disability 
quota, process of formation of syllabus and guidelines for the same, constitution 
of IBPS. The Chairman also gave suggestions to increase the number of centres 
and also queried about the process of normalization. The Senior Professor and 
Advisor, IBPS responded to some of the queries raised by the Members.  
(Then, some witnesses withdrew) 
5. Thereafter, the Principal Executive Director (Staff), RRB apprised the 
Committee about the functioning and mandate of RRB. She also explained how 
RRB conducts various types of exams for different posts. She informed that age 
relaxation, fee waiver and free travel passes for examinations have been 
provided to OBC, SCs/ST, women and Person with Disabilities candidates. The 
Committee was enlightened with the fact that RRB conducts the examination in 
more than 360 cities including Andamans, Lakshadweep, J&K and the north -
east. She also answered in brief the questionnaire sent by the Sec retariat. 
Members than raised queries on issues such as location of centres outside the 
state in which the candidate is residing. The Chairman also suggested to keep 
centres within the state in which the candidate is residing. He further suggested 
that the re should not be any major change in notification. The Principal 
Executive Director (Staff), RRB   then responded to some of the queries raised 
by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.  
6. The Chairman then thanked all the witnesses and asked them to furnish 
replies to the queries raised during the meeting, in writing.   
(Witnesses then withdrew) 

63 
 
7. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8. The meeting adjourned at 5.25 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
4th November, 2022                                                                          DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on 20.12.2022 in 
Committee Room No. 4, Block -A, Parliament House Annexe Ext. Building, 
New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vii) Shri P. Wilson 
 
 Lok Sabha 
(viii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(ix) Smt. Veena Devi 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xii) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xiii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiv) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xv) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
 

65 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
(i) Department  of  Personnel  and  Training (DoPT) 
(i) Ms. Rashmi Chowdhary, Additional Secretary; 
(ii) Shri Somdutt Sharma, JS (Admin); and 
(iii) Shri S.P. Pant, Director 
(ii) Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) 
(i) Shri Pushpendra Rajput, Additional Secretary; 
(ii) Shri Raj Kumar, Joint Secretary (Exam.); and 
(iii) Shri R. K. Tiwari, Joint Secretary (R-I, NLS & Vig). 
 
(iii) Staff Selection Commission (SSC) 
(i)   Shri Rajiv Srivastava, Member; and 
(ii)   Shri Mohan Lal Hirwal, Director 
 
(iv) Ministry  of Home Affairs (MHA) 
(i) Shri Mritunjay Kumar Narayan, Additional Secretary; and 
(ii) Ms. Pauumi Basu, Director 
(v)  Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) 
(i) Smt. B. Radhika, IPS, ADG; and 
(ii) Shri Tsewang Namgyal, IPS, Inspector General 
(vi) Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) 
(i) Shri Anish Dayal Singh, IPS, DG; 
(ii) Shri Amrit Mohan Prasad, IPS, ADG (HQrs); and 
(iii) Ms. Anisa Hussain, IPS, IG (Estt & Rectt) 
(vii) Assam Rifles (AR) 
(i) Lt Gen P C Nair, AVSM, YSM, DG; and 
(ii) Brig V N Kulkarni, Brig (Pers) 

66 
 
 
(viii) Border Security Force (BSF) 
(i) Shri Rajesh Nirwan, IPS, Additional DG 
 
(ix) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) 
(i)        Dr. Sujoy Lal Thaosen, IPS, DG 
(ii) Shri Sudhakar Upadhyay, IG; and 
(iii) Shri N.K. Singh, DIG 
 
(x) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) 
(i) Shri Udayan Banerjee, Inspector General (Adm); 
(ii) Shri Deepak Agarwal, Dy. Inspector General (Rectt); and  
(iii) Shri Anil Damor, Asstt. Inspector General (Rectt). 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee. He apprised them that the Committee *                        *                   
hear the representatives of six Central Armed Police Forces, and officers from 
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) and Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA). 
3. *                                                       *                                                       * 
4. The Chairman then welcomed the officials of MHA, DoPT, UPSC, SSC, 
Director General and other senior functionaries of all the six Central Armed 
Police Forces to the meeting of the Committee. He requested the representatives 
of MHA and UPSC to apprise the Committee about the current recruitment 
process being followed by the organisations, challenges faced and further 
reforms that can improve the quality of human resource in these organisations.  
5. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) then made a 
presentation and briefed that CAPFs consists of six forces which is classified  
                                                  
*pertains to other matter     

67 
 
 
into border guarding forces i.e. Assam Rifles, BSF, ITBP, SSB and in non -
border guarding forces i.e. CISF and CRPF. He further informed that the total 
sanctioned strength of all the six forces is more than 10 lakh out of which 90% 
consists of constables and he ad constables, about 8% subordinate officers and 
the Gazetted Officers are 1.83% only. He apprised the Committee that whereas 
for recruitment at these posts MHA has designated one recruitment agency and 
one nodal force for each type of vacancy on the other  hand the recruitment of 
non-GD cadre which consists of medical, ministerial, engineering, water wing 
and tradesman the recruitment is done by respective forces. He then furnished to 
the Committee the detailed process of recruitment and also informed that 50% 
of the vacancies in CAPFs and AR are allotted to all the States and Union 
Territories on the basis of population ratio and 25% are allotted to border 
districts. The Additional Secretary, MHA also presented details of the current 
recruitment process that are ongoing and future recruitments that are at planning 
stage.     
6. The Chairman then asked the Heads of respective Central Armed Police 
Forces to share their views on recruitment in response to which Director 
Generals of ITBP, Assam Rifles, BSF and o ther officers pointed out in brief the 
current process of recruitment conducted by their organisations and the 
problems faced in it.   
7. The Chairman and Members raised queries and sought clarification on 
certain issues such as filling up of vacancies thr ough mission mode, strength of 
women personnel in Central Armed Police Forces, pending litigations in the 
Supreme Court, employment and welfare of Ex -CAPFs, recruitment of 
transgenders in CAPFs, impact of COVID on the recruitment of candidates to 
CAPFs.  
(Witnesses then withdrew) 

68 
 
8. The Committee decided to undertake a study visit to Imphal, Guwahati 
and Agartala from 19 th to 23 rd January, 2023 and authorized the Chairman to 
seek the permission of Hon'ble Chairman for the proposed study visit. The 
Chairman of the Committee directed the Secretariat to finalise the details and 
make necessary arrangements pertaining to the proposed study visit. 
9. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The meeting adjourned at 04.05 PM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN  
20thDecember, 2022                                                                         DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

69 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING  
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 PM on Monday, 31.07.2023, in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – „A‟, Parliament Ho use Annexe Extension, 
New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(viii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
(xii) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xiii) Shri A. Raja 
(xiv) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xv) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xvi) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
(xvii) Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
(xviii) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
3. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 

70 
 
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members  to the meeting of 
the Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. 
Consideration and adoption of the draft 131 st Report on the subject "Review of 
functioning of Recruitment Organizations of Government of India "; draft 132 nd 
Report on the subject "Specific Aspects of Election Process and their Reforms"; 
and  draft 133rd Report on the subject " Judicial Processes and their Reforms". 
3.        The Committee discussed the draft Reports in detail. Some members 
suggested minor mod ifications in the draft Reports which were agreed to. The 
Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Reports unanimously and authorized its 
Chairman to carry out the corrections as suggested by Members and other patent 
errors in the Reports. 
4.      Thereafter, the Committee decided to present these Reports to Both the 
Houses of the Parliament. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to 
finalise the exact dates of presentation of the Reports in both the Houses and to 
nominate the Members for presenting the Reports. 
5.      The meeting adjourned at 4.00 PM. 
  
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
31st July, 2023                                                                                   DIRECTOR   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
Annexure I 
List of all the representatives of the organizations who were present to depose before 
the Committee:  
Department of Personnel & Training:  
Ms. S. Radha Chauhan, Secretary; and  
Ms. Rashmi Chowdhary, Additional Secretary  
Shri Somdutt Sharma, Joint Secretary (Admn.) 
Shri S.P. Pant, Director 
  
Union Public Service Commission :  
Ms. Vasudha Mishra, Secretary;  
Shri Pushpendra Rajput, Additional Secretary;   
Ms. Vinakshi Gupta, Additional Secretary;  
Shri Rajkumar Gathwal, Advisor;  
Shri Puneet Yadav, Joint Secretary;  
Shri Rajkumar, Joint Secretary;  
Shri R.K. Tiwari, Joint Secretary; 
Shri Kamal Saxena, Joint Secretary; and 
Shri A.K. Mishra, F&BO  
 
Staff  Selection Commission: 
Shri S. Kishore, Chairman;  
Shri Rajiv Shrivastava, Member; and 
Shri D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Mohan Lal Hirwal, Director 
 
National Recruitment Agency: 
Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola, Chairman; 
Shri Sanjeeb Kumar Mishra, Secretary-cum-CEO; and 
 Shri Hemant Kumar Patil, Director. 
 
Institute of Banking Personnel Selection (IBPS): 
Shri Harideesh Kumar B., Director & Executive Head, (IBPS) 
Prof. V. K. Chilana, Sr. Professor & Advisor, IBPS, Mumbai 
 
Railway Recrutiment Board: 
Smt. Aruna Nayar, Principal Executive Director (Staff), RRB 
Shri Rajiv Gandhi, Executive Director (RRB) 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs: 
Shri Mritunjay Kumar Narayan, Additional Secretary 
Ms. Pauumi Basu, Director  
 
  

72 
 
Sashastra Seema Bal: 
Shrimati B. Radhika, IPS, ADG 
Shri Tsewang Namgyal, IPS 
 
Indo-Tibetan Border Police: 
Shri Anish Dayal Singh, IPS, DG 
Shri Amrit Mohan Prasad, IPS, ADG 
Ms. Anisa Hussain, IPS, IG (Estt & Rectt) 
 
Assam Rifles: 
Lt. Gen P C Nair, AVSM, YSM, DG 
Brig VN Kulkarni, Brig (Pers) 
 
Border Security Force: 
Dr.  Sujoy Lal Thaosen, IPS, DG 
Shri Sudhakar Upadhyay, IG 
Shri N.K. Singh, DIG 
 
Central Industrial Security Force: 
Shri Udayan Banerjee, Inspector General (Adm) 
Shri Deepak Agarwal, Dy. Inspector General (Rectt) 
Shri Anil Damor, Asstt. Inspector General (Rectt) 
 
 
 
 
***** 