Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO.
86
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5 2016)th August,
Promotion of Legal Education and Research
under the Advocates Act, 1961
EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT
July, 2016/Ashadha, 1938 (Saka)

29
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT
Promotion of Legal Education and Research
under the Advocates Act, 1961
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2016/Ashadha, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 171


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv )
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-6
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE A T A G LANCE .............................. 7-9
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 11-21
6. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 23-28

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappam — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Subrata Bakshi
13. Adv. Sharad Bansode
14. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
15. Shri A. H. Khan Choudhary
16. Adv. Joice George
17. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
18. Shri Santosh Kumar
19. Shri Bhagwant Mann
20. Shri B. V . Nayak
21. Shri Vincent H. Pala
22. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
23. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
24. Dr. A. Sampath
25. Shri Bharat Singh
26. Shri M. Udhayakumar
27. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
28. Dr. Anshul Verma
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee, present Eighty-Sixth
Report on the subject "Promotion of Legal Education and Research under the Advocates Act, 1961".
2. The Committee heard Shri Vinay Sheel Oberoi, Secretary, Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development, Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, University Grants Commission, Shri
Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Dr. Ranbir Singh, Vice
Chancellor, National Law University, Delhi and Prof V. Vijayakumar, National Law School of India
University, Bangalore in its meeting held on 24th May, 2016. In its meeting held on 31st May, 2016,
the Committee heard the Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, Chairman, Bar Council of India, Prof. C. Raj
Kumar, Vice-Chancellor, O.P. Jindal Global University, Sonipat, Maj. Gen. (Prof.) Nilendra Kumar,
Director, Amity Law School, Noida, and Prof. (Smt.) Shashikala Gurpur, Director, Symbiosis Law
School, Pune.
3. The Committee during its study-visit to Kolkata from 13th to 15th June, 2016 heard Prof.
P. Ishwara Bhat, Vice-Chancellor, West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata,
Smt. Ananya Bandyopadhyay, Director, West Bengal Judicial Academy, Prof. J.K. Das, Dean, Faculty
of Law, Calcutta University,  Shri Arindam Sarkar, Khaitan & Co. and Shri Souvik Bhadra, Ashlar
Law.
3.1 The Committee visited National Law School of India University, Bangalore and had
interaction with Prof. R. Venkata  Rao, Vice-Chancellor, Prof. V .  Vijaykumar, Professor of Law,
Prof. O.V . Nandimath, Registrar, National  Law School of India University, Prof. C.S. Patil, Vice
Chancellor, Karnataka State Law University and Prof. Dr. Suresh V . Nadagoudar, Principal & Former
Dean, Faculty of Law, Bangalore   University, Bengaluru, Prof. C. Basavaraju, Dean,  Faculty of
Law & Registrar, University of Mysore and Dr. Somu CS, Dean School of Law, Christ University,
Bengaluru on 20th  June, 2016.
3.2 The Committee visited the Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University,  Chennai and had
interaction with Prof. (Dr.) P. Vanagamudi, Vice-Chancellor and Prof. (Dr.) M.S. Soundara Pandian,
Registrar, Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University  Prof. (Dr.) Santhosh Kumar, Director of Legal
Studies, Government of The Tamil Nadu, Shri S. Prabakaran, Co-Chairman,  Bar Council of Tamil
Nadu, Prof. (Dr.) David Ambrose, Head, Department of Legal Studies, University of Madras, Dr.
Vindod Surana, Director and Attorney, M/s. Surana & Surana International Attorneys, Shri Srinath
Sridevan, M/s HSB Partners, Chennai on 22nd June, 2016.  The Committee also visited Tamil Nadu
State Judicial Academy at Chennai and had interaction with Hon'ble Chief Justice and Hon'ble Judges
of Madras High Court and Shri Sathish  Kumar, Director, Tamil Nadu State Judicial Academy on
22nd June, 2016.
3.3 The  Committee visited National Judicial Academy, Bhopal and had interaction with Prof
(Dr.) Geeta Oberoi, Director, National Judicial Academy, Prof. S.S. Singh, Director, National Law
Institute University(NLIU), Bhopal and Prof. P .P. Singh, Dr. H.S. Gour Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar on
24th June, 2016.
4. While considering the subject, the Committee has relied upon following documents/
information: -
(i) The University Grants Commission Act, 1956;
(iii)

(ii) The Advocates Act, 1961;
(iii) One Hundred Eighty Fourth Report of Law Commission of India on "Legal Education
& Professional Training and Proposals for amendments to the Advocates Act, 1961
and the University Grants Commission Act, 1956";
(iv) Background Note on the subject furnished by the Department of Legal Af fairs;
(v) Views/suggestions received from stakeholders during the study-visit.
5. The Committee wishes to extend sincere thanks to Officers/Professors of  the Department
of LA, M/o Law and Justice Ministry of HRD, University Grants Commission, Bar Council of India,
Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University,  Chennai West Bengal National University of Judicial
Sciences, Kolkata, National Law School, Delhi, National Law School of India University, Bengalore,
OP Jindal Global University, Sonipat, Amity Law School, Noida, Symbiosis Law School, Pune,
National Judicial Academy, Bhopal, State Judicial Academies of West Bengal and Tamil Nadu and
other stakeholders who appeared before the Committee during the examination of the subject.
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
7. The Committee adopted the Report on 28th June, 2016.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
28th June, 2016 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel
Public Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha
(iv)

1
1
REPORT
Legal education is fundamental to judicial system of the country. The quality of Legal
education helps to create a rule of law friendly society which strengthens the foundation of
democratic polity in the country. In order to achieve quality of rule of law, excellence in legal
education and research is prerequisite. The role of quality institutions imparting legal education,
statutory bodies regulating standard of legal education are inextricably intertwined. Inter-
disciplinary approach to law, empirical and applied research to key issues concerning law and
justice is the need of hour. There are approximately 1305 universities/colleges/schools imparting
legal education in our country which are registered with the Bar Council of India (BCI). The
details of law colleges/universities, including National Law Universities (State/UT wise) is
enclosed at Annexure-I . Approximately 1.4 million lawyers are registered with BCI for practice of
law. State/UT wise advocates enrolled with BCI is enclosed Annexure-II.
Constitutional and Statutory Provisions
2. The Constitution of India has placed ‘education’ in Concurrent list. Entries 63, 64, 65 and
66 of the Union List, Entry 25 of the Concurrent List deal with education and Entry 26 of the
Concurrent List deals with legal profession in the country. The University Grants Commission Act,
1956 was enacted under Entries-65 and 66 of the Union List and Entry-25 of the Concurrent List.
Section 2(f) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 empowers the UGC to exercise control
over the universities and affiliated colleges for prescribing standards of education. The Advocates
Act, 1961 was enacted under Entries-77 and 78 of the Union List. Section 7(h) and 7(i) of the
said Act empowers the Bar Council of India to promote and regulate legal education in the country.
3. The standard of legal education as well as institutions imparting legal education is regulated
by two statutory bodies, namely, University Grants Commission (UGC) and Bar Council of India
(BCI). The UGC was set-up under University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and comprises 12
Members, who are full time members having distinguished career in the field of education including
technical, medical and legal. The BCI is constituted under the Advocate Act, 1961 having
independent members elected by the Bar. That Council under Section 7(1)(h) has been assigned the
task of laying down norms and standards of legal education in consultation with universities
imparting such education. The expert committee of UGC has a member from legal profession
which inspects the infrastructure, faculty, etc. before granting recognition. Both UGC as well as
BCI gives recognition to the legal institutions imparting legal education whenever they apply for the
same. The UGC as well as BCI can de-recognize any university/institution which is not able to
maintain the standard set up by those regulatory bodies. The Bar Council of India is empowered
to make rules under the Section 49 of the Advocates Act, 1961. The Bar Council of India Rules
(Rules of Legal Education), 2008 provides for inspection of Universities/ Colleges for recognizing
its degree in law for the purpose of enrolment as advocates. The BCI has also constituted Legal
Education Committee under Section 10(2) (d) of the Advocates Act, 1961, which is headed by a
former judge of Supreme Court of India and has been made broad based to include Judges of High
Courts, Attorney General for India, Solicitor General for India, Vice Chancellors of National Law
Universities etc.
Role and Initiatives of University Grants Commission
4. The UGC provide recognitions and revokes recognitions to institutions imparting legal
education in the Country. The UGC provides grants from its own funds to state universities,

2
Deemed universities for infrastructural development. Some of the National Law Schools/Universities
have also received developmental grant which was utilized for capacity building of the institution.
Developmental grant released to various law universities/institutions during Twelfth Five Year Plan
is at Annexure-III.
Role and Initiatives of Bar Council of India
5. The Committee was apprised that the Bar Council of India has constituted a Legal Education
Committee, which is the supreme body to take vital decision about the grant of recognition or de-
recognition university/institution imparting legal education. A Curriculum Development Committee
(CDC) under the Legal Education Committee comprising members from Bar, Bench and Academia
has been constituted for updating curriculum and a Directorate of Education under Legal Education
Committee has been constituted to lay down standards of continuing legal education and uphold and
upgrade standard of legal research and legal profession.
5.1. In its submission, the BCI apprised the Committee that in June, 2015 the BCI resolved not
to grant approval for new law colleges for coming three years and accordingly requested State
Governments not to set-up law colleges for coming three years to curb and control the mushroom
growth of legal institution. However, BCI received many applications for grant of recognition by
it during that period. It has been observed that the student-teacher ratio of 40: 1 laid down by BCI
is not adhered to by the State Governments due to the financial and infrastructural constraints
faced by them. The BCI submitted that same teachers are in the rolls of several universities/
colleges and there is inadequate infrastructure in many colleges/institution imparting law education.
To identify fake lawyers the Certificate of Place of Practice Verification Rules has been  framed
by BCI. The Directorate of Education has taken up the task of setting up of Lawyers’ Academy
in all States for continual legal training for budding advocates. Such Advocate Academy has already
been established in the State of Kerala and the second one is in process in the State of Jharkhand.
Other States are trying to set up such academy from the contribution of Members of State Bar
Council for the training of Members of local Bar.
6. The Bar Council of India lay down the standard of professional conduct or etiquette for
Advocates under Section 7(1)(b) and 7(1)(c) read with Section 49(1)(c) of the Advocates Act,
1961 and enforce the same among the Advocates. The Chairman, Bar Council of India during its
deposition before the Committee on 31
st May, 2016 submitted that the Bar has decided to remove
from its roll lawyers convicted in criminal and serious cases and is accordingly, verifying the
antecedents of conviction in criminal and serious cases against Bar members.
Reports of other Commissions and Bodies
7. The Sixteenth Law Commission of India suo motu  took up the subject of legal education
in its One Hundred and Eighty Fourth Report titled “Legal Education and Professional Training and
Proposals for amendments to the Advocates Act, 1961 and the University Grants Commission Act,
1956” has recommended as under:-
....”Bar Council of India can lay down minimum standards necessary for courses for
students who will come into legal profession but not in respect of other law courses which
do not lead to a professional career. UGC can prescribe higher standards”
....”UGC and BCI to introduce a system of Accreditation of law colleges. Section 7 (1) (h)
should be amended to enable Bar Council of India to promote excellence in legal education
for the purpose of accreditation system”
1.
1184th Report on The Legal Education and professional Training and Proposal for Amendments to the Advocates
Act, 1961 and the University Grants Commission Act,1956 (2012) Retrieved from http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/
reports/184threport-PartI.pdf (page-129-130)

3
8. The National Knowledge Commission (NKC) under the Chairmanship of Shri Sam Pitroda
has recognized legal education as an important constituent of professional education. The NKC
recommended the setting up of a new regulatory mechanism under the Independent Regulatory
Authority for Higher Education (IRAHE), vested with powers to deal with all aspects of legal
education and whose decisions are binding on the institutions teaching law and on the union and
state governments. The NKC vide its report and opined the following:-
....”In the last three decades, ... the BCI, by virtue of its Resolutions, Rules and
Regulations, has taken over the entire body of powers in relation to legal education which
is not the intention of the Advocates Act, 1961, which is a legislation under Entries-77 and
78 of List I Schedule VII of the Constitution of India. The BCI, under its powers to grant
recognition to universities for the purpose of enrolment of law graduates has been also
dealing with inspection, affiliation or disaffiliation of various law colleges, granting
annual affiliation or permanent affiliation etc..... It has also been laying down conditions
for establishment of law schools, buildings, appointment of faculty, and a variety of other
matters in which the faculty and other players have not been allowed to have any effective
role. These powers were extended by the BCI under Resolutions, Rules and Regulations as
stated above, though such extension of  powers is not permitted by the Advocates Act,
1961.”
9. In the year 2011 the Department of Legal Affairs had prepared the National Law School Bill,
2011, the Centre for Advanced Legal Studies and Research Bill, 2011 and Legal Education and
Research Bill, 2011 to bring excellence in legal education.
10. The following view points were received from the stakeholder during its meeting in Delhi,
Kolkata, Bengaluru, Chennai and Bhopal:-
(i) The quality of legal services, including legal aid under Article 39A of the constitution
largely depends on quality of legal education. There is urgent need to streamline the
existing legal education in majority of law colleges. A provision of “legal budgeting”
may be included in the budget of all Government for the purpose of upholding and
upgrading standard of legal education.
(ii) Dr. B.R. Ambedkar had suggested for the establishment of a Council of Legal
Education to supervise legal education and to conduct examination in law, as far
back in 1936 (Law College Magazine, Bombay, 1936, at 15; cited from Fourteenth
Report of the Law Commission of India on Reforms of Judicial Administration,
1958, para 51 at 544). A National Council for legal education having corporation and
coordination amongst Bench, the Bar, academia, UGC and Union and State
Government may be created with the single objective of streamlining entire
education. The said council may assist the BCI for conducting the Bar admission
test which is being currently outsourced by the BCI. It may evolve and administer
continuing legal education and training for advocates and law teachers.
(iii) The Department of Legal Affairs is entrusted with the administration of Advocates
Act, 1961 and Legal profession only. The subject of legal education may also be
looked after by the UGC, while the BCI should exercise the power to recommend
the minimum standard for practice as an advocate and in disciplinary matters.
(iv) National Law Universities are established under various State Acts and barring a few,
most of them are having financial problems as State Governments have stopped the
funding after establishing them and on the other hand, the Union Government does
not fund them as they are established by State legislatures. These institutes had to
generate its own funds, mainly from students’ fees, for its day-to day activities.

4
(v) The BCI is mainly concerned with the advocates who are enrolled in Bar Councils
for practice in the court of law. However, they were of the view that they would
be happy to have overall charge of legal education in the country.
(vi) Lawyers academies to be set-up in each states from the contributions of Bar
members of the State.
(vii) Like the Bar Council of America, the Bar Council of India should regulate all sorts
of legal education and research as well as profession including entry of international
law firms into our country for the sake of upgrading standard of legal education.
(viii) The brightest law graduates prefer to join the corporate law firms due to difficulty
in getting good mentorship. Senior lawyers should play the role of mentor for the
first-generation young law graduates and law students from under-privileged section
of society to enable them to join the Bar.
(ix) Teaching in law schools is theoretical in nature and out of touch with the practical
reality. Classroom for law students should be student-centric rather than teacher-
centric and participation of students for legal research may be given due attention.
Emphasis should be given on andragogy rather than on pedagogy.
(x) The compulsory attendance of seventy-five percent for students should be done
away and more practical training should be introduced in law schools to make the
students more employable in the market. However, another view received was that
compulsory attendance rule prescribed for law graduates should be strictly
maintained and if necessary biometric attendance systems should be introduced in
law colleges and universities to uphold standards of legal education in the country.
(xi) Similar to Corporate Social Responsibility, senior lawyers should have Professional
Social Responsibility to contribute certain percentage of their taxable income for
promoting legal education and profession in the country. Philanthropy in legal
education is essential for its growth and development. Accordingly effort ought to
be made by all stakeholders for promoting philanthropic initiatives in legal education
and research.
(xii) The avenues for professional engagement of lawyers have significantly expanded
with the liberalization of the economy. The curriculum and pedagogy at law schools,
therefore, must reflect the requirements of these new demands and its structure
must not be built around the needs of a litigating lawyer alone. There is also need
to introduce courses relating to tribal issues and agriculture etc. in the curriculum.
(xiii) The legal education transcends the legal profession and has other dimensions as
well. Therefore, Bar Council should not regulate legal education. The UGC is also
not suitable to regulate the legal education given its technical and specialised nature.
Therefore, there must be a separate regulatory body at national level for legal
education in the lines of All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE).  Bar
Council of India should focus on improving the quality of Bar and regulation of
quality of legal education should be left to University Grants Commission (UGC) or
any other super-regulatory body on the line of All India Council for Technical
Education.
(xiv) The legal education system in the country needs to be regulated comprehensively
by a body to be known as Indian Council of Legal Research (ICLR) with regional
branches to audit and review legal education and research to uphold the rule of
law.

5
(xv) Maximum age limit should be prescribed to pursue LL.B programmes in the country
as we cannot expect a 21 years student to sit in a class with 60 years old man.
There should be age limit to pursue LL.B programmes in the country.
(xvi) Three years law course may be abolished in phased manner. Part-time law degree,
law degree by correspondence may be abolished.
(xvii) There should be one legal standard for the institutions throughout the country. One
model National law school may be set up in every State, which should be assigned
the duty of regulating law colleges within that State.
(xviii) There is all India entrance examination for admission to other professional course,
i.e. Medical and Engineering, known as National Eligibility cum Entrance Test 
(NEET) and Joint Entrance Examination (JEE), respectively. The Common Law
Admission Test (CLA T) is limited to the 17 National Law School Universities
offering five years (Hons) undergraduate legal education. Whereas admission to
undergraduate legal education in other law colleges and departments/universities is
either made on marks basis secured on 12th standard or specific entrance
examinations regulated by concerned college/university. There should be common
entrance test for admission into undergraduate law courses on the lines of National
Eligibility cum Entrance Test  (NEET), Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) and
Common Law Admission Test. There is a need of a body to conduct common
National Level Aptitude Test for screening student opting for five years law degree
in the country.
(xix) Like IITs and IIMs, the National Law Schools should be granted autonomy and
status of institute of national importance/excellence for maintaining the standards of
legal education in the country. They may be re-christened as Indian Institute of Law
(IIL). All the law colleges in a particular state may be affiliated to those universities
for the purpose of standardization of legal education.
(xx) The constituency of law academia is neglected by the Bar and also unrepresented
in the Benches, even though; the Constitution of India has a provision for elevation
of jurist to the Bench. Law teachers are not allowed to take higher judicial service
examination nor can they can practise in the court of law, as a result of which
clinical legal education has remained a mere façade. In USA and other developed
countries full time law teachers are allowed to practise law which may be adopted
to making suitable amendment to Advocates Act, 1961, which may enable them to
provide insight of the conventions /procedures of court room to the law students.
(xxi) The members of Bar usually have knowledge of lawyering and advocacy but may
not have domain knowledge of teaching and research. The academic qualifications
of Members of Bar in usually lower than that of academicians teaching law. The
BCI and State Bar Councils (SBC) have been changing the student-teacher ratio
which is difficult to follow by the State governments due to infrastructural, capacity
adjustment and inadequate human resource support. Therefore, there is a need to
amend Advocates Act, 1961 so as to confine BCI and SBC for regulation of legal
profession and leave legal education to a plural body comprising of distinguished
legal academicians.
(xxii) Mushrooming of law colleges /departments without proper faculty is a serious
concern for the legal education. The 1.5 lakh fee charged by BCI is very high as
compared to fee charged by AICTE and MCI for giving affiliation to Engineering
and Medical courses, respectively. In many cases colleges are given recognition

6
without proper inspection. The recognition of law colleges should be handled by a
regulatory body having representatives of law academicians, experts and recognition
fee should be nominal.
(xxiii) The law universities may be given option to design course curriculum to
complement choice based credit system insisted by the UGC. The Curriculum
Development Committee of BCI should not design course curriculum for law
students.
(xxiv) Judicial officers and advocates are pre-occupied with their profession and hardly
find time to do legal research. The academicians and research scholars may be given
small projects by the law department to do empirical legal research on specific
burning legal problems. The empirical research should complement doctoral/post-
doctoral research in law.
(xxv) The quality of legal education largely depends on quality of students, facilities and
student-teacher ratio. Students studying in vernacular languages find it difficult join
national law schools as the medium of instruction is English in the latter. The CLAT
exam is urban oriented and advantageous to students of public schools. The students
in local law colleges, State Universities and National Law Schools get different kinds
of training. Therefore, law students in local colleges may be given exposure to the
training and infrastructure in the state universities and national universities, which is
far excellent from the law colleges in States.
(xxvi) There are paucity of academicians to impart legal education and legal drafting in the
country. Many law colleges are having faculty of other institution in their roll. The
guest lecturers or ad-junct lecturers in colleges are not also available from the Bar.
(xxvii) The pay and allowances of law teachers is at par which teachers in Arts and
Science colleges. Except law teachers, all other professional having law degrees,
including members of Bench and Bar are highly respected and rewarded. The salary
and retirement age of law professors in national law school universities is higher
than their peers in other State universities. Tamil Nadu Government was generous
enough to provide higher salary at the initial appointment of law teachers which may
be adopted by other States to attract better law teachers. Since teachers are not
allowed to practice on Advocates Act, 1961, they may be provided non-pra+cticing
allowances as in case of doctors teaching in medical colleges.
(xxviii) There are many untrained lawyers having fake certificate as members of Bar which
is creating indiscipline in the legal profession. The initiative of Bar Councils to check
credentials of advocates should be completed in time bound manner.
(xxix) There is no R & D investment in legal education sector so as to improve the state
of affairs on quality of justice system professionals, quality of law making and
quality of institutions providing justice to citizens; and
(xxx) There is a paucity of quality law teachers and lawyers in the country and therefore,
the retirement age of law teachers and High Court judges needs to be enhanced to
65 years.

7
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE –– A T A GLANCE
1. The Committee observes that legal education taught in universities enables the
products of those universities to join as Judge, Advocate, Legislative Draftsman, Law
Officer, Treaty Negotiator, Legal Journalist, etc. In this era of globalization, liberalization
and privatization, there is a growing need of legal professional in fields of trade, commerce
and industry as well. Further, the knowledge of law also enables to understand its impact
and implication upon the lives of common man. It can be said that anyone can manage
without having the knowledge of technical or medical education but knowledge of law is
essential in every social, economic and political system. Even the treaty obligations of the
country are affecting the lives of every man in the remote corner of the country. The legal
education is not restricted to the students who are intending to practise law in the court
of law. Higher education at the level of post-graduate and doctorate is now enabling them
to become negotiator and arbitrator in international fora.
2. As many as seventeen national law schools have been set up by various States
through their own legislations inter-alia  to impart five year Hons law degree which
encompasses law in various fields as well as practical training in terms of internship, mock
trial and moot courts which sharpen communication and argument skill of the students
which are essential attributes of a solicitor or an advocate. The Committee notes that these
institutions are self-financed; some of them are in receipt of developmental grant from
University Grants Commission (UGC). All of them are called as universities without having
any colleges affiliated to them for the purpose of functional autonomy. Those law schools
have evolved a Common Law Admission Test (CLAT) to select candidates having aptitude
and flair to study law. The product of those institutes are getting placement in corporate
law houses, legal processing outsourcing, etc. The fees from students are not sufficient to
put those in proper growth trajectory. During its study visit to some of the national law
schools in the country, it found excellent faculty, infrastructure and research resources for
promotion of legal education. These types of institutes may be set up in other States as well
and also be treated at par with institutions like AIIMS, IIT with the financial support from
Union Government. The legal education should not be neglected as it affects the common
life. The Committee recommends that National Law Schools set up under State legislation
may be declared as institute of national eminence and can be a role model for other law
institutions to emulate their standard in research, curriculum, faculty, etc. which could be
a real asset for the legal fraternity.
3. The legal education is regulated by two statutory bodies’ i.e, Bar Council of India and
University Grant Commission. While the Bar Council of India regulates legal education
which is essential for an individual to enrol him/her as an advocate. The University Grant
Commission regulates entire gamut of legal education as well as medical and technical
education. The Bar Council of India is democratically elected body from the legal profession
while the UGC members including its Chairman and Vice-Chairman are whole time salaried
officers specially drawn from the field of education in medical, technical and legal having
distinguished career in those fields. The Bar Council of India under Section 10 (2)(b) of the
Advocate Act, 1961 and rules framed thereunder has re-constituted Legal Education
Committee having more than thirty members under the Chairmanship of a retired judge of
7

8
the Supreme Court of India. The members of that Committee are chosen from Bar, Law
Universities including National Law Schools to regulate the standard of basic LL.B degree.
The Committee notes that the Legal Education Committee (LEC) of Bar Council of India
is broad-based and having more membership than what is contemplated under Section 10
(2)(b) of the Advocate Act, 1961. The Bar Council of India under Rules have also constituted
Curriculum Development Committee and Directorate of Legal Education for the purpose of
upholding and upgrading standard of legal education. The Committee feels that the
expansion of Legal Education Committee, constitution of Curriculum Committee and also
setting up of the Directorate of Legal Education was done by the BCI by exercising the
powers beyond the Advocates Act. The Committee is not, in anyway, opposed to the
aforementioned arrangements but desires that attempts made by BCI be given the statutory
support by incorporating restructured Legal Education Committee, Curriculum Development
Committee and Directorate of Legal Education in the Advocate Act itself. The Committee
accordingly recommends for the amendment of the Advocates Act and advises the
Department of Legal Affairs to initiate action in this regard.
4. The Committee is of the view that role of BCI is restricted to the LLB degree which
is an essential eligibility for enrolment at Bar under the Advocates Act. However, the
postgraduate, specialised courses and the research comes under the higher education which
is largely governed by the UGC. The Committee suggests that the Universities need to be
given full autonomy in designing the courses.
5. The Committee strongly feels that the National Law Schools, Law Collages and Law
Departments of the Universities need adequate financial support. The role of University
Grants Commission can be vital in this regard. The Committee suggests the UGC should
also frame Rules under the Section 25 read with Section 12B of the UGC Act providing for
‘fitness’ of the institutions imparting legal education on the lines of Technological and
Agricultural universities etc.
6. The Committee considers that it is high time now to acknowledge the new
dimensions like arbitration, mediation, consultancy which have now become part of general
stream but not necessarily the practicing lawyers who are to be enrolled under the
Advocates Act. These have now become the integral part of the legal profession through out
the world. The Committee impress upon all the institutions imparting legal education also
to focus in these fields as well. The Committee also feels that basic law courses like
drafting of deeds, conciliation and mediation may be made part of school curriculum in
higher secondary school level.
7. In our country, there are two models offering basic legal education, i.e. 3 years LLB
and 5 years integrated BA (H) LLB offered by National Law Universities and some other
universities. In order to purify and promote legal education in the country, Madras High
Court in October, 2015 suggested to the BCI to scrap 3 year LLB Programme and retain
only 5 years law programme. The Juris Doctor (JD) programme are being offered in most
of the common law countries, i.e. Australia, England etc.  Our legal education system may
adopt similar type of education pattern in addition to 5 years law degree. Law Schools
starting with National Law School of India University, Bangalore has provided institutional
leadership in the field of teaching, research and learning. The law schools have become a
recruitment platform, commercial law firms and Legal Process Outsourcing (LPO).
8. The Committee is happy to note that BCI is going to set-up one Lawyer Academy in
each state for ongoing training of practicing lawyers to equip them with the development
in law in the globalised economy. The first academy has been set-up in Kerala and the
second is under progress in Jharkhand. The Committee feels that the academies would

9
provide research and resource material to young lawyer to keep them abreast of emerging
trends in legal profession. It can also provide continued legal education by giving training
by senior members of the Bar on latest rulings of Supreme Court and High Courts. The
General body of Bar Council of Gujarat has resolved to constitute Gujarat Bar Council
Advocates Academy (GBCAA) for continued legal education in association with National Law
University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat (GNLU).  The Committee feels that the Union Government
may encourage all the States to setup Advocates Academy on the lines of State Judicial
Academy for providing training to advocates in the States for an independent and integrated
judiciary as envisaged under the Constitution of India. The Committee also impress upon
the Union Government to provide financial assistance for establishing and nurturing
Advocate Academies. In the mean time the infrastructural facilities of State Judicial
Academy may be utilized to provide training for advocates, particularly when these
academies are not imparting training to judicial academies officers.

MINUTES

13
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 24th May, 2016 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Smt. Rajani  Patil
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
7. Adv. Joice George
8. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Shri Santosh Kumar
10. Shri Bhagwant Mann
11. Shri Vincent H. Pala
12. Shri M Udhayakumar
13. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
WITNESSES
I. Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development
1. Shir Vinay Sheel Oberoi, Secretary;
2. Shri Praveen Kumar, Joint Secretary;
3. Smt. Ishita Roy, Joint Secretary; and
4. Shri Amit Shukla, Director.
II. Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary; and
2. Shri Y . K. Singh, DLA.

14
III. University  Grants Commission (UGC)
Prof. V ed Prakash, Chairman, UGC.
IV . National Law University, Delhi
1. Dr. Ranbir Singh, Vice-Chancellor ; and
2. Prof. Sachidanandam, former Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Ambedkar Law University, Tamil Nadu.
V. National Law School of India University, Bangalore
Prof V . Vijayakumar, former Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Ambedkar Law University, Tamil Nadu
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. He then apprised that
the representatives of Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Legal Affairs,
University Grants Commission, National Law School, Delhi and National Law School of India
University, Bangalore have been invited to  present their view on the subject “Promotion of Legal
Education and Research under the Advocates Act, 1961”.
(After the arrival of the witnesses)
3. The Chairman welcomed Shri Vinay Sheel Oberoi, Secretary (Higher Education), Ministry
of Human Resource and Development, Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary, Department of
Legal Affairs, Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, University Grants Commission, Prof. Ranbir Singh,
Vice Chancellor, National Law School, Delhi, Prof V . Vijayakumar, National Law School of India
University, Bangalore and other officers present in the meeting of the Committee. He then
highlighted role of Bar Council of India under the Advocates Act, 1961 in regulating and promoting
legal education in the country, role of Department of Higher Education, Ministry of HRD, University
Grants Commission (UGC) for laying down guidelines/norms to regulate standard of higher
education and funding in the country. He added that the nomenclature of National Law Schools
prima facie is a misnomer, as they are neither funded by Union Government, nor have any colleges
affiliated to them and many of them are suffering due to inadequate funds. He requested the
witnesses to touch upon the issues relating to the provisions of Advocates Act, 1961 dealing with
legal education, role and relevance of Bar Council of India in promoting legal education in the
country, issue of affiliation and inspection of law institutions, encroachment of powers of UGC by
BCI, role of the Department/institutions with regard to curriculum, recruitment and promotion of
faculties, research output, and also the issues regarding admission in law programmes while making
their presentation.
3. The Secretary (Higher Education), Ministry of Human Resource and Development apprised
the Committee of the recommendations of the One Hundredth and Eighty Fourth Report on the
“Legal Education and professional Training and Proposal for Amendments to the Advocates Act,
1961 and the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (2002)” for inserting Legal Education
Committee of University Grants Commission (UGC) in the Section 5 of the UGC Act, 1956 in view
of the inability of Bar Council of India to undertake consultation with universities in setting norms
and standards for legal education. The Secretary further apprised the Committee of the withdrawal
of Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011 from Rajya Sabha, which provided for the creation
of the National Commission for Higher Education and Research subsuming University Grants
Commission (UGC), All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and National Council for
Teachers Education (NCTE) to address the challenges of higher education in the country.
4. The Chairman, University Grants Commission submitted that the UGC sanctions grants to
different universities in the country based on its criteria and guidelines. He added that since 2013
the UGC has been sanctioning grants to National Law Schools in the country.
5. The  Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs submitted that Entry 65 and 66 of
the List I (Union List) and Entry 25 of List III (Concurrent List) of the Seventh Schedule of the

15
Constitution deal with education in the country. He added that as per the Government of India
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the Department of Legal Affairs is entrusted with the
administration of Advocates Act, 1961 and Legal profession only, whereas the Department of
Higher Education is entrusted with university education, higher education and research. He apprised
the Committee of the judgment of Madras High Court in Cr. O.P. (MD) No. 14573 of 2014 for
phasing out three year LLB programmes. He submitted that the subject of legal education may be
looked after by the UGC, while the BCI should exercise the power to recommend the minimum
standard for practice as an advocate and in disciplinary matters.
6. The Vice Chancellor, National Law University, Delhi submitted that the National Law Schools are
established under various State Acts in the country and barring a few, most of them are having
financial problems as State Governments have stopped the funding after establishing them and on
the other hand, the Union Government does not fund them as they are established by State
legislatures. He added that like IITs and IIMs, the National Law Schools should be granted status
of institute of national importance for maintain the standards of legal education in the country.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Members sought clarifications on certain issues, to which the witnesses responded to and
the Chairman directed them to give written clarifications on issues not responded to.
8. * * *.
9. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.
* Relates to some other matter.

16
16
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 31st May, 2016 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
3. Shri K. T .S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
6. Shri A. H. Khan Choudhary
7. Adv. Joice George
8. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Shri Santosh Kumar
10. Shri B. V . Nayak
11. Dr. A. Sampath
12. Shri M. Udhayakumar
13. Dr. Anshul V erma
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. Bar Council of India
1. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, Chairman;
2. Shri Debi Prasad Dhal, Co-Chairman;
3. Shri S. Prabakran, Member;
4. Shri Ramchander Rao, Member;
5. Shri Amit Rana, Member;
6. Shri Ashok Kumar Pandey, Joint Secretary; and
7. Shri Senthil Kumar, Assistant Secretary.

17
II. O.P. Jindal Global University, Sonipat, Haryana
1. Professor (Dr) C. Raj Kumar, Vice Chancellor; and
2. Shri K. Harish Chander Rao, Deputy Director.
III. Symbiosis Law School, Pune
Professor Shashikala Gurpur, Director.
IV . Amity Law School, Amity University, Noida, UP
1. Maj. Gen. (Prof.) Nilendra Kumar, Director;
2. Mr. Indranil Banerjee;
3. Ms. Mokshda Bhushan; and
4. Dr. Kavita Surabhi.
V. Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri Y . K. Singh, Deputy Legislative Adviser.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. He then apprised that
the Bar Council of India, Jindal Global University, Symbiosis Law School and  Amity Law School
have been invited to present their views on the subject “Promotion of Legal Education and
Research under the Advocates Act, 1961”. * * *.
(After the arrival of the witnesses)
3. The Chairman welcomed the Chairperson and Members of Bar Council of India (BCI) to
the meeting on the subject – Promotion of legal Education and Research  under the Advocates Act,
1961.  Thereafter, he requested the Chairperson to make a brief submission on the role and
contribution of the Commission for upholding and promoting standards of legal education and legal
profession in the country.
4. The Chairperson, Bar Council of India in his opening observation submitted that the Bar
Council has been assigned the task of promotion of legal education for the purpose of legal
profession under Section 7 of the Advocates Act, 1961.  That Commission has framed Legal
Education Rules, 2008 under the Advocate Act. Legal Education Committee having representation
of Attorney General for India, Solicitor General of India, legal luminiaries/jurists, academicians and
Vice-Chancellors/Deans of Law Universities/Colleges has been constituted for recognition, affiliation
and inspection of universities/colleges imparting legal education under the Advocates Act, 1961.
5. The Chairman of the Bar Council of India submitted that the Legal Education Committee
is the supreme body which takes vital decision about the grant of recognition or de-recognition
university/institution imparting legal education.  During inspection by the Legal Education
Committee instances of teachers being in the roll of several universities/colleges and the inadequate
infrastructure of colleges have come to the notice of Bar Council.  He apprised that the Bar Council
in 2015 had taken a decision not to give recognition to the new colleges for the forthcoming three
years and had requested State Governments not to give NOC to such private institutions in order
to curb and control the mushroom growth of legal institution.  A Curriculum Development
Committee (CDC) under the Legal Education Committee comprising members from Bar, Bench and
Academia has been constituted for updating curriculum to be followed uniformly by all the
universities/colleges imparting legal education to be in line with contemporary developments/
*** Relates to some other matter.

18
requirements of the legal education.  A Directorate of Education under Legal Education Committee
has been constituted to lay down standards of continuing legal education and uphold and upgrade
standard of legal research and legal profession.  That Directorate has taken up the onerous task
of setting up of Lawyers’ Academy in all States for continual legal training for budding advocates.
Such Advocate Academy has already been established in the State of Kerala and the second one
is offing in the State of Jharkhand.  Through the Certificate of Place of Practice V erification Rules,
the BCI has taken initiative to verify LLB Degree Certificate and licence of all advocates in the legal
profession to identify fake lawyers in the profession.
6.  Members sought data relating to number of law universities/colleges/schools in each State,
student-teacher ratio, infrastructure and faculty position, etc.  Responses of BCI for the steps to
check mushroom growth of private law colleges, falling standard of legal education, large-scale
absentism amongst the students, malpractices in the examination was sought for.  Some of the
Members were of the view that the Bar Council being democratically elected Body should be
equally held responsible for independence of judiciary and felt that active involvement of BCI could
improve standard of legal education and profession.
7. In his opening remarks, the Vice-Chancellor of O.P. Jindal Global University, Haryana gave
an overview of evolution of five years law schools.  While lauding the role of Bar Council in
setting standard of legal education and implementing those standards, he was of the view that
curriculum of law need to be continually updated having specific emphasis upon comparative laws
of other countries, international law and laws on Intellectual Property Rights to keep pace with
development of laws in international arena.  He apprised that most of the brightest law graduates
of five years law school preferred to join the corporate law firms, Legal Process Outsourcing
(LPO), Non-governmental Organization/Inter-governmental Organizations rather than the academics
or litigation.  He requested the Bar Council to urge senior lawyers to play the role of mentor for
the first-generation young law graduates and law students from under-privileged section of society
to enable them to join the Bar.  Like the Bar Council of America, the Bar Council of India should
regulate all sorts of legal education and research as well as profession including entry of
international law firms into our country for the sake of upgrading standard of legal education.
8. Director, Symbiosis Law School, Pune submitted  legal education in the country needs to
be looked in a holistic manner and the present scattered approach needs to be regulated
comprehensively by a body to be known as Indian Council of Legal Research (ICLR) with regional
branches which would audit and review legal education and research to uphold rule of law. She
added that research output would be important for the growth of the profession, however, very
few institutions in the country are seriously engaged in legal research. She added that more
research fellowships, grants and sponsorships should be provided in legal education field along with
a network of national law schools in the country.
9. Director Amity Law School, Amity University submitted that syllabus prescribed by the BCI
happened to be urban oriented and added that law courses relating to tribal issues and agriculture
etc. needed to be introduced in the curriculum. He suggested that senior advocates must also take
social responsibility and contribute atleast one percent of their taxable income to a law college of
their choice as a professional social responsibility to reduce the resource crunch faced by law
schools in the country. He apprised that the teaching in law schools is theoretical in nature and
out of touch with the practical reality. He suggested that compulsory attendance of seventy-five
percent should be done away and more practical training should be introduced in law schools to
make the students more employable in the market.

19
10. Members sought clarifications on certain issues, to which the witnesses responded to and
the Chairman directed them to give written clarifications on issues not responded to.
 (The witnesses then withdrew)
11. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
12. The meeting adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.

20
20
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 28th June, 2016 in Room No. 63, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
8. Shri A. H. Khan Choudhary
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
11. Shri Santosh Kumar
12. Shri B.V . Nayak
13. Dr. A. Sampath
14. Shri M. Udhayakumar
15. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
1. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee then took up the consideration and adoption of the draft Eighty-sixth Report on the
‘Promotion of Legal Education and Research under the Advocates Act, 1961.’ Some Members suggested
the addition of the following lines in the beginning of paragraph six of the recommendations-
*** Relate to some other matters.

21
6. The Committee considers that it is high time now to acknowledge the new dimensions like arbitration,
mediation, consultancy which have now become part of general stream but not necessarily the practicing
lawyers who are to be enrolled under the Advocates Act. These have now become the integral part of the
legal profession through out the world. The Committee impress upon all the institutions imparting legal
education also to focus in these fields as well.’
Some Members suggested that an addition may be made which would provide for training of advocates
in the State Judicial Academies until the Advocates Academies are established in the States in the paragraph
number eight of the recommendations  regarding establishment of Advocates Academy for training of
advocates. Further, it was suggested that the following line may be added at the end of the same
recommendation-
‘which also needed to be nurtured by financial help from the Union Government.’
7. The Members of the Committee congratulated the Chairman on the successful completion of his
tenure as a Member of Parliament.
 (The Committee adjourned to call on the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha)
(The Committee reassembled after call on Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha)
8. The Report was adopted with necessary changes. The Committee authorized Shri Sukhendu Sekhar
Roy, and in his absence Shri Majeed Memon to present the Report to Rajya Sabha and Adv. Joice George and
in his absence, Shri M. Udhayakumar to lay the same in Lok Sabha at the first opportune time of the forth
coming Monsoon Session of  Parliament.
9. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 12.46 P.M.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
State/UT wise details Law Universities and Law Colleges in the country
Sl. No. Name of the State/UT Number of University T otal College
 1. Andhra Pradesh 16 60
 2. Arunachal Pradesh 3 3
 3. Assam 4 29
 4. Bihar 10 28
 5. Chhattisgarh 7 25
 6. Delhi 4 19
 7. Goa 1 2
 8. Jharkhand 5 14
 9. Gujarat 16 78
10. Haryana 20 36
11. Jammu and Kashmir 2 16
12. Himachal Pradesh 8 17
13. Karnataka 6 108
14. Kerala 6 28
15. Madhya Pradesh 13 121
16. Manipur 1 3
17. Maharashtra 14 129
18. Meghalaya 3 6
19. Mizoram 1 1
20. Nagaland 1 3
21. Odisha 7 32
22. Puducherry 1 2
23. Punjab 7 33
24. Rajasthan 32 105
25. Sikkim 2 2
26. Tamil Nadu 7 16
27. Tripura 2 2
28. Uttar Pradesh 32 320
29. Uttarakhand 5 30
30. West Bengal 13 37
T
OTAL 249 1305
25

ANNEXURE-II
Statement of total number of Advocates enrolled with the State Bar Councils
As per Detaild
Sl. No. Name of the Male Female Total As on
St. Bar Council
1. Andhra Pradesh 90,813 31.01.15
2. Assam, Nagaland 23,077 5.3. 2011
3. Bihar 1,06,784 28.02.15
4. Chhattisgarh 25,000 6.2.2015
5. Delhi 74,500 31.12.14
6. Gujarat 59910 17629 77.539 7.2.2015
7. Himachal 6802 1826 8628 31.12.14
Pradesh
8. Jharkhand 25,21 1 15.01.15
9. Karnataka 79.025 31.12.12
10. Kerala 45,945 31.12.12
11. Madhya Pradesh 93.286 13.02.15
12. Maharashtra & 1,03,456 45,000 1,48,456 08.02.15
Goa
13. Orissa 45,087 31.12.13
14. Punjab & 69360 10085 79,445 31.12.14
Haryana
15. Rajasthan 61,377 9982 71,359 8.2.2015
16. Tamil Nadu 67,000 31.08.11
17. Uttarakhand 1 1,749 27.02.15
18. Uttar Pradesh 2,84,249 19,428 3,03,677 31.01.15
19. West Bengal 62,977 31.12.13
20. Jammu & Kashmir 5498 05.03.11
TOTAL 14,45,056
26

ANNEXURE-III
Statement showing the grants released by UGC to individual State Law
Universities during Twelfth Five Year Plan
(` in lakh)
Sl. Name of State/Universities 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
No. (Provisional)
12 3 4 5 6
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. Damodram Sanjivayya National 56.25 0.00 0.00 0.00
Law Univ., Visakhapatnam
ASSAM
2. National Law Univ. and Judicial 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Academy, Guwahati*
BIHAR
3. Chanakya National Law Univ., Patna 0.00 2.00 0.00 0.00
CHHA TTISGARH
4. Hidyatullah National Law Univ., Raipur 265.65 244.39 100.67 234.30
DELHI
5. Indian Law lnstt., New Delhi 000 240.00 0.00 0.00
6. National Law Univ., Dwarka, 119.15 242.39 204.89 142.45
New Delhi
GUJARAT
7. Gujarat National Law Univ., 185.25 217.80 0.00 8.38
Gandhinagar
JHARKHAND
8. National Univ. of Study & Res. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
in Law, Ranchi*
KARNA TAKA
9. National Law School of India 153.18 234.50 68.08 113.51
University, Bangalore
10. Karnataka State Law Univ., Hubli 56.25 11.24 0. 00 0.00
27

28
KERALA
11. National Univ. of Advanced Legal 0.00 200.00 0.00 0.00
Studies, Kaloor, Kochi
MADHY A PRADESH
12. National Law Instt., Bhopal 347.95 249.80 0.00 8.00
ORISSA
13. National Law Univ., Cuttak 0.00 280.00 0.00 37.58
PUNJAB
14. The Rajiv Gandhi National Univ. 246.57 217.12 42.25 519.90
of Law, Patiala
RAJASTHAN
15. Naiionai Law Univ., Jodhpur 132.20 195.00 1.86 0.00
16. Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Univ., Jaipur*
TAMILNADU
17. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Law Univ , 158.12 219.80 0.00 21.82
Chennai
18. Tamilnadu National Law School, 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Tiruchirapalli*
TELANGANA
19. National Academy of Legal 129.03 208.60 166.80 102.12
Studies & Res. Univ.
of Law, Hyderabad
UTTAR PRADESH
20. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia National 90.00 372.47 0.00 4.42
Law Univ., Lucknow
WEST BENGAL
21. The W.B. National Univ. of Juridical 229.85 225.60 0.00 0.00
Science, Kolkata
                             T
OTAL: 2169.45 3378.71 584,55 1 192.48
* These universities are not fit under 12B for receiving central assistance.
12 3 4 5 6