 
1 
 
        
 
 
          PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
          RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
  134 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED THIRD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON "FUNCTIONING OF THE VIRTUAL COURTS/ COURT PROCEEDINGS 
THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCING" 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
(MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2023) 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 11th  December, 2023) 
 

 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs 
 
 
 

 
3 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                           6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                   7 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                              9 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                 13 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                 29                                                                                     
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
(IV) CHAPTER IV                                                                                                                 35                                                                                      
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
RECEIVED   
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                                37                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 

 
4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M. C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
3. Ms. Indira Chaturvedi, Additional Director 
4. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
5. Ms. Chinmayee Chakravarty, Assistant Committee Officer 
 

 
5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby 
present this One Hundred Thirty Fourth Report (134th) on Action Taken on One 
Hundred and Third (103rd) Report of the Committee on "Functioning of the 
Virtual Courts/ Court Proceedings through Video Conferencing"  pertaining to 
the Department Of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice). 
2. The One Hundred and Third Report of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 11th September, 
2020 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 18 th September, 2020.  
3. The Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice) furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and Third Report of the Committee 
on 16 th December, 2020.  The Committee considered the draft One Hundred 
Thirty Fourth Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 07th 
December, 2023.  
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi     
11th December, 2023        SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
              Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
 Committee on Personnel, Public 
 Grievances, Law & Justice 
                                                        
    
 

 
6 
 
ACRONYMS 
BSNL    Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
CIS    Case Information Software  
 CrPC    Criminal Procedure Code 
 DG sets   Diesel Generator Sets 
 EUR    Euro 
4G 4     Generation 
HCL     Hindustan Computers Limited  
ICT     Information and Communication Technology 
IPAB    Intellectual Property Appellate Board 
NCLAT    National Company Law Appellate Tribunal  
NIC     National Informatics Centre 
NJDG   National Judicial Data Grid 
PPP     Public Private Partnership 
SDG     Sustainable Development Goals  
SWAN    State Wide Area Network  
TCS     Tata Consultancy Services 
TDSAT    Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate  
    Tribunal 
UN     United Nations 
UPS     Uninterrupted Power Supply 
USD     United States Dollar 
UYAP    Ulusal Yargi Agi Bilisim Sistemi  
VC     Video Conferencing 
WAN    Wide Area Network 
 Wifi     Wireless fidelity 
  

 
7 
 
R E P O R T 
          This Action Taken Report deals with the action taken by the Department 
of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice) on the recommendations / observations 
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred Third (103 rd) Report on 
"Functioning of the Virtual Courts/ Court Proceedings through Video 
Conferencing", which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 11th September, 
2020 and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 18th September, 2020. 
2.      The Committee had made 34 recommendations/observations in its 103 rd 
Report. Replies of the Department thereto h ave been categorized and 
scrutinized under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. 
These replies have been categorized as follows:  
Chapter – I:    Recommendations/observations (9) which have been 
accepted by the Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.20, 2.43, 3.9, 3.14, 
3.18, 3.26, 3.29, 3.33 and 3.36  of the Report. The Committee is pleased 
to note that the Department has accepted those recommendations.  
Chapter – II: Recommendations/observations (15) which the 
Committee does not des ire to pursue in view of the replies given by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.7, 2.9, 2.24, 2.38, 2.41, 2.49, 2.53, 
2.65, 2.66, 3.20, 3.28, 3.32, 3.34, 3.35 and 3.37 of the Report. The 
Committee is satisfied with the explanations advanced by the  
Department and does not wish to pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:   Recommendations/observations (7) in respect of which 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. with 
regard to paras 2.10, 2.13, 2.15, 2.26, 2.48, 3.4 and 3.30 o f the Report. 
The Committee does not accept the reasons given by the Department and 
reiterates the same. 
Chapter – IV: Recommendations/observations (3) in respect of which 
final replies of the Government have not been received. The Committee 
expresses its deep concern that it did not receive the replies from the 
Government in respect of Committee's recommendations vide Para Nos. 
2.17, 3.5 and 3.6. 
 

 
8 
 
3.      The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective 
Chapters in the succeeding pages. For ref erence purpose, para numbers 
of the original report (i.e. of 103 rd Report) have been mentioned at the 
end of each recommendation/observation.                                                     
--- 

 
9 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
1.0    The Committee understands how poor quality audio/video, frequent loss 
of connection, disruptions and high latency affects judicial assessment of 
demeanour, emotions and other nonverbal cues and the changing  
communication dynamics which are also important variables in deciding a case. 
The Committee is of the view that improving the quality of Courtroom 
technology is a necessary pre condition for virtualization of Court proceedings. 
The Committee a lso recommends that a study of Courtroom design be 
commissioned and customized software and hardware to facilitate Virtual Court  
hearings be developed to suit the needs of Indian judiciary.   
  (Para 2.20) 
Action Taken 
1.1    To study Court Room design to facilitate Video Conferencing a committee 
has been constituted by Department of Justice comprising of members from 
Central Public Works Department (CPWD), Central Project Coordinator (CPC) 
of the High Courts of Delhi, Bombay, Telangana, and Allahabad as we ll as 
representative of the Department of Justice. The committee was of the view that 
since the court halls are already in existence, the support needed will be in the  
form of software augmentation. for software , Department  of  Justice  has 
released  funds amounting  to Rs. 50.5 Cr towards strengthening the VC 
infrastructure in Courts which includes setting up of VC cabins, purchase of VC 
equipment and additional VC licenses. In addition the eSewa kendras are also to 
act as an enabler in this direction. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
1.2    The Committee recommends that Block chain technology should be 
leveraged to improve reliability of evidence and security of transactions and to 
fortify digital security of case files. Proper standardized systems of 
authentication need to be put in place. Online systems should be underpinned by 
proper procedural safeguards.  
                                                                                                               (Para 2.43) 

 
10 
 
Action Taken 
1.3    The abo ve recommendation of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing 
Committee is noted for future guidance. 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
1.4    The Committee also feels that at present, there is an enormous gulf 
between knowing one’s rights and being able to enforce th em. Only well 
resourced individuals/organizations are able to deploy lawyers and fight for 
justice. Virtual Courts have the potential to bridge the gap between people 
knowing the law and being able to enforce their entitlements, thereby creating a 
level playing field between the affluent and the less well off, between those who 
have always had Courts at their disposal and those who have always felt 
alienated. In the opinion of the Committee, Virtual Courts deliver ‘Enforceable 
Justice’.                                (Para 3.14) 
Action Taken 
1.5    The above recommendations of the Committee are duly noted for future 
guidance. 
  RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.6        The Committee is of the opinion that introduction of Virtual Courts 
would result in an improvement over traditional Courts as they are more 
affordable, citizen friendly and offers greater access to justice. They yield 
substantial savings in costs for both individual litigants and Courts. Traditional 
Courts, by and large, are accessible to ve ry few people and even then only at 
disproportionate expense and effort, Virtual Courts can help overcome these 
injustices.                                                      (Para 3.18) 
 Action Taken 
1.7    The above recommendations of the Committee are  duly noted for future 
guidance. 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
1.8    The Committee is of the opinion that a full fledged Virtual Court should 
be piloted in the first instance. This allows the system to be tested in practice 
which can then be refined in the light of the feedback received from different 

 
11 
 
stakeholders. I t also enables the judiciary to identify the type of cases best 
suited to Virtual Courts.                                                                                           
(Para 3.29) 
Action Taken 
1.9    The eCommittee of Supreme Court of India, ha s opined that the 
suggestion of full -fledged virtual court to conduct regular court proceedings 
needs the pre creation of digital infrastructure and portability of judicial data on 
virtual platform. eCommittee is already working on the projects of digitiza tion 
of Judicial record, provisions for live streaming of court proceedings and 
paperless court. The advanced version of e -filing is also rolled out for the use of 
advocates and litigants. The High Courts can identify the categories of cases 
suitable for hearing on virtual platform. 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
1.10          The Committee fully understands that Virtual Courts have their own 
shortcomings, however they constitute an advancement over the existing 
system, and therefore, on the overall, they are worth embracing. These current 
shortcomings might be overcome through existing and emerging technologies. 
Periodical interaction of bar and bench with the technical persons by 
establishing committees in each Courts/Tribunal will help sort out the 
grievances relating to Virtual Courts and other   issues then and 
there.                                                                                    (Para 3.28) 
Action Taken 
1.11 These recommendations of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on bar and  bench interactions have been noted for future 
compliance. 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
1.12    In 19th Century, Justice Benjamin Cardoso said, “New times demand 
new measures and new men” in the field of law or elsewhere. This statement is 
very much relevant to the current situation. The Committee is of the considered 
opinion that traditional Courtrooms may well remain necessary for our future, 
but they are certainly not sufficient. There is a need to integrate Virtual Courts 
into the country’s legal ecosystem.                                                                   
(Para 3.32) 

 
12 
 
Action Taken 
1.13    The above recommendations of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee 
of hybrid model of use of virtual platforms along with traditional courtroom 
hearings has been noted for future guidance. 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
1.14      In respect of complex cases such as those involving interpretation of 
Law, facts, examination of a large number of witnesses and so forth, a hybrid 
model may be adopted wherein manual processes such as filing of plaint, 
vakalatnama, issuing of summons etc. may be automated and digitized and the 
hearing may be held in a physical Courtroom.                                                       
                    (Para 3.34) 
Action Taken 
1.15   The above recommendations of the Parliament Committee are duly 
noted. 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
1.16    The concept of Virtual Courts has gained immense ground during 
COVID-19 Pandemic times. It is and will remain the new reality and the new 
normal. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the concept of Virtual 
Courts may well be extended to cover arbitration hearings, conciliation and 
Summary trials. For instance, if national and international arbitrations are 
allowed to be conducted through Vir tual Courts, there will be hardly any 
requirement for real time travel to distant locations. The Committee believes 
that this move will unlock the Courts and also mitigate the inconvenience of 
attending Courts as long distance travels can be dispensed with  and proceedings 
become less expensive as well.                                                  (Para 3.37) 
Action Taken 
1.17    The above recommendations of the Parliament Committee are duly 
noted. 
   
*** 

 
13 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.0    Department of Justice in its written replies to the Committee submitted 
that E-Seva kendras have been established in all the High Co urts and in one 
District Court in each state as a part of a pilot project to provide assistance to 
lawyers and litigants ranging from information to facilitation and eFiling. The 
Committee is highly appreciative of this initiative and believes that E-Seva 
Kendras will go a long way in bridging the ‘access divide’ and hopes that such 
facilitation centres be set up in all Court complexes across the country at the 
earliest. The Committee recommends that the feasibility of involving private 
agencies/service pro viders who can help people who are not tech savvy in 
connecting with Courts by taking VC equipment to their door steps on payment 
may be explored.                                                      (Para 2.7)     
Action Taken 
2.1  For making eFiling more  citizen centric and to mitigate the handicaps 
caused by digital divide, pilot eSewa Kendras are being rolled out for lawyers 
and litigants in all High Courts and in one district court in each State. 
Department of Justice in consultation with the eCommitte e has sanctioned Rs. 
12.54 Cr for setting up eSewa Kendras at 235 locations. So far, e -Sewa 
Kendras have been established in 19 High Courts and 219 District Court 
Complexes. This facility will be extended at all Court Complexes in India. 
eSewa Kendras are being set up at the entry points of the court complexes 
with the intention of facilitating the lawyer or litigant who needs any kind of 
assistance ranging from information to facilitation and e -filing.  The litigant or 
lawyer coming to court who is not tec h savvy or lacks the hardware facilities 
can avail these facilities by simply approaching the staff available at these 
Kendras. It will provide assistance to the litigants to know their case status, to 
get judgments / Orders, to eFile a case and to access all the court / case related 
information. These digitization initiatives will add to judicial efficiency, 
judicial productivity, reduce costs and make access to justice delivery system 
swifter and easier. 

 
14 
 
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.2    As regards conn ectivity divide, the Committee recommends the Ministry 
of Communications to step up efforts to ensure timely implementation of 
National Broadband mission which envisages broadband access to all so that the 
services provided by indigenous communication sate llites are fully harnessed 
and the goal of Universal broadband access is achieved.                                        
                                                                            (Para 2.9) 
Action Taken 
2.3    The Ministry of Communicati on through the National Broadband Mission 
aims to facilitate fast track growth of digital communications infrastructure; 
bridge the digital divide; enable digital empowerment and inclusion; and 
provide affordable and universal access of broadband for all. A Broadband 
Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Telecom) has also 
been constituted to facilitate implementation and progress of mission activities; 
to set targets and approve annual mission plan; and to address inter -
departmental and st ate related execution issues. Majority of the States/Union 
territories have constituted their respective State Broadband Committees to 
facilitate effective implementation of the Mission.  
Department of Justice (DoJ) is the implementing authority in respect of 
Wide Area Network (WAN) Project which is component of eCourts Phase II 
project. The project was awarded to BSNL on a nomination basis. The project 
entails providing Multi -Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) connectivity at 2992 
Court complexes located all o ver India with bandwidth 10 Mbps and above and 
constitutes the backbone of the eCourts Project. As on date, out of 2992 links, 
2930 links have been commissioned (98%). Many courts under the eCourts 
project are located in far flung areas where terrestrial c able cannot be used for 
providing connectivity. Such sites are termed as Technically Not Feasible 
(TNF) sites. The Department has been able to reduce the total TNF sites from 
58 in 2019 to 11 in 2020 and connectivity has been provided by conventional 
means. Additionally, there are 10 TNF sites in the U.T. of Jammu & Kashmir 
where BSNL is working on providing connectivity to 09 of these sites using 
VSAT technology. 5 TNF sites in Andaman & Nicobar Island are proposed to 
be connected through under sea Sub-marine Cable (SMC). 
  
  

 
15 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.4        The Committee recommends the Department of Justice to step up 
efforts to provide WAN connectivity and superior quality videoconferencing 
facilities to all Court complexes across the country under Phase II of e Courts 
project more ambitiously within the prescribed timeline.   The Committee 
recommends that Government may explore the feasibility of roping in the 
private sector to eliminate the technical glitches and improve service quality, if 
need be.  The Committee appreciates the proposal to establish a centralized 
Video conferencing infrastructure and hopes that the proposal will be 
materialized soon.                                                               (Para 2.24) 
  
Action Taken 
2.5     Department of Justice (DoJ) is implementing the WAN Project which is a 
component of eCourts Phase -II. The project was awarded to BSNL on a 
nomination basis. The project entails providing Multi -Protocol Label Switching 
MPLS connectivity at 2992 Court comple xes located all over India with 
bandwidth 10 Mbps and above. As on date, out of 2992 links, 2930 links have 
been commissioned (98%). Many courts under the eCourts project are located in 
far flung areas where terrestrial cable cannot be used for providing c onnectivity. 
Such areas are termed as Technically Not Feasible (TNF) sites. The Department 
has been able to reduce the total TNF sites from 58 in 2019 to 11 in 2020 and 
connectivity has been provided by conventional means. Additionally, there were 
10 TNF s ites in the U.T. of Jammu & Kashmir where BSNL is working on 
providing connectivity to 09 of these sites using VSAT technology. 5 TNF sites 
in Andaman & Nicobar Island are proposed to be connected through Sub - 
marine cable (SMC). 
      With the sudden outb reak of COVID -19 pandemic, virtual courts 
have now become a necessity as Judges, Lawyers and Litigants are unable to 
visit the Courts physically and the need to maintain social distance. Due to this, 
Hon. Supreme Court and most of the other Courts in the c ountry have started 
using Video Conferencing (VC) facility to conduct hearing of cases. NIC 
proposed various solutions, endorsed by MeitY, such as subscription of 
licenses, On Premise VC solution etc. Considering the sanctity and security of 
data, after mu ch deliberations it was decided to continue with on -premise 
version of Vidyo VC solution which is being utilized in eCourts project since 
last 5 years. The upgraded version of VidyoConnect has been launched now 
which has features that are at par with the o ther standard VC solutions and has a 

 
16 
 
better dashboard which is customized as per the functioning of courts. NIC has 
procured and deployed 1000 VC licenses of VidyoConnect and is in process of 
procuring another 500 licenses, out of which 1000 licenses are p roposed to be 
given to the Supreme Court of India. Under ‘Atma Nirbhar Bharat’ initiative of 
Govt. of India, MeitY has evaluated and shortlisted an indigenously developed 
VC solution made by “M/s Techgentsia Software Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 
(Vconsol), Alappuzha,” which can be a viable alternative to existing third -party 
VC solutions being used. The Jury also identified three (3) potential VC 
products which were also considered to be good and were shortlisted for 
handholding and mentorship to help them develo p into robust VC products. 
These solutions are being tested for functioning in Court environment. 
Currently, NIC is availing services from private sector partners/ Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) in hardware/cloud support and imparting 
trainings. Capacity Building Trainings are necessary to acclimatize the lawyers, 
plaintiffs with the operation and function of IT based solutions adopted in the 
Courts. 
  
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.6    The Committee thinks that third -party software is not only an un viable 
option but poses a major security risk as such software programs and 
applications are prone to hacking and manipulation. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology to address data privacy and data security 
concerns while developing a new platform for India’s judicial 
system.                                                                          (Para 2.41) 
 Action Taken 
2.7    Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (Mei tY) has 
informed that while developing a new application for video conferencing (VC), 
security aspects will have to be taken care of at the designing stage of the 
system/application. Regular security audit may be done through the Indian 
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) empanelled auditors. The 
remote access to the centralized VC system may be extended through 
encrypted channel so that it is not tapped. In addition to data privacy and data 
security issue, the centralised VC system may be developed using secure 
development technique such as DevOpsSec. 

 
17 
 
The e -Committee of Supreme Court of India, has stated that necessary 
precautions have been taken for data security and data privacy in all e -Courts 
software applications. The e -Courts applications are b eing launched for public 
access only after due security audit and certification by the CERT -in 
empanelled auditors. E -Courts websites are publishing information after 
masking data which affects the privacy of citizens, e.g. in matrimonial matters 
and POCSO  cases names are masked and related judgments/orders are 
available only to the concerned parties. 
  
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.8    The Committee believes that Legal technology Start ups engaged in 
innovative solutions can play a crucial role in harness ing the unlimited 
potential of technology to connect stakeholders in the justice delivery system 
and in finding solutions that are affordable and efficient and therefore 
recommends the Government to promote them.                                                     
                                                                                            (Para 2.49) 
Action Taken 
2.9     It has been informed by MeitY that as the overarching platform of MeitY 
Start-up Hub (MSH) is cut out for synthesizing, coordinating and networking 
the entire gamut of technology startup ecosystem in the country, therefore legal 
technology start - ups can also connect with MSH platform to showcase their 
enterprise, take advantage of different facilities and expand their netw ork. 
The e-Committee of Supreme Court of India is of the view that the Legal 
Technology start -ups can participate and contribute to innovative solutions to 
connect stakeholders in the system. The use of Open Application Programming 
Interface (API) for sharing of judicial data with institutional litigants is also an 
innovative solution in harnessing the unlimited potential of technology to 
connect stakeholders in the justice delivery system and in finding solutions that 
are affordable and efficient to tr ack the cases centrally at institutional level. 
Institutional litigants along with tracking the cases centrally can also monitor 
readiness of the case, manage pendency, manage compliances etc. from the 
litigant’s perspective. 
  
  
 

 
18 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.10    The Committee is constrained to note that District and Subordinate 
Courts lack basic infrastructure and are experiencing difficulties in adapting to 
Virtual Court system. The Committee understands that transition from physical 
Courtrooms to Virtu al Courtrooms requires massive investment in basic 
infrastructure required to support digitized Court hearings such as electronic 
case files, equipment to project documents and images, audio and video tools to 
record hearings, videoconferencing and reliabl e WiFi needs to be put in place. 
Since transition to Virtual Courts requires high initial investment, the 
Committee desires that feasibility of new financing approaches such as PPP 
model may be examined. The committee also feels that since the stake holder s 
are advocates, the Bar council of India should advise the respective state bar 
councils to conduct crash classes to equip the advocates for handling 
Online/Virtual Courts. The Bar Council of India should also address the 
problems of advocates hailing fro m the weaker sections relating to acquisition 
of necessary infrastructure to support online Virtual Courts in view of the 
transition having taken place suddenly.                                                                       
                 (Para 2.53) 
Action Taken 
2.11 The above recommendation of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing 
Committee has been seen by the eCommittee of Supreme Court of India, which 
has opined that the e-Committee through its Master Trainers (Judicial Officers) 
has conducted D istrict Level awareness programmes for Advocates on e -
Courts services across the country in their respective regional languages. 
Around 96,775 advocates have participated virtually in these awareness 
programmes. The eCommittee has also taken the initiative  to train advocates 
who in turn will work as Master Trainers, to disseminate information of 
eCourts projects to litigants and advocates to educate them to handle e -filing 
and virtual court modalities. 
   
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.12    The Committee is unhappy to note that e Courts Integrated Mission 
mode project is progressing at a tortoise’s pace. Without proper infrastructure in 
place, Virtual hearing of cases is an impossible proposition. Moreover, the 
Committee feels that the benefi ts of Virtual Courts will percolate down only 
when all Court Complexes are fully ICT enabled. The Committee strongly 

 
19 
 
recommends the Department of Justice to take stock of the situation, introspect, 
identify the bottlenecks and take necessary remedial measu res to ensure that the 
targets are achieved more ambitiously in prescribed timeframe.  
    (Para 2.65) 
Action Taken 
2.13    Department of Justice (DoJ) has been at the centre stage for ushering in 
the technological interventions in eCourts project for the benefit of litigant and 
advocates alike. Few of the major achievements of the project are as below:  
The e -Courts Mission Mode Project was a follow up on the National 
Policy and Action Plan for ICT in Judiciary of 2005. The Phase -I 
implementation started fr om 2007 with a total expenditure of Rs. 639.41 Cr. 
The Phase-II of the Project started from 2015 and is continuing. As against the 
budget outlay of Rs.1670 Cr, Rs.1536.43 Cr (92%) has been released. Till now 
16,845 courts have been computerized with softwa re compatibility and 
interoperability. Hardware (Computers, Printers, Kiosks, DG Sets, Display 
Boards, LAN, Scanners, UPS etc) have been provided to all the Courtrooms. 
During the eCourts Project Phase -II, 2992 court complexes were to be 
connected through Wide Area Network (WAN), out of which 2930 (98%) 
court complexes have already been connected. As per the   eTaal portal which 
records government electronic transactions, during the period, from December 
2019 to December 2020, 230 Cr e -transactions have been recorded for eCourts 
projects and is ranked first amongst Mission Mode Projects which speaks 
volumes for the popularity and reach of the e-Court services. 
National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) has been operationalized to create a 
real-time database in public  domain of pending/disposed cases and 
orders/judgments of Subordinate Courts and High Courts. Using elastic search 
technology, it has emerged as a monitoring tool to manage case pendency 
(2015). NJDG has a real time data base of 17.55 Cr pending / disposed  cases as 
well as 13.16 Cr orders passed by the Courts as on 1 st December, 2020. 
Under the e -Courts Project, an e -filing application has been developed 
and in the year 2018, an e -filing system Version 1.0 was created and a portal 
for this purpose (e -Filing.ecourts.gov.in) was started. Now more user -friendly 
versions 2.0 and 3.0 have been developed with advanced features.  
To tackle digital divide and provide internet access for e -filing to 
lawyers and litigants, pilot e -Sewa Kendras rolled out to cover all High Courts 
and all District Courts. Currently e -Sewa Kendras are functioning in all High 

 
20 
 
Courts and one district court  in each state as a pilot project. Funds have been 
provided for an additional 235 e-Sewa Kendras. 
E-filing of cases requires facilities for e -payments of court fees. Online 
payment of court fees, fines, penalties and judicial deposits has been initiated 
through https://pay.ecourts.gov.in from 14th August 2018. 21 States have 
already amended the Court Fees Act for this purpose.  
With the outbreak of Covid -19 pandemic, accelerated impetus has been 
given to hearings through Videoconferencing. One video conferen ce 
equipment each has been provided to all Court Complexes including Taluk 
Level Court Complexes in rural areas (14,443 VC equipment) under the Phase 
II of the e -Courts Project for virtual hearings with the total estimated 
cost  of  Rs.28.89  Cr.  Rs.5.01  Cr  have  been  allocated  for  providing 
equipment in Video Conferencing cabins in various court complexes to 
facilitate virtual hearings. 
The Subordinate courts conducted 35,93,831 hearings and the High 
Courts conducted 13,74,048 hearings during the loc kdown period, totaling to 
more than 49 lakh cases. While the Supreme Court of India has conducted over 
30,000 virtual hearings during the lockdown period till 13.11.2020. VC facility 
has also been operationalized between 3240 court complexes and 1272 
corresponding jails. 
For convenience of litigants and to save judicial manpower, Virtual 
Courts have been set up in major cities to try petty traffic offences including 
online realization of fines (2019 & 2020). Currently there are 9 Virtual courts 
functioning in India - Delhi (2 Courts), Haryana (Faridabad), Maharashtra 
(Pune), Chennai, Karnataka (Bengaluru), Maharashtra (Nagpur), Assam 
(Guwahati) and Kerala (Kochi). They are all dealing with Traffic Challan cases 
only. Over 35 lakh cases (35,02,896) have been h andled by 9 virtual courts and 
in more than 11 lakhs (11,53,704) cases online fine for more than Rs. 130.72 
Cr has been realised till 8th December,  2020. 
To make effective use of database created through National Judicial 
Data Grid (NJDG) and to make the information available to public, Justice 
Clocks (LED Display Message Sign Board System) have been installed at 18 
High Courts, Allahabad and its Lucknow bench, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Guwahati (4 benches - Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland, Assam) , 
Calcutta, Jharkhand, Meghalaya, Telangana, Manipur, Madhya Pradesh (3 
benches), Odisha, Madras, Telangana, Tripura,   Kerala, Sikkim, Rajasthan (2 
benches), Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. One justice clock is also 
installed at Department of Justice, Jaisalmer House. 

 
21 
 
To conduct awareness programme for advocates on e -Filing and ECMT 
tools under e -Court Services, training of trainers has already been undertaken 
by e -Committee of the Supreme Court at the National and State level. For a 
wider reach, e -Courts Services YouTube channel was launched, and all the 
video tutorials uploaded to the said YouTube channel. Currently this channel 
has 11000 subscribers and been viewed 104020 times. 12 Help videos on e -
Filing in 7 regional languages apart from Hindi and Eng lish were prepared and 
circulated for the advocates as part of awareness raising programme. The 
videos are available in the e -filing portal help desk and also in the social media 
through the e -Committee YouTube channel. A Manual on e -Filing titled as 
“Step by Step Guide for e-Filing” has been prepared and made available on the 
e-Filing portal, in both English and Hindi, for use of advocates and litigants. It 
has also been released in 11 regional languages. A Brochure in English and 
Hindi on “How to register for e-Filing” has been made available on the e-Filing 
portal for the use of lawyers. It has also been released in 12 regional languages.  
A new software patch and court user manual for COVID -19 
management has also been developed. This tool has been develop ed to help in 
smart scheduling of cases thereby enabling judicial officers to retain urgent 
cases and adjourn cases not urgent on cause list. This is expected to effectively 
manage overcrowding in courts and provide for issue of digital passes to 
maintain social distancing of litigants and lawyers. Courts can hear urgent 
cases in scheduled time slots and accommodate the convenience of lawyers to 
prevent conflicting engagements. This has become possible as this patch 
indicates the occupancy of a lawyer not o nly in a  particular 
court but  in  multiple  other courts.  A user manual for this patch has also been 
issued for the ease of the stakeholders. 
A Common Software application CIS NC 3.2 with latest features has 
been developed for all District Courts for man aging day to day processes like 
cause list, daily proceedings, business, disposal and uploading of orders and 
judgments by Court Staff. E -Courts Services are providing citizen centric 
services through 7 platforms or service delivery channels. Information o n case 
status, cause lists, judgments etc., are provided. This comprises of the 
following means: 
  

 
22 
 
I. SMS Push and Pull: About 35,000 SMSs are sent every single day. 
II. Email: Information regarding cases can also be received in the litigants’ mailbox on 
registration of email address. About 3,50,000 emails are sent every day. 
III. Ecourts Portal providing links for all e court  services.  This portal records about 25 
lakh hits daily 
IV. Judicial Service Centres (JSC) have been established at all computerized courts to 
serve as a single window for filing petitions and applications by litigants / lawyers, 
and for obtaining information on ongoing cases and copies of orders and judgments 
etc. 
V. Information Kiosks: Touch Screen Information Kiosks have   been set up at all 
computerized court complexes for disseminating judicial information related to cause 
lists and other case related information to the lawyers and litigants. 
VI. Mobile App for e court services for th e public was launched in  
2017.  The  total  number  of  downloads  have  crossed 49.50 lakhs.  The JustIS App 
for judicial officers has been downloaded 14091 times till date. 
The Department of Justice is conscious of the need to make the ICT 
enablement of Judiciary more robust and will c ontinue to put all efforts in this 
direction with the same spirit as has been recommended by the Hon’ble 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.14    The Committee notes that the Apex Court, High Courts and Subordinate 
Courts are at different stages of ICT enablement. Moreover, the world has seen 
staggering technological changes in the last decade. The Committee feels that 
there is a need to revise the National policy and Action plan for implementation 
of ICT in the Indian Judiciar y which was brought out in 2005.   Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the policy needs to be evaluated and revised in 
the light of transformation of legal landscape in the last fifteen years and a 
drive towards digital justice.                                                                                  
(Para 2.66) 
 Action Taken 
2.15    In view of the great strides taken in the field of ICT and to align the e 
Court project with the latest developments in this field, a study has been 
fielded by the eCommittee of Supreme Court of India for creating the Vision 
Document for Phase III of the e -Courts project. The Committee consists of 
representatives from the judiciary, domain experts ICT, Civil society 
organisations etc. for better appreciation of the p erspective of civil society and 
domain experts from the private sector on the e -Courts project. It is tasked with 

 
23 
 
determining the core components of the Phase -III, prioritizing solutions for 
conceptualising, designing and developing different use cases an d prototypes 
to be piloted across courts in India, develop SOPs which will govern the use of 
technological interventions deployed under the project etc.  
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.16  The Committee believes that Virtual Courts can better promote the 
principle of Distributive Justice. Distributive Justice requires that Court services 
should be accessible to all and that the service should be affordable by all. No 
member of the general public should be disadvantaged by locational or 
economic handicaps or otherwise. The Committee is of the opinion that Digital 
Justice is cheaper and faster. People living in remote and far flung areas can also 
take part in Court proceedings through videoconferencing without having to 
spend a fortune to set foot in the Courtroom.                                                           
(Para 3.9) 
  
Action Taken 
2.17  Under the e -Courts Project, all the e -Courts services are provided free of 
cost. To ensure accessibility of eCourts services to all, even at remote places,           
e-Sewa Kendras are being set up in all Court Complexes to provide eCourts 
services free of cost to the litigants. 
  
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.18  In the opinion of the Committee, Virtual Courts can better promote the 
principle of Proportionate Justice. The principle of Proportionate Justice 
requires that the expense, speed, complexity and the extent of combativeness of 
any case should be proportionate to the substance and scale of that case. The 
Committee feels that there should be some mechanism to segregate simple cases 
from complex ones. In simple terms, one should not use a sledge hammer to 
crack a nut. Petty cases should be dealt with swiftly in a reasonable timeframe. 
Such cases should not require cumbersome procedures.  
                             (Para3.20)  
  
 

 
24 
 
Action Taken 
2.19    Virtual Courts are a step away from process automation to 
transformative change from the conventional brick and mortar court 
architecture. Virtual courts have been rolled out to try traffic challa n cases and 
have met with appreciable results. Over 35 lakh cases (35,02,896) have been 
handled by 9 virtual courts and in more than 11 lakhs (11,53,704) cases online 
fine for more than Rs. 130.72 Cr has been realised until till 8 th December, 
2020. Present ly there are 9 such courts in 8 States / UTs viz. Delhi (2), 
Faridabad, Chennai, Bengaluru, Kochi, Nagpur, Guwahati and Pune. It is 
proposed to extend such courts in all metro cities and one for rural areas in 
each state. The ambit and scope of Virtual Cou rts can be extended to cover 
other offences like NI offences. Given the need to progressively make justice 
more and more accessible Delhi High Court has established 34 digital courts to 
handle cheque bounce cases by video conferencing. A Handbook entitled 
“Digital NI Courts-Project Implementation guidelines have also been issued by 
them. 
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.20  The Committee is of the view that  digital transformation of the Judiciary 
has important implications for clearing the significant backlog  of cases 
which the judiciary is burdened with. Technology may, in fact, be a catalyst 
for simplifying processes and making manual processes redundant. It will 
make justice accessible and affordable to a large section of the population 
and help in overcomi ng physical and logistical barriers which prevent many 
litigants from seeking justice.                                                                                
(Para 3.26) 
 Action Taken 
2.21  The pandemic has highlighted the importance of ICT in the Judicial 
Domain. The e -Committee is working on Digitization of Court records and 
cases. The transformation of judicial record and proceedings in digital format 
will enable access to court proceeding s on virtual platform. A Working Group 
has been formed by the Chairperson, e -Committee including experts of Centre 
for Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC) and NIC to prepare the 
Digital Preservation SOP and technical implementation plan for the entire  
Courts of the country. The project report prepared by the Working Group will 
be the base for future paperless and digital court project. The project report is 

 
25 
 
prepared considering the international standards of data preservation 
methodology, security mana gement and open standards which will enable 
exchange of data in different technologies. The steps are also taken for 
interoperability of data among Court, Police, Prison and Forensic Laboratories.  
National Service and Tracking of Electronic Processes (NSTE P) is another 
tool for reducing inordinate delays in process serving. It provides for 
Centralized process service tracking application and used for speedy delivery of 
processes. All these steps are the way ahead for simplifying processes in the 
judicial system. 
  
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.22     To begin with, Judiciary may identify categories of cases that can be 
tried by Virtual Courts. Department of Justice in its written replies to the 
Committee submitted that the following cases may be tried in the  Virtual Court-
Offences under Motor Vehicles Act (Traffic Challan cases), Petty offences 
where summons can be issued under Section 206 of CrPC., Cases registered 
under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, Motor Accident Claim 
Petition cases. The Comm ittee is of the view that all such matters where 
personal presence may be dispensed with, can be transferred from regular Court 
establishments to Virtual Courts. The Committee believes that Virtual 
adjudication will bring massive benefits across the system.                       
                                                                                                              (Para 3.33) 
Action Taken 
  
2.23  Virtual Courts are a step away from process automation to transformative 
change from the conventional brick and mortar court architecture. Virtual courts 
have been rolled out to try traffic challan cases and have met with appreciable 
results. Over 35 lakh cases (35,02,896) have been handled by 9 virtual courts 
and in more than 11 lakhs (11,53, 704) cases online fine for more than Rs. 
130.72 Cr has been realised until till 8 th December 2020. Presently there are 9 
such courts in 8 States / UTs viz. Delhi (2), Faridabad, Chennai, Bengaluru, 
Kochi,  Nagpur, Gauhati and Pune. It is proposed to extend  such courts in all 
metro cities and one for rural areas in each state. The ambit and scope of Virtual 
Courts can be extended to cover other offences like NI offences. Given the need 
to progressively make justice more and more accessible Delhi High Court h as 
established 34 digital courts to handle cheque bounce cases by video 

 
26 
 
conferencing. A Handbook entitled “Digital NI Courts -Project Implementation 
guidelines have also been issued by them. 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.24  Since integration of Virtual cou rts into the legal ecosystem will have a 
significant impact on all stakeholders, the Committee feels that Members of Bar 
Associations and Bar councils must also be involved in evolving a consensual 
process. This would avoid unnecessary opposition and 
irritants.                                              (Para 3.35) 
Action Taken 
2.25 The eCommittee of Supreme Court of India, has stated that the inputs of 
Bar Council and Bar Associations are always taken in account. The 
introduction of new version of e -filing 3.0 rolled out by eCommittee has 
addressed the issues of advocates while e -filing the cases. The e-Filing Version 
3.0 has several novel features that will reduce the physical movements of 
Advocates and Clients to courts or even office of Advocates just for signing the 
pleadings or recording of Oath. The data of registered advocates from State Bar 
Council is used in the e -Filing software. Registration of Advocate in the e -
filing software has been simplified. By just entering the Bar Enrolment 
Number entir e data of Advocate including mobile number, address, practice 
locations etc is fetched. By getting OTP on the mobile number registered with 
Bar Council and further validating it, Advocate can sign up with e -Filing 
portal. Facility is created in NJDG especi ally for Bar Council office to monitor 
and promote e -Filing, to authenticate Advocates whose mobile number is 
incorrect, add new Advocates etc.   Adding Partners/Colleagues/Associates, 
Online vakalatnama, Online Video Recording of Oath are some of the 
important features available in the e-Filing software version 3.0. 
The involvement of advocates in integration of virtual court system is 
also achieved by eCommittee by conducting training programmes for the 
advocates across the country in regional languages and further involving them 
as Master trainers to conduct trainings. During the pandemic period from May 
2020 to December 2020 the eCommittee has conducted 19 training and 
awareness programme and has trained nearly 1,67,790 (one Lakh sixty -seven 
thousand se ven hundred and ninety) stakeholders which includes 96577 
Advocates. Advocate Master Trainers are also proposed to be trained by 
eCommittee, thereby involving the advocates in the process of disseminating 
information about eCourts initiatives among litigants and advocates. 

 
27 
 
  
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.26    The facility of Virtual Courts extended to lawyers should also be 
considered for extension to private litigants who appear in person or have to 
travel to High Courts from different states and cities and places. This would go 
a long way in strengthening public confidence and improving perception about 
the reachability of the judicial 
system.                                                                               
             (Para 3.36) 
Action Taken 
 
2.27    For making EFiling more citizen centric and to mitigate the handicaps 
caused by digital divide, pilot eSewa Kendras are being rolled out for lawyers 
and litigants in all High Courts and in one district court in each State.   eSewa 
Kendras are being set up at the entry points of the   court complexes with the 
intention of facilitating the lawyer or litigant who need any kind of assistance 
ranging from information to facilitation and EFiling. Department of Justice in 
consultation with the eCommitt ee has sanctioned Rs. 12.54 Cr for setting up 
eSewa Kendras at 235 locations. 
Further, Virtual Courts have been rolled out to try traffic challan cases 
and have met with appreciable results. The concept of Virtual Courts will 
reduce the pendency of cases t remendously, considering the large number of 
traffic offences and offences under local and special laws. Over 35 lakh cases 
(35,02,896) have been handled by 9 virtual courts and in more than 11 lakhs 
(11,53,704) cases online fine for more than Rs. 130.72 C r has been realised till 
8th  December 2020. 
Accelerated impetus has been given to hearings through Video 
Conferencing. One video conference equipment each has been provided to all 
Court Complexes including Taluk Level Court Complexes in rural areas under 
the Phase II of the e -Courts Project for virtual hearings with the total estimated 
cost of Rs.28.89 Cr. Additionally, the eCommittee of the Supreme Court has 
approved Video Conferencing equipment to be provided to 14,443 court rooms 
in these court complexes. 
The High Courts (13,74,048 hearings) and Subordinate Courts (35,93,831 
hearings) have conducted more than 49 lakh hearings in this manner till 28th 

 
28 
 
October 2020. The facility of Virtual Courts is already available to private 
litigants (party-in-person) and they can appear before the courts using the same 
VC links which are used by advocates. 
   
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.28   The Committee notes that world over, Court proceedings are recorded in 
some form or the other. The apex Court has time and again  emphasized the 
significance of live streaming of Court proceedings in promoting openness and 
transparency which in turn reinforce public faith in judicial system. The 
Committee agrees with the observation made by the apex Court that live 
streaming Court p roceedings, especially cases of constitutional and national 
importance having an impact on public at large or a section of the public will 
promote transparency and openness. The litigant need not come to the Court to 
watch the proceedings and thus will red uce crowding inside the court. The 
Judiciary may also consider broadcasting virtual hearings of certain specified 
categories of cases to further the principle of open justice and open Court.  
                                                                          (Para 2.38) 
   Action Taken 
2.29     In compliance of the orders passed by the Hon’ble Supreme court in 
Writ petition (criminal) No 99 of 2015 (Pradyuman Bisht verses Union of 
India & others as well as the judgement in Writ Petition (Civil) No -66 of 
2018- Indira Jai Singh verses Secretary General of Supreme Court & others, 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India has set up a Committee of 5 judges who 
are Chairpersons of the Computer Committees of the High Courts to oversee 
and assist the eCommittee of the Supreme Court of India in preparing Model 
Rules and guidelines for live streaming of cases heard over video 
conferencing to make the justice delivery mechanism more transparent. The 
guidelines would cover all facets including technologies to be deploye d, 
safeguards and proceedings. Live Streaming of video conferencing of 
proceedings has been initiated in Gujarat. 
  
  
  
  
*** 
  

 
29 
 
                                                           
                                                         CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE 
REASONS GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND 
REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS 
   
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.0   The Committee is of the opinion that the Judiciary may also consider s uch 
innovative solutions as launching mobile videoconferencing facilities for the 
benefit of advocates and people living in remote areas.                                      
(Para 2.10) 
Action Taken 
3.1  The concept of Mobile Video Conferencing has been ta ken up with all 
High Courts. It was also requested that Telangana High Court Mobile Video 
Conferencing facilities may be looked upon as a model case. The status of 
Mobile videoconferencing in the High Courts is as under:  
  
Status                of            Mobil
e Videoconferencing 
Name of High Court 
Implemented Telangana, Himachal Pradesh 
Work In Progress Calcutta, Guwahati, Manipur, Rajasthan and Sikkim 
Proposal still under 
consideration of   High Court/ 
Hon’ble Committee of High 
Court/ 
Allahabad,            Andhra          Pradesh,            Kerala
, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa 
  
Further observation of the Committee 
3.2  The Committee observes that till now only two states have 
implemented this recommendation and set up mobile Video Conferencing 

 
30 
 
facility. For the rest of the states, either the work of implementation is in 
progress or the proposal is under submission. The Committee, therefore 
recommends that the facility of mobile video conferencing in all other High 
Courts may be expedited so that litigants from remote and interior areas 
have access to fast and speedy justice.   
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.3   The Com mittee is of the view that with the advent of Information 
technology, there is not a single facet of human life that is left untouched by it. 
ICT has also transformed the legal landscape in India and the Indian judiciary 
has come a long way from a paper -based era to the one dominated by digital 
technology and is now moving towards cloud based technology. The 
Committee believes that in coming times, technology will emerge as a game 
changer and advocates would be required to use technological skills in 
combination with their specialized legal knowledge and therefore, they should 
keep up with the changing times.                                  (Para 2.13) 
  
3.4   To address ‘skill divide’, the third facet of digital exclusion as mentioned 
previously, the Commi ttee recommends that training and awareness 
programmes should be conducted in all Court complexes across the country 
including Subordinate Courts in order to acquaint advocates with the technology 
and to enable them to acquire skills required for handling digital platforms so 
that advocates operate digital platforms themselves.  
                  (Para 2.15) 
Action Taken 
3.5    The above recommendations of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee 
have been noted by the Department for further guidance. To enable the 
advocates to acquire skills required for handling digital platforms, the 
eCommittee of the Supreme Court of India has been organizing series of 
trainings and seminars for encouraging the lawyer community to adopt the new 
technologies. Webinars on EFili ng for Tamil Nadu, Goa, Maharashtra and 
Delhi Bar Council were organized on 14 th June 2020, which had more than 
19000 viewers. A manual on EFiling entitled as “Step by Step guide for 
EFiling” has been prepared and made available on the EFiling portal in bo th 
Hindi & English for the use of the advocates and litigants. It has been released 
in 11 regional languages. A Brochure on “How to register for EFiling” has 

 
31 
 
been made available on the   eFiling portal for the use of the lawyers. It has 
been released in 12 regional languages. As part of the awareness campaign, a 
You tube channel has been created in the name of the eCourts services where 
video tutorials on e -filing have been made available for larger outreach to the 
stakeholders.  
  
     12 help videos on EFiling in 7 regional languages were prepared and 
circulated for the advocates as part of the awareness raising program. The said 
videos are available in the e- filing portal help desk and also in the social media 
through the e Committee You Tube Channel. Upon upload, it has reached 
11,300 subscribers and more than 10,7321 views in the social media. To 
conduct awareness programme for advocates on eFiling and ECMT tools under 
eCourts services, training of trainers has already been undertaken by the e 
committee of the Supreme Court at the national andthe state level. 25 master 
trainers have been trained in each High Court who in turn will have already 
trained 461 master trainers across the   country. Thus these 461 master trainers 
will in turn be giving trainin g programme in each district of the country for 
advocates in their regional languages and also identify Master Trainer 
Advocates. A district level awareness programme of Advocates on eCourt 
Services EFiling and on manuals/Video tutorials was held on 25.07. 2020 and 
will be now conducted on a regular basis. An eCommittee website has been 
started which gives information about the facilities being made available to the 
lawyers as well as the litigants. 
 The eCommittee of Supreme Court of India, has informed tha t the 
eCommittee during the pandemic period from May 2020 to December 2020 
has conducted 19 training and awareness programme and has trained nearly 
1,67,790 (one Lakh sixty -seven thousand seven hundred and ninety) 
stakeholders which includes Advocates, Hig h Court Judges, Judges of District 
Judiciary, Court Staff, Master Trainers among Judges, Master trainer among 
staff, Technical Staff of High Court. 96,775 Advocates were covered under the 
eCommittee awareness programme conducted during May 2020 to December  
2020. 
  
Further observation of the Committee 
3.6  The Committee applauds the work which has been   done by 
eCommittee of Supreme Court in the field of training and awareness of 
lawyers and other court staff on digital platforms and recommends that an 
endeavour should be made   that these training programmes should receive 

 
32 
 
wide and varied participation  so that maximum lawyers across the country 
shall be trained. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.7    The Committee recommends that Judiciary may consider promoting 
harnessing of renewable energy in all Court complexes as it entails twin benefits 
of uninterrupted power supply and positive ecological impact.            
(Para 2.26) 
Action Taken 
3.10 Government of India under the eCourts Project Phase -II has approved 
solar power in 5% of the Court Complexes. As per the information received 
from High Courts, majority of them have uninterrupted power supply through 
DG sets. Funds for solar Panel were released both by eCommittee and 
respective state governments. 7 High Court s have utilized 100% of funds and 
installed the Solar Panel. The status report as received from 20 High Courts is 
enclosed in Annexure –I. 
  
Further observation of the Committee 
3.8    The Committee takes note of the reply and going by the figures 
quoted in the given Annexure, it is quite clear that only 7 High Courts have 
utilized 100% of funds released both by eCommittee and respective state 
governments for installation of Solar Panels and installed the same and rest 
of the 20 High Courts are still in the  process of doing so. The Committee 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation of harnessing of renewal energy to 
the maximum extent possible by High Courts all across the Country at the 
earliest.  
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.9   The Committee recommends that Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology may be approached by the Administrative Ministry to develop 
indigenous Software applications to handle Virtual Court hearings. The 
Committee also recommends to rope in Private  IT companies, if need be, to 
develop Artificial intelligence systems capable of supporting bulk 

 
33 
 
documentation, remote location of parties and sophisticated use of 
graphics.                                                     (Para 2.48) 
Action Taken 
3.10    Under ‘Atma Nirbhar Bharat’ initiative of Govt. of India, MeitY   has 
evaluated and shortlisted an indigenously developed VC solution made by 
“M/s Techgentsia Software Technologies Pvt. Ltd. (Vconsol), Alappuzha,” 
which can be a viable alternative to exi sting third -party VC solutions being 
used. The Jury has also identified three (3) potential VC products which were 
also considered to be good and were shortlisted for handholding and 
mentorship to help them develop into robust VC products. These solutions are 
being tested for functioning in Court environment and will be ready for 
deployment in few months. 
  
Further observation of the Committee 
3.11    The Committee emphasizes that the testing of Virtual Court hearing 
solutions for functioning in Court envir onment should be expedited and 
deployed as early as possible and the Committee may be kept informed 
about the progress thereof.  
   
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.12    The Committee believes that ‘Justice delayed is Justice denied’ but 
‘Justice hurried is a lso Justice buried’. The Committee is of the view that 
Virtual Courts is a mechanism that will strike a balance between these two 
extremes and extends expeditious Justice to the litigant public without 
compromising quality. The Committee feels that transfe r of certain categories of 
cases from regular Court establishments to Virtual Courts will reduce the 
pendency of cases which has been clogging the wheels of Justice for 
decades.                                                              (Para 3.4) 
 Action Taken 
3.13  Virtual Courts are a step away from process automation to 
transformative change from the conventional brick and mortar court 
architecture. Virtual courts have been rolled out to try traffic challan cases and 
have met with appreciable results.  Over 35 lakh cases (35,02,896) have been 
handled by 9 virtual courts and in more than 11 lakhs (11,53,704) cases online 

 
34 
 
fine for more than Rs. 130.72 Cr has been realised until till 8 th December 
2020. Presently there are 9 such courts in 8 States / UTs vi z. Delhi (2), 
Faridabad, Chennai, Bengaluru, Kochi, Nagpur, Gauhati and Pune. It is 
proposed to extend such courts in all metro cities and one for rural areas in 
each state. The ambit and scope of Virtual Courts can be extended to cover 
other offences like  NI offences. Given the need to progressively make justice 
more and more accessible Delhi High Court has 
established  34  digital  courts  to  handle  cheque  bounce  cases  by video 
conferencing. A Handbook entitled “Digital NI Courts -Project 
Implementation guidelines have also been issued by them. 
  
Further observation of the Committee 
  
3.14    The Committee appreciates the work done in setting up of Virtual 
Courts for handling special category of cases. The Committee recommends 
that the proposed extension of such courts in all metro cities and one for 
rural areas in each state should be undertaken on priority basis and all 
such categories of cases which can be handled through Virtual Courts 
should be transferred to these courts so that the burden on regular courts 
is mitigated.  
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.15  The Committee also recommends Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology to employ globally tried and tested tools such as Immersive tele 
presence technology, augmented reality systems to make virtual hearings more 
lifelike and engaging.                                                                                                
(Para 3.30) 
 Action Taken 
3.16 As advised by the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee, the 
recommendation has already been placed before MeitY.  
  
Further observation of the Committee 

 
35 
 
3.17      The Committee further recommends that Department of Justice 
should vigorously pursue the matter with the  MeitY and inform the 
Committee about the progress made thereof.  
.         
  

 
36 
 
CHAPTER IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN RECEIVED:  
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
4.1    The Committee also recommends that the Bar Council of India may 
introduce computer course as one of the subjects in three year/five year courses 
to enable the students to get train ed in handling computers and get adapted to 
the online systems while they pursue the Law Course. This will help educate 
and equip budding lawyers with knowledge and skills required for handling 
digital platforms.                         (Para 2.17) 
Action Taken 
4.2     Since the matters relating to Bar Council of India are looked after by the 
Department of Legal Affairs, the recommendation made by the Hon’ble 
Parliamentary Committee has been duly forwarded to the Bar Council of India 
by Department of Legal Affairs 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
4.3    To continue with the functioning of Virtual Courts in all the Courts even 
during non pandemic time, the Committee feels that the present system should 
be allowed to continue on an experimental basis with the consen t of all parties 
for certain categories of cases like Appeals etc and final hearings where 
physical presence of the parties/counsels is not required and online virtual 
hearing alone is sufficient. The expenditure involved in the establishment of a 
large nu mber of Tribunals /Courts can be cut down sizeably. This will also 
reduce the crowd in the court and cut down other litigation costs and 
overheads.                                                                              (Para 3.5) 
  
4.4   The Committee is also of the opinion that Virtual Courts can be extended 
permanently to various Appellate Tribunals like TDSAT, IPAB, NCLAT etc., 
located across the country which do not require personal appearances of the 

 
37 
 
parties/advocates. Permanent Virtual Courts ca n also be established for hearing 
matters relating to Administrative and other Tribunals at the time of final 
hearing. This will cut down the cost and increase the efficiency in disposal of 
the cases without being unnecessarily being adjourned. The Committ ee is also 
of the opinion that necessary Amendments may be brought in laws to legalise 
Virtual Courts and its proceedings without being unnecessarily challenged 
before Courts.                                                                
           (Para 3.6) 
 Action Taken 
4.5  The above recommendations of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee 
were duly forwarded to the Department of Legal Affairs who have solicited 
the views of all the controlling Ministries of the various Tribunals on the 
observations and recommendations made by the Committee in its Interim 
Report and sought further suggestions on how to improve the functioning of 
Virtual Courts. 
  
*** 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
38 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 
39 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                   
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
V 
FIFTH MEETING  
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM on Thursday, 07.12. 2023, in 
Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Malook Nagar 
(viii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(ix) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
(xv) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
3. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
2.           At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the meeting 
of the Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. 
consideration and adoption of the following draft reports of the Committee:  

 
40 
 
(i) 134th Report on Action Taken on 103 rd Report of the Committee on 
"Functioning of the Virtual Courts/Court Proceedings through 
Video Conferencing" pertaining to Department of Justice ;  
(ii) *            *                                    * 
(iii) *            *                                    * 
(iv) *            *                                    * 
(v) *            *                                    * 
(vi) *            *                                    * 
(vii) *            *                                    * 
 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted all the draft  Reports and decided 
to present those Reports to both Houses of Parliament on 11 th December, 2023.  
The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri P. Wilson and 
Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and 
Shri Malook Nagar and in his absence Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
Kanumuru for laying the reports in Lok Sabha.  
4.               *                     *                          * 
 
5.      The meeting adjourned at 4.30 PM. 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
7th December, 2023                                                                          DIRECTOR   
 
 
 
 
*pertains to other matters 