PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 21
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL, 2006
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 AUGUST, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 AUGUST, 2007)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 AUGUST, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 AUGUST, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1928 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1928 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
TWENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL, 2006
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 TH AUGUST, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 TH AUGUST, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/SRAV ANA, 1928 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-41

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—44
4. M INUTES OF DISSENT S UBMITTED BY S HRI R AM J ETHMALANI, M.P. ................................ 45—48
5. M INUTES OF DISSENT S UBMITTED BY S HRI V IRENDRA B HATIA, M.P. ................................ 49
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 51—85
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 87—90
A. T HE J UDGES (I NQUIRY) B ILL, 2006. ........................................................................... 91—109
B. Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice on the views/suggestions
contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts
on various provisions of the Bill. ............................................................................ 1 10—130
C. Comments/suggestions received from V arious High Courts. ............................... 131—138
D. List of Witnesses who Appeared before the Committee. .................................... 139—140

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2006)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Dr. P.C. Alexander
9. Shri Tarlochan Singh
10. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
12. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
13. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Dr. C. Krishnan
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
18. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
19. Prof. M. Ramadass
20. Shri Vishvendra Singh
21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
22. Shri Raj Babbar
23. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
24. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
25. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
26. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2007)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Ram Jethmalani
9. Dr. P.C. Alexander
10. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
15. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
25. Shri Vishvendra Singh
26. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having
been authorised by the Committee, present its Twenty First Report on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006*. The Bill seeks to establish the National Judicial Council to undertake preliminary
investigation and inquire into allegations of misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme
Court or of a High Court and to regulate the procedure for such investigation, inquiry and proof,
and for imposing minor measures and for the presentation of an address by Parliament to the
President of India and for matters connected therewith.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee’s, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha referred** the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 19th December, 2006 and pending
therein, to the Committee on the 26th December, 2006 for examination and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue Press
Communique to solicit views/suggestions from interested individuals/ organisations/institutions on
various provisions of the Bill. Accordingly, a Press Communique was issued in response to which
memoranda containing suggestions were received by the Committee from the general public,
persons from the legal profession, former Judges and eminent Jurists and others.
4. The Committee held preliminary discussion on the Bill in its meeting held on the
18th January, 2007. A Press Conference was subsequently addressed by the Committee on that day
to elicit public opinion on the various provisions of the Bill. It further considered and heard a
presentation on the Bill by the Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice) in
its meeting held on the 25th January and 2nd February, 2007.
5. The Committee heard oral evidence of twenty five individuals/organisations/ institutions/
experts during the course of examination of the Bill.
6. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:—
(i) Background note on the Bill, supplied by the Government;
(ii) Memoranda received from various organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on the
provisions of the Bill; and
(iii) The comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice on the views/suggestions contained
in the memoranda received from various organisations/institutions/individuals/experts
on the provisions of the Bill.
7. The Committee held c1ause-by-c1ause consideration of the Bill on the 14th and
25th June, 2007.
8. The Committee adopted the Report in its two meetings held on the 24th July, and
1st August, 2007.
* Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 19th December, 2006.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 43744) dated the 27th December, 2006.

9. The Committee in all held fifteen sittings to deliberate upon the various provisions of the
Bill i.e. 18th and 25th January, 2nd, 13th and 20th, February, 13th March, 11th and 12th April,
8th May, 7th, 14th and 25th June, 17th and 24th July and 1st August, 2007. Besides its above
mentioned sittings in Delhi the Committee interacted with various dignitaries/State Governments etc.
during its study visits outside Delhi in 2007.
10. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
August, 2007 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice
(iv)

1
REPORT
1. The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 ( Annexure — A ) introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 19th
December, 2006 seeks to establish a National Judicial Council to undertake preliminary investigation
and to inquire into the allegations of misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court
or of a High Court. The Bill also seeks to regulate the procedure for such investigation, inquiry
and proof and to impose minor measures and for the presentation of an address by Parliament to
the President and for matters connected therewith.
2. In the light of the above, the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 was introduced in the Lok Sabha
on the 19th December, 2006. It was referred to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 26th December, 2006 for
examination and report.
3. That the Bill has a definite legislative purpose, is elucidated by the Statement of Objects and
Reasons appended to the Bill, which states as under:—
‘‘A suitable legislative framework is the need of the hour for empowering a judicial
forum to deal with complaints against Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
On the basis of the recommendations made in the 195th Report of the Law Commission
of India on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005, the Bill, namely the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
has been prepared.
It may be recalled that the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 was enacted with a view to lay
down a procedure for removal for proved misbehaviour or incapacity of the Judges of the
High Courts and the Supreme Court by way of address of the Houses of Parliament by the
President. The Law Commission of India in its 195th Report has examined the issue of
judicial accountability in the light of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in its various
judgments, which relate to the interpretation of articles 121, 124 and 217 of the
Constitution.’’
3.1. While considering the Bill, the Committee felt the need to have a vast range of discussions
with legal luminaries, former Chief Justices of India and former Judges of the Supreme Court/High
Courts and other stakeholders from the legal field. Since the subject matter of the Bill was of
sensitive nature, the Committee decided to invite views suggestions from individuals/organisations
also. It, accordingly, authorised the Secretariat to issue a press release for inviting views/
suggestions. The Committee also organised a press conference on the 18th January, 2007 so that
a wide publicity to the Bill is given by the print and electronic media. In response to the press
release published on the 4th January, 2007 in the major English and Hindi dailies and vernacular
news papers all over the country and the subsequent press conference held on 18th January, 2007
a number of representations/memoranda were received by the Committee Secretariat.
3.2. Since, the Committee endeavoured to hear legal experts, former Chief Justices of India,
Judges of the Supreme Court/High Courts and other stakeholders in the legal field for an in depth
appraisal of the various provisions of the Bill, it requested the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for
an extension of time on the 20th March, 2007. The Chairman Rajya Sabha acceded to the request
of the Committee and granted extension of time till the first week of Monsoon Session (2007).
3.3. The major points raised in various memoranda are summarized as follows:—
(i) The provisions of the Bill for (a) complaints, (b) withdrawal of judicial work, and (c) minor
measures are invalid as there is no power under the Constitution to subject a judge to such
action at the hands of a statutory body;

2
(ii) There is no reason to make impeachment easy much less to bypass it by introducing
‘complaint procedure’;
(iii) Article 124(5) empowers Parliament to legislate on the investigation and proof but does not
empower Parliament to create an external forum like a Council to entertain complaints from
any person whatsoever. The complaint procedure is ultra-vires to the Constitution;
(iv) The accountability of Judges must necessarily be to a body like Parliament and not some
Judicial Council activated by a private complaint;
(v) Article 124(5) of the Constitution provides for the procedure for presentation of the address
and for investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge. It is not
traceable to Entry ll-A, list III ‘Administration of Justice’ as erroneously thought by the
Law Commission in its 195th Report;
(vi) The Bill directly attacks judge’s independence through complaints by any person and
decision thereon by other Judges who may now exercise a power not contemplated by the
Constitution to impose minor measures against them;
(vii) Once a complaint procedure is provided, the reference procedure will never be resorted to;
the complaint procedure will mark the beginning of the end of the fearlessness and
independence of the judiciary as the loosing litigant may file a complaint against the judge
who in turn may fear besmirching their reputation; There is no power under the
Constitution to put judges at the mercy of any person who deems it fit to complain to the
Judicial Commission and set in motion a sort of disciplinary proceeding;
(viii) There is separation of power within the assigned sphere and the only check and balances
are those provided in the Constitution; under the Constitution, the only check on judiciary
is through the power of impeachment which cannot be initiated by any person by filing a
complaint nor any body can entertain any such complaint;
(ix) The Bill is unconstitutional as violating Article 124 as well as the independence of the
judiciary and separation of powers which are part of the basic structure of the Constitution;
(x) The Bill should include (a) misjudgment as a reason for complaint, (b) setting up of State
Judicial Councils, and (c) the report of the inquiry be subject to RTI Act after the inquiry
is completed;
(xi) The clause relating to imprisonment as mentioned in Clause 26 of the Bill may be deleted;
(xii) The National Judicial Commission should be under the Chairmanship of the President of
India or the Vice-President;
(xiii) The composition of the National Judicial Commission should include outsiders including
those belonging to SC/ST communities;
(xiv) Reasons should be recorded by the Council while deciding the complaint which should be
subjected to confirmation by the Confirmation Council;
(xv) The decisions of the Council should be tabled in the Parliament and on confirmation the
President should execute it;
(xvi) The definition of misbehaviour should include ‘character’ also;
(xvii) D ecisions of the Council should be final but the aggrieved judge should be able to represent
to the President of India;
(xviii) CBI should specifically be recognized as one of the agencies for investigation under the Bill
for any misbehaviour ete.;

3
(xix) The Council should have power for surveillance and for taking suo-motu action against the
errant judges;
(xx) Giving powers to the Council for minor measures is contrary to the provisions of the
Constitution; Council in its present form will spoil the basic structure of the Constitution;
The proposed Bill surrenders the powers vested in the executive and the legislative wings
to the judicial wing;
(xxi) The word ‘‘misbehaviour’ as applicable to Judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts, in the context of Articles 124(4) and (5) and other relevant provisions of the
Constitution, means conduct or a course of conduct on the part of a Judge which brings
dishonor or disrepute to the judiciary as to shake the faith and confidence which the public
reposes in the judiciary. It is not confined to acts which are contrary to law and also not
confined to an act connected with the judicial office. It extends to all activities of a Judge,
public or private.
(xxii) The act or omission must be wilful. The wilful element may be supplied by culpable
recklessness, negligence, disregard for rules or an established code of conduct, even though
a single act may not be wilful.
(xxiii) Monetary recompense would not render an act or omission any the less misbehaviour if the
Judge intentionally committed it;
(xxiv) Misbehaviour is not confined to conduct since the judge assumes charge of the present
judicial office.
(xxv) The standard of proof is proof beyond reasonable doubt.
(xxvi) The misbehaviour must be held proved accordingly by the Inquiry Committee.
(xxvii) The Judge against whom an inquiry is being held is under a constitutional obligation to co-
operate with the inquiring authority and not to raise petty-fogging objections to obstruct the
inquiry;
(xxviii) In Section 23 it may be added that a Judge in respect of whom removal order is passed
by the President, shall be prohibited from practicing law and appearing as lawyer in any
court or Tribunal in the country.
(xxix) The Council should have power of appointment and transfer also in addition to disciplinary
powers.
3.4. The Committee forwarded the memoranda so received from the individuals and
organisations to the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice) for their comments
thereon.
3.5. The Ministry in their written reply/comments ( Annexure B ) on the memoranda mainly
focused on the following points:—
(i) The issue was examined by the Law Commission in its 195th Report. The Commission has
opined that no amendment of the Constitution is necessary if a law is made by Parliament
enabling the Judicial Council to impose 'minor measures' as part of an in-house mechanism.
(ii) Impeachment will be invoked only if and when the National Judicial Council concludes that
the charges proved warrant removal of a Judge. It is not being made easy.
(iii) The Law Commission has stated that a law can be made under the later parts of Art. 124(5)
and in any event, under Art. 246 read with entry ll-A of List III of Schedule VII of the
Constitution of India.

4
(iv) The Law Commission, in its 195th Report, has said that a complaint procedure, in addition
to a reference procedure, is not an infringement of the Parliamentary process contained in
Art. 124(4) and does not amount to impermissible delegation and is valid. (page 407 of the
195th Report of the Law Commission)
(v) Adequate safeguards have been provided in the Bill to punish those making vexatious
complaints.
(vi) Impeachment will be invoked only if and when the National Judicial Council concludes that
charges proved warrant removal of a Judge. It is not being made easy. The complaint
procedure is an additional mechanism for ensuring accountability of judges.
(vii) Comprehensive definition of ‘misbehaviour’ is already provided in the Bill; setting up of
State Judicial Council is not consistent with the Constitutional scheme for the higher
judiciary as this will compromise with the confidentiality of the proceedings of the Council.
(viii) Adequate safeguards have been provided in the Bill to ensure that the complaint procedure
will not be misused. The Bill is aimed at bringing accountability while preserving the
independence of judiciary.
(ix) The proposed law provides a framework for empowering a suitable judicial forum to deal
with complaints against the judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts.
(x) The definition of ‘misbehaviour’ in the Bill is comprehensive.
(xi) There is already a provision for appeal for the aggrieved judge against whom the Council
has passed the orders.
(xii) It is for the National Judicial Council to draw up the Code of Conduct and the Clauses to
be included in it.
(xiii) U nder Clause 28, it is left to the Council to determine the circumstances under which the
identity of the complainant can be kept secret.
(xiv) Provisions of Clause 29 regarding stoppage of work are well founded and not arbitrary.
(xv) The Bill provides for punishment in case of disclosing the identity of the complainant and
the judge without the approval of the Council.
(xvi) As per the Bill, the Council will device its own procedure for inquiry and investigation.
(xvii) Chief Justice of India being the head of the institution has been kept away from other
Judges under complaint procedure. However, a reference can be made by Parliament into
his conduct to the Council.
(xviii) The Bill aims at devising suitable legislative framework for empowering a judicial forum to
deal with the complaints against judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. Reference
procedure already exists in the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 which substantially remains
unchanged in the Bill.
(xix) The Government has no statutory powers for initiating any disciplinary action against the
judges, both of the Supreme Court and the High Courts. The Council will investigate the
complaints for their genuineness.
(xx) Since National Judicial Council will be a permanent body, It would be necessary that any
change in the composition of the Council is made with the approval of the President of
India.

5
4.0. Since the sitting judges were the stakeholders in the proposed Bill, the Committee decided
to call for the views of the Supreme Court and all the High Courts, Accordingly, the Committee
Secretariat vide its letter dated the 23rd January, 2007 requested the Supreme Court and all the
High Courts through their Registrar-General to apprise the Committee with their view points on the
various provisions of the Bill. In response thereto the Committee received detailed suggestions from
the High Courts of Allahabad, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Punjab and Haryana. While
the High Courts of Calcutta, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Chhattisgarh out rightly opposed the
Bill, as being destructive of the judicial independence, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh stated that
‘‘it is not proper for the High Court to express any view’’. However, the High Court of Orissa
favoured the provisions made in the Bill. A Summary of the views received from the above High
Courts is placed at ( Annexure-C).
4.1. The Committee was also enlightened by the opinion/suggestions of the former Chief Justices
of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court/High Courts. V aluable inputs were provided by
Justice Ranganath Misra, Justice P.N. Bhagwati, Justice R.S. Pathak, Justice V .S. Malimath and
Justice K. Ramaswamy and other esteemed legal luminaries/senior advocates of the Supreme Court
of India on various issues concerning judicial independence, Judicial accountability and the
appointment of Judges.
4.2. The Committee took up the consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on the
25th January, 2007. The Secretary, Department of Justice made a presentation on the Bill during
the meeting. He briefly traced the background of the proposed Bill and narrated the reasons for
proposing repeal of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.
4.3. The Committee took up in-house discussion and clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill
in its meetings held on the 14th and 25th June, 2007 respectively. The Committee adopted the draft
Report on the Bill in its meeting held on the 1st August, 2007.

6
CHAPTER–II
JUDICIARY
5.0. One of the three wings of the polity judiciary has always been a supremely important
edifice in a democratic nation. It has always been accorded a place of highest sanctity by the
modern day nations irrespective of the form of Government they choose to adopt. The concept
of modern day Government envisages co-existence of all the three organs of the Government viz.
the legislature, the executive and the judiciary. These three organs or estates are expected to
function within their constitutional limits. Judiciary plays an important role in resolving the disputes
not only between the parties but also between the Centre and the States, between the States and
most importantly between the State and its subjects. In democratic countries like ours, judiciary
plays an important institutional role i.e., it has to keep the other wings of the State within their
constitutional limits.
5.1. In our country judiciary has always been held at highest pedestal from the beginning.
Further, the Constitution has also assigned a distinct role to the judiciary. It not only interprets the
provisions of the Constitution finally but also enforces the fundamental rights embodied in part III
of the Constitution. Further, in Indian context the judiciary had played a distinct proactive role, as,
it has, time and again, given directions to the executive of the day to enforce provisions enlisted
in part IV of the Constitution by taking affirmative action for the welfare of the people.
INDEPENDENCE OF JUDICIARY
6.0. Since the judiciary has been assigned a very distinct role under the Constitution of India,
it is but imperative that it may be allowed to remain strong, vibrant and independent, free from
the influence of the executive. The founding fathers of the Constitution were very keen to ensure
that the judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Hence, they envisaged an
independent judiciary. There are several provisions in the Constitution that insulate judiciary from
external influences. The following provisions of the Constitution are intended to secure the
independence of the judiciary:—
(a) The President appoints the judges on the recommendation of judicial collegium. In the
case of appointment of the Chief Justice of India, the President must consult such
judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts as he may deem necessary. For the
selection of other judges of the Supreme Court, he must consult the Chief Justice of
India. The appointment of the judges of the High Court is made by the President after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the Governor of the State. In the case
of appointment of a judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High
Court concerned must be consulted.
(b) Security of tenure is guaranteed to every judge. A judge of the Supreme Court or of
a High Court can be removed only on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity. The President can remove a judge only when an address has been
presented against him by each House of Parliament.
(c) Salaries of the judges have been fixed by the Constitution and cannot be varied by the
legislature except during the period of financial emergency. Once appointed, their
privileges, rights and allowances cannot be altered to their disadvantage.
6

7
(d) The Supreme Court and the High Courts have been given authority to recruit their
own staff and frame rules regarding conditions of service.
(e) Expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the judges is not put to the
vote of the Parliament and State Legislatures.
(f) The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court, including salaries, allowances, and
pensions, payable to its officers, are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
Similarly, administrative expenses of the High Court are charged on the Consolidated
Fund of the concerned State.
(g) The Constitution debars the Supreme Court judges from  pleading or appearing before
any court of judicial authority in the country even after his retirement. Also after
retirement a judge of the High Court can practice only in the Supreme Court or in a
High Court in which he has not been a judge.
(h) No discussion shall take place in the Legislature of a State or in Parliament with
respect to the conduct of any judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the
discharge of his duties
1.
6.1. Thus, our Constitution has done everything possible to make the Supreme Court and the
High Courts independent of the influence of the executive. An attempt is made in the Constitution
to make even the subordinate judiciary independent of extraneous influences. The Constitution also
directs and facilitates separation of the executive from the judiciary and places the magistracy
which deals with criminal cases on the same footing as civil courts.
6.2. Thus, there is every conceivable provision in the Constitution of India to make the Supreme
Court and the High Courts independent from the influence of the executive and the legislature.
JUDICIAL ACCOUNTABILITY
7.0. Associated with the higher cause of truth and justice, judiciary and the judges have been
accorded a distinct position. The Constitutional provisions also make it obvious that the intention
was to create an impartial judicial body. It is not out of place to mention here that even though
the Constitution of India does not recognize the doctrine of separation of powers in its absolute
form, it still rests on the premise that the “functions of the different branches of Government have
been sufficiently differentiated.” In this context, what the Constitutional provisions provide for is
that “there should be an impartial and independent judicial body to adjudicate upon the
matters and to act as the interpreter and guardian of the Constitution.”
7.1. It is also equally important to note that the judicial power was in the hands of the judiciary
even before the Constitution of India came into existence. It is also a well settled principle of
modern day governance that an authority deriving its existence from some source cannot claim to
be absolute and unaccountable. It must be accountable either to the source of its origin, to
the institution and more importantly to the people. All wings of Government belong to the
people, when the legislature and the executive both are accountable, the judiciary cannot remain
unaccountable and absolute. No person, howsoever high is above the law similarly, no institution
howsoever sanctified can claim to be unaccountable. Ultimately, every institution is accountable to
the people in every democratic polity like ours.
CONSTITUTIONAL AND OTHER PROVISIONS EXISTING  FOR ACCOUNTABILITY
8.0. The framers of the Constitution provided a mechanism for accountability under Article
124(4) which provides that :—
1. V .N. Shukla, Constitution of India, Tenth Edition. p. A50-51.

8
“A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an
order of the President passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by
a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than
two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting has been presented to the
President in the same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity.”
The Article stipulates the following four things specifically:—
(i) A judge of the Supreme Court shall be removed only by an order of the President;
(ii) It should be after an address by each House of Parliament;
(iii) That address should be supported by a special majority; and
(iv) Removal has to be on the grounds of “proved” misbehaviour or incapacity.
Thus, this Article provides for a “method” and “grounds” on which a Judge of the higher
judiciary is to be removed.
8.1. Evidently, the founding father of the Constitution while inserting this clause, had in their
mind the vision of such legal luminaries of their time who were of high moral, ethical and legal
scholarship. They must have thought that the judiciary shall always be composed of such scholars.
This may be the reason that they envisaged an accountability mechanism for serious judicial
misconduct which could be remedied only by way of “removal”. The provisions of Article 124(4)
read with Article 218 provide for removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court for
“proved misbehaviour” or “proved incapacity” by a Parliamentary procedure known as
“impeachment”.
8.2. However, the Parliamentary procedure of impeachment can be resorted to only after the
allegations against a Judge have been “proved” meaning thereby that these allegations have been
investigated and established by some authority which is impartial and independent. That is, before
having recourse to the parliamentary procedure of “removal”, charges or allegations of
misbehaviour and incapacity must have been investigated and proved. This procedure and
constitution of such a machinery which is supposed to investigate is again to be prescribed by the
Parliament. Article 124(5) which provides for regulation of such procedure and for presentation of
an address to Parliament vests this power exclusively in the Parliament. Article 124(5) stipulates
that “Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an address and for the
investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under clause (4).”
Article 124(5) empowers Parliament to make laws for the following:—
(i) for regulating the procedure for the presentation of an address; and
(ii) for investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge.
8.3. The above mentioned two Articles cover the existing mechanism under the Constitution for
enforcing judicial accountability, known as “impeachment procedure”. A plain reading of the Articles
make it clear that the constitutional provisions only provide for “removal” and that the power of
removal lies with Parliament. How and by whom the procedure of investigation is to be initiated
is found in the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, though the Constitution is silent as to who would be
the complainant e.g. any individual or the representative of the people.
THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) ACT, 1968
9.0. In pursuance of the provisions of Article 124(5) of the Constitution the Judges (Inquiry)

9
Act, 1968 was enacted to regulate the procedure for investigation and proof of the misbehaviour
or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and for the presentation of an
address by Parliament to the President and for matters connected therewith. Clause 3 of the Act
stipulates investigation into misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge by a Committee on a notice of
a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of a Judge. However,
that notice is to be signed by one hundred Members of Lok Sabha, if such a notice is given in
Lok Sabha and by fifty Members of Rajya Sabha if such a notice is given in Rajya Sabha. The
Committee that is envisaged under Section 3 is to be constituted by the Speaker or the Chairman
as the case may be. Sub Section(2) of Section 3 of the act reads as under:—
“If the motion referred to in sub-section (1) is admitted, the Speaker or, as the case
may be, the Chairman shall keep the motion pending and constitute, as soon as may be,
for the purpose of making an investigation into the grounds on which the removal of a
Judge is prayed for, a Committee consisting of three members of whom—
(a) one shall be chosen from among the Chief Justice and other Judges of the Supreme
Court;
(b) one shall be chosen from among the Chief Justices of the High Courts; and
(c) one shall be a person who is, in the opinion of the Speaker or, as the case may be,
the Chairman, a distinguished jurist.”
9.1. The above provisions spell the power of the Speaker or the Chairman to constitute a
Committee to investigate on the charges of misbehaviour or incapacity against a Judge. The
composition of the Committee is supposed to have the representation of the Supreme Court, High
Courts and the presence of a legal Scholar. The Act further provides for submission and
subsequent laying of the report of the Committee to the Speaker or the Chairman and thereafter
before both Houses of Parliament.
9.2. The above provisions clearly specify a procedure that whatever the outcome of the
investigation of the committee that has to be communicated to the Speaker or the Chairman and
subsequently laid before each House of Parliament for further proceedings.
THE IN-HOUSE PROCEDURE BEING FOLLOWED IN THE HIGHER JUDICIARY
10.0. In 1997 the Supreme Court of India passed two resolutions dealing with Judicial
Accountability viz Restatement of V alues of Judicial life and in-house procedure within the
Judiciary. The Restatement of Values of Judicial Life Resolution was adopted in the full court
meeting of the Supreme Court on May 7, 1997 which included the following:—
“That an in house procedure should be devised by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India
to take suitable remedial action against the judges who by their acts of omission or
commission do not follow the universally accepted values of Judicial Life including those
indicated in the Restatement of V alues of Judicial Life.”
10.1. The in-house procedure is essentially meant for disciplining the Judges, against whom
complaints of judicial misconduct and misbehaviour were received. The in-house procedure rests
on the premise that there may be complaints casting reflection on the independence and integrity
of a Judge which is bound to have a prejudicial effect on the image of the higher judiciary. In the
in-house procedure, a complaint against a judge is dealt with at an appropriate level within the
institution. It is examined by his peers and no outside agency is involved, thus the independence
of judiciary is maintained.

10
THE EFFICACY OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL AND OTHER PROVISIONS AND JUDICIAL
ACCOUNTABILITY
11. Through experience it has generally been accepted that the existing Parliamentary procedure
of removal of a Judge is cumbersome, time consuming and tends to get politicized. There has been
one instance of impeachment proceedings being resorted to which resulted in a failure due to
considerations other than procedural difficulties. Though only one instance of proceedings being
initiated against a judge of higher judiciary does not mean that judiciary by and large is the way
it was in the not-so-distant past when the integrity of the higher judiciary was never doubted. As
stated by the Supreme Court itself “Judicial office is essentially public trust. Society is,
therefore, entitled to expect that a judge must be a man of high integrity, honesty and
required to have moral vigor, ethical firmness and impervious to corrupt or venal
influences”. Seen in this context, the judiciary today is losing that reverence. There have
been sweeping references by former judges/legal luminaries such as that “the integrity of about
20 per cent of the higher judiciary was in doubt”. Now, the instances of corruption, non-judicial
activities, aberrations in judicial conduct, incompetencies are coming to fore. The Constitution only
provides for “removal” and there are no provisions dealing with judicial misconduct and
misdemeanor inviting measures less than “removal”. Furthermore, as per 1968 Act it is only the
Members of Parliament who can bring about any proceedings against a judge of the higher
judiciary. There is no provision Constitutional or otherwise which enables the citizens or
authorities other than member of Parliament to register complaints of judicial misconduct
or other grievances. All these factors coupled with delays and judicial impropriety have by and
large lowered the image of the judiciary in public eye considerably. There has been perceptible
deterioration in the conduct of many of the judges within and outside the court, thus raising the
issue of evolving a mechanism to scrutinize, the conduct and behaviour of such judges.
BACKGROUND LEADING TO THE INTRODUCTION OF THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL,
2006
12.0. Since there were instances of grave judicial aberrations thus shaking the faith of the people
in the judiciary, it was, but thought proper to introduce some measures of accountability in addition
to the existing Parliamentary procedure. The Ministry of Law and Justice in their background note
on the issue stated that :—
“Allegations of deviant behaviour involving acts of corruption and moral
turpitude, against some Judges of the High Courts have come to the notice of the
Government in the past but the Government has no constitutional competence to set
up any committee to look into allegations levelled against Judges of the High Courts.
At best, the complaint, in case a copy is not endorsed to the Chief Justice of India,
is referred to the Chief Justice of India for such action as he may deem fit.”
12.1. The Ministry further stated that under the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 only the Speaker, Lok
Sabha or the Chairman, Rajya Sabha can admit a complaint relating to the misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge for being inquired into by a committee to be constituted by them. The
Ministry further opined that the scope of the 1968 Act is limited as it does not create any
institutional framework for dealing with complaints against the Judges of the Supreme Court/High
Courts. It will, therefore, be advisable if on the pattern of USA, Canada and other developed
countries, a permanent body which could be called as the ‘National Judicial Council’, could be
constituted under the Act.
12.2. The Ministry further apprised the Committee that in order to provide a legislative
framework, a Bill namely the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005 was drafted and forwarded to the then
Chief Justice of India for comments of the Supreme Court. The then Chief Justice desired that

11
the Bill be referred to the Law Commission of India for detailed examination and Report. The Law
Commission in its 195th Report dealt with the subject in detail and made comprehensive
recommendations. Some of the recommendations of the Law Commission on the Bill of 2005 are
listed below :—
➢ Judicial independence is not absolute. Judicial independence and accountability are two sides
of the same coin. The present proposals in the Bill of 2005 together with our
recommendations for enabling the Judicial Council to impose ‘minor measures’ including
stoppage of assignment of judicial work are constitutional. They ought not to be viewed as
an encroachment on Judicial Independence by the Executive or by the Legislature;
➢ Clause 3(1) of the Bill of 2005 which provides for the establishment of a National Judicial
Council consisting only of judges is constitutionally valid and is consistent with the concept
of independence of judiciary, judicial accountability and doctrine of separation of powers;
➢ The Bill of 2005 must be suitably modified to provide for ‘minor measures’ to be imposed
by the Judicial Council itself. Such a law can be made under the latter part of Art. 124 (5)
and in any event, under Art. 246 read with Entry 11-A of List III of Schedule VII of the
Constitution of India which refers to the subject of ‘Administration of Justice’. Introducing
a provision permitting ‘minor measures’ to be imposed by the Judicial Council will be valid
and will not be unconstitutional;
➢ No amendment of the Constitution is necessary if a law is made by Parliament enabling the
Judicial Council to impose ‘minor measures’ as part of an in-house mechanism; and
➢ The procedure in the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 and in the proposed Bill of 2005 enabling
investigation/inquiry by the Judicial Council by way of a complaint procedure, in addition
to a reference procedure, is not an infringement of the Parliamentary process contained in
Art. 124(4) and does not amount to impermissible delegation and is valid.
12.3. It was in pursuance of the recommendations of the Law Commission as contained in its
195th Report, that the proposed Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha. The Bill, namely, the Judges
(Inquiry) Bill, 2006 is based on the premise that judicial independence is one of the basic
fundamentals of the Constitution. Judicial independence and judicial accountability are inseparable.
Thus, there is an urgent need of a legislation for establishing a National Judicial Council to look
into the allegations of misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court, as the case may be, and to regulate the procedure for such investigation, inquiry and proof
in a complaint procedure in addition to the earlier “reference procedure” as contained in the Judges
(Inquiry) Act, 1968. In a complaint procedure, a complaint can be made by any person to the
Judicial Council against Judges of the Supreme Court (except the Chief Justice of India), Chief
Justices and Judges of High Courts. The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006, inter alia, seeks to empower
the National Judicial Council for imposing minor measures also. The Bill also seeks to repeal the
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.”
12.4. In the background note on the Bill, the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
informed the Committee as under :—
“The transparency and accountability in the higher judiciary are ‘at present’ being
enforced and maintained through ‘In-House’ system by the peer group.
The issue of Judicial Accountability was discussed at the Conference of Chief
Justices held in 1990 and on the basis of the broad consensus emerging out of the
deliberations, the Chief Justice of India summed up the position as follows:
The Chief Justice of the High Court has the competence to receive complaints
against the conduct of the Judges of his court and when he receives any he could look into

12
it for finding out if it deserves to be closely looked into. Where he is satisfied that the
matter requires to be examined, he shall have facts ascertained in such manner as he
considers appropriate keeping the nature of allegations in view and if he is of the opinion
that the matter is such that it should be reported to the Chief Justice of India, he shall
do so.
The Chief Justice of India shall act in a similar manner in regard to complaints
relating to conduct of Judges of the Supreme Court and in regard to conduct of Chief
Justices of the High Courts. On the basis of the facts ascertained, the Chief Justice of the
High Court or the Supreme Court, as the case may be, shall take such appropriate action
as may be considered proper, keeping the interests of the judiciary as the paramount
consideration.”
12.5. In order to provide a legislative framework to enable people to make complaints against the
erring Judges of the higher judiciary, the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 has been introduced. The Bill
seeks to create an additional institutional framework apart from the existing constitutional provision
to hear cases of misconduct and incapacity by establishing a permanent Body viz. the National
Judicial Council.

13
CHAPTER–III
DELIBERATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON CERTAIN ISSUES
13.0 The initial deliberations on the Bill aroused the concern of the Committee, on the various
provisions of the Bill, including on three specific issues pertaining to the (i) infringement of the
exclusive right of Parliament under Article 124; (ii) the composition of the proposed National
Judicial Council; and (iii) allowing any person to make a complaint against a Member of the higher
judiciary. These three concerns were voiced by the Chairman of the Committee, while hearing a
presentation of the Secretary, Department of Justice, stating that “we feel that the mandate in
Article 124, that is, the exclusive right of Parliament is now being delegated to a Council.
Secondly, we feel that you are opening up the Pandora’s box by allowing not only the
citizens but also any person to lodge a complaint against the Constitutional authority.
Thirdly, we feel that this Bill is taking away the powers of the Parliament by constituting
a Council and, thereby, the powers are being handed over to the Judiciary, through the
President”. The Committee in its subsequent meetings extensively deliberated upon these three
specific issues along with other provisions of the Bill as under.
PARLIAMENT’S POWER TO IMPEACH A JUDGE
13.1 As per the existing provisions a Judge of the higher Judiciary is to be removed on certain
specified grounds as provided under Article 124. Thus, it is the prerogative of the Parliament to
remove a Judge after following a certain procedure. An apprehension was raised by the Members
of the Committee that the provisions of the proposed Bill seek to take away the powers of
Parliament and vest the same in the proposed National Judicial Council. The Committee observed
that the Constitution has authorized Parliament to deal with the cases of judicial misconduct. Now,
that right of Parliament is sought to be vested in the proposed National Judicial Council, a
nominated body. The members raised serious concern that it amounts to dilution of the powers of
Parliament. The Members further debated whether such a provision could be made through
legislative method. In the opinion of the Members this required Constitutional amendment rather
than a direct legislative method. The members pointed out that under the existing provisions viz.
the Constitution and the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, the Speaker or the Chairman are empowered
to constitute a committee to investigate and inquire into allegations of misbehaviour or incapacity
of the Judge. Now under the proposed Bill, that power of the Speaker or the Chairman has been
proposed to be vested in the Chief Justice of India. By implication it would mean that the role
assigned to the Parliament and its functionaries shall devolve on the Chief Justice of India. This
in fact is a cause for concern as succinctly put by one of the legal luminary that ‘‘it would tilt
the balance in favour of the judiciary thus undermining the delicate balance of separation
of powers between the three wings of the polity” which is the basic structure of the
Constitution. The Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, in their deposition before
the Committee, on the issue stated that in the present Bill, the Committee which is named as the
National Judicial Council comprising Judges of the Supreme Court and the Chief Justices of the
High Courts to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India shall be constituted by the President.
And, this Committee will be a permanent body. Whereas under the present provisions of law, the
Committee to inquire into allegations against the Judges is constituted by the Speaker of Lok Sabha
or Chairman of Rajya Sabha, as the case may be, on case to case basis. This Council can directly
advise the President for laying the Report on the Tables of both the Houses of Parliament with a
view to initiate proceedings for impeachment of the concerned Judge. Under the existing
13

14
constitutional scheme, only the Speaker or Chairman were competent to receive the reports and
initiate further action in the matter. Though there is no provision for minor measures or for that
purpose any penalty other than removal of the Judges, in the existing constitutional scheme,
however, in practice these measures are being resorted to. There are instances where the Chief
Justice of a High Court withdraws the judicial work from a Judge; issues advisories to brother
judges and also asks them to go on leave, pending in-house inquiry into allegations against them.
There have been a few cases where the Judge against whom very serious allegations were made,
had to resign on persuasion or on the informal advice rendered to them by the Chief Justice of
India. Therefore, the proposed Bill, in fact, is only documenting these practices, as a legislative
measure.
13.2 The representative of the Department of Justice further stated that in the proposed Bill, the
three major differences are: the National Judicial Council or its officers will make inquiries into the
allegations, instead of the Committee constituted for the purpose. The Committee constituted by the
National Judicial Council enjoys more powers for search etc.  which is not available to the
committee under the existing Act of 1968. In the present system, the Judge concerned can give
a written statement or be heard on his behalf through a person whom he thinks fit for presenting
the case.
13.3 The representative of the Department of Legal Affairs sought to allay the apprehensions of
the Committee regarding the constitutional validity of the proposed legislation by stating that “the
Law Commission is of the opinion that inspite of absence of express constitutional provision
permitting imposition of minor measures, conferring of such power through ordinary law and
imposition of such measures by the Judicial Council would be constitutionally valid.” The
representative further stated that this Bill seeks to provide a statutory basis to already existing in
-house peer review. In the absence of such a thing, it is not possible to issue these minor penalties,
like issue of advisories, warnings, withdrawal of pending judicial work, requesting the Judge to
retire voluntarily, and censor or admonition, public or private. It was further stated that Article 124
only provides procedure for removal. It does not exhaust the entire field. It does not mean that
the removal is only remedy and no other action short of removal could be taken. The representative
sought to make it clear that the impeachment process still is within the purview of Parliament and
the proposed Bill only seeks to create a procedure other than or in addition to parliamentary
procedure of impeachment. He further substantiated his argument by stating that the existing
provisions only provide for removal by way of impeachment and there is no provision for imposing
minor measures short of removal.
13.4 However, the Committee was of the opinion that the provisions of the proposed Bill will
nonetheless reduce the role of Parliament to that of a post office. Taking strong exception to this
fact one of the Hon’ble Member observed that “the procedure which has been indicated to be
followed by the Council practically excludes even the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha or the Speaker
of the Lok Sabha who made the reference to the judicial body for the initial inquiry. To explain
the matter further, if it is a complaint, you can dispose it off without informing the complainant
if you come to the conclusion that the evidence is not adequate to proceed further. But, when the
reference is made by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, who also happens to be the Vice-President
of the country, and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and if this Council comes to the conclusion that
there is no case to proceed further, then they can drop it without informing the Chairman or
Speaker as to why they are doing it or why have they done it. It is totally keeping them aside and
their role is reduced to that of a post office”.
13.5 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Constitution of India specifically
entrusts a duty to Parliament with regard to impeachment of a Judge. That constitutional
obligation, in any case, cannot be delegated or shifted to any body or institution by way of

15
a statute. The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that the provisions of the
proposed Bill have the effect of curtailing Parliament’s right to discuss about the conduct
of a Judge. The Committee categorically observes that the powers of Parliament with regard
to impeachment of a Judge in no case be diluted or shifted to any other institution or body.
COMPOSITION OF THE PROPOSED NATIONAL JUDICIAL COUNCIL
14.0 The composition of the proposed National Judicial Council invited considerable debate
during the Committee’s deliberations on the Bill. It was felt that with the passage of time the
Judiciary has already acquired the image of a closed Institution, which is not in consonance with
the democratic set up of the Nation. In this context, the composition of the proposed National
Judicial Council specifically conveyed that the Council shall be an exclusive one consisting only of
persons from the Judiciary alone. On this the Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Justice
stated that “for composition of the Council, the deviation is guided by the premise that the
investigation into the allegations against Judges could be left to the peer group only”. The
Committee opined that the proposed National Judicial Council is supposed to be a nominated body
with five Members, with the Chief Justice of India being its Chairman and the rest four Members
nominated by the Chief Justice of India according to their seniority. This led one of the Member
to state “we talk about accountability instead of Judges appointing Judges, which is bad
enough in itself; Judges judging Judges, even when there are complaints against them, I
think, is worse”.  The Committee was for widening the composition of the Council to include
persons other than the Judges. Various suggestions were put forward for composition of the
Council such as eminent persons or Jurists, to be appointed by the President of India, on the
recommendations of the Government of India, representatives of the Bar Council, Social Scientists,
Academicians, Leader of Opposition etc.  There was general consensus among the Committee
Members that the proposed Judicially exclusive composition of the National Judicial Council is not
in consonance with the Principle of accountability.
14.1 While deposing before the Committee, Justice R.S. Pathak suggested changes in the
composition of the Council. He suggested that the NJC should consist of the Chief Justice of India
as Chairperson; three senior most Judges of the Supreme Court selected according to their strict
numerical seniority from the list of the Supreme Court Judges. He also included an eminent
Member of the Supreme Court Bar, highly reputed for his professional integrity and professional
experience and dedicated to the best interests of the administration of justice, in the Council. He
justified inclusion of a member of the Bar in the Council by stating that “he is a direct participant
in the administration of Justice, in the development and growth of its ethical standards, and shares
in its reputation as the fount of Justice. He shall be appointed to the Council by the President
of India, who shall have absolute discretion in selecting such person and not be bound by the
advice of the Council of Ministers”. Justice R.S. Pathak further suggested that in the case of an
investigation and inquiry against the Chief Justice or a Judge of a High Court, the Council should
co-opt two Chief Justices of the High Courts selected on the basis of strict numerical seniority in
a notional list of High Court Chief Justices. However, Justice Pathak did not favour the “inclusion
of High Court Chief Justices as members of the Council in case of an investigation and inquiry
against the Chief Justice of India or a Supreme Court Judge. He stated that “there is considerable
merit in the age-old principle that a man should be judged only by his peers. The inclusion of High
Court Chief Justice could be embarrassing to the Chief Justice of India or Supreme Court Judge
who is under investigation and inquiry”.
14.2 The Committee notes that the proposed composition of the NJC rests on the premise that
inquiry and investigation against an errant Judge is best left to the peer group and this Bill seeks
to provide a statutory basis to already existing in-house peer review. The Committee suggests
that either the NJC should be made a broad based Committee having representation from

16
the Executive, Parliament, Bar or an Empowered Committee consisting of representatives
from the NJC, Executive, Parliament and Bar should be there to be a preliminary part of
the investigative machinery. The Committee’s recommendation rests on a fundamental
premise of the administrative law which stipulates that an Authority who is taking a
disciplinary action against a particular person should not be the inquiry officer. Some other
officer should be the inquiry officer, who has to investigate and submit a report to the
Disciplinary Authority. It is very anomalous that here the National Judicial Council is both
the inquiry as well as Disciplinary Authority.
ALLOWING ANY PERSON TO MAKE A COMPLAINT AGAINST A MEMBER OF HIGHER
JUDICIARY
15.0 W hile deliberating upon the issue of allowing any person to make a complaint against a
member of the higher Judiciary, the Committee observed that such an open system may lead to
a situation where losing advocates and litigants may prefer lodging complaints against the Judges,
or this route may be utilisd for intimidating the Judge trying a particular case thus eroding the
independence of the Judiciary. Even though the Bill has provisions for penalty and punishment for
false and frivolous complaints, still the Committee felt that there should not be an easy channel of
filing complaints directly to the National Judicial Council.  The Committee is for a cautious
approach on this issue as certain intrinsic factors are associated with allowing such a system
to come into existence viz. the independence of Judiciary which is a basic structure of the
Constitution, its credibility in public eye and the image of the Judges. Another very
fundamental issue is that the Judges are held in high esteem by the people because they
are associated with the cause of truth and Justice, therefore, they should not be made
susceptible to unlimited public criticism by opening up an easy channel of complaints as the
same shall undermine their integrity in particular and Judicial Integrity in general. At the
same time due recognition to accountability should be given. In fact independence and
accountability have to go together. There is a certain need to tackle the cases of Judicial
misconduct warranting measures other than removal. Similarly, there is an urgent need to have
some institutional mechanism in place other than the Parliamentary procedure for allowing people
in addition to the Members of Parliament to have recourse to this mechanism. However, there
cannot be an open system of complaints by “any person” thus subjecting each and every
Judge to complaints whether genuine or frivolous. The Committee observed that the power of
even initiating any step against a sitting judge is vested in Parliament. Now, that power is being
given to any person. Though, as per the provisions of the Bill, a complaint from any person may
ultimately result in dismissal as false or frivolous but none-the-less it will set the investigating
machinery into motion and might even result in “impeachment”. In this context, the Chairman of
the Committee observed that “the powers were given to the Members of Parliament. Now, you
are giving powers to any person. That does not mean that he has to be a citizen of India.
It means any person who is travelling to India can also complain against a sitting judge”.
15.1 The Committee felt that an individual is being equated with 100 MPs of Lok Sabha and 50
MPs of Rajya Sabha for making a complaint against a Judge. This was summed up by the
Chairman of the Committee as “A Member of Lok Sabha is elected by an average of 20 lakh
people. If 100 Members have to sign a document for the initiation of impeachment, that
means, that document is representation of about 20 crores people. If you take 50 Members
of Rajya Sabha, it represents entire State of a particular Federal set up. But now, you are
taking away these powerful issues from them and giving the same to an ordinary man”. The
Committee further observed that if an individual can also make a complaint on the ground of
misbehaviour which could lead to impeachment, then why the Members of Parliament be subjected
to the condition of mustering the strength of 100 MPs of Lok Sabha and 50 MPs of Rajya Sabha,
for giving complaint for removal. The Committee further observed that the only difference between

17
an individual making a complaint and 100/50 MPs making a complaint is that an individuals
complaint would be tested for its veracity while the MPs complaint would be taken up for
investigation. The Committee observes that the Bill seeks to create a separate complaint
procedure for anybody to make complaint. Another procedure is for the MPs to complain.
The Committee feels that there is a need to reconcile the two procedures and create a
mechanism which would scrutinize the complaints received from both the sources in the
first instance and decide whether they are frivolous or vexatious before they go to the NJC
for further investigation and inquiry. The Committee is for bringing  into existence an
Empowered Committee in between the complainants and the National Judicial Council.
15.2 The Committee is suggesting for this Body as it feels that while creating any
mechanism of accountability, the cardinal principle of Judicial independence and people’s
faith in the Judiciary should be kept in mind. It should be such a mechanism that has an
inbuilt system of checks and balances and which does not bring the Judges to any disrepute
while paving the way for much desirable accountability. There is a pressing need that the
instances of corruption, misdemeanor or misconduct should be addressed to in an
appropriate and reasonable manner without lowering the repute and image of the Judges
and the Judiciary.
IMPOSITION OF MINOR MEASURES
16.0 In the existing constitutional scheme there is no provision for minor measures or any
penalty other than removal of a Judge. The proposed Bill of 2006 seeks to introduce imposition
of minor measures such as issuing advisory, censure, warnings or withdrawal of judicial work etc.
This issue also attracted the attention of the Committee during its deliberations on the Bill, the
cause for concern for the Committee was that the Constitution only recognizes “removal” as a
resort against an errant Judge and since the members of higher Judiciary are Constitutional
Authorities resort to administrative measures akin to Government Servants cannot be applied to
them. The Committee felt that such measures may lead to public distrust and disrespect and the
Judgment of such Judges against whom such measures are resorted to will be viewed with
disrespect. In addition to that, the Committee felt that such measures by implication would lower
the image of honest and upright Judges. Even though, through in-House procedure some of these
measures are being resorted to. Still, the Committee was for a cautious approach on this issue as
this pertains to action against a Constitutional Authority. The Representative of the Ministry stated
on the issue that there are instances where the Chief Justice of High Court withdraws the judicial
work from the Judge; issues advisories to Brother Judges and also asks them to go on leave,
pending in-house inquiry into allegations against them. There have been a few cases where the
Judge against whom very serious allegations were made, had to resign on persuasion or on the
informal advice rendered to them by the Chief Justice of India. Therefore, the proposed Bill, in
fact, is only documenting these practices, as a Legislative measure.
16.1 It may not be out of place to mention here the views of Justice R.S. Pathak on the
imposition of “minor measures”. He stated “it may be pointed out that the power of the National
Judicial Council is confined to the imposition of “minor measures”, and those minor measures are
detailed in Clause 20(1)(b). The Council is not empowered to deal conclusively with charges
warranting removal of the Judge. The matter lies within the domain of Parliament and the
President”.
16.2 Still the Committee feels that imposition of minor measures will lower the prestige of the
Judiciary. A Judge facing inquiry under the provisions of the proposed Bill will have his integrity
in doubt. The litigants will be looking at him in doubt and even if he is exonerated or even if there
is admonition against him and this fact comes out in open, his reputation will be undermined and
the Judgment delivered by him will lose its sanctity. In this context, the Committee desires that

18
before proceeding against a Judge it should have been clearly established through some
body other than National Judicial Council that there is sufficient evidence against the
Judge. The Committee is of the considered opinion that before setting the investigating
machinery in motion it should have been ensured that there is ground to move against the
Judge. In the opinion of the Committee it could be accomplished through the Empowered
Committee which it is proposing to bring into existence.
APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT
17.0 The proposed Bill contains the provisions for appeal to Supreme Court against (i) an order
of removal passed by the President and (ii) a final order passed by the Council imposing one or
other minor measures on the basis of a complaint. The Committee is against any provision for
appeal as it feels that a provision for appeal against the President’s order is totally uncalled for.
The Committee further observes that the Presidential order of “removal” is a result of Parliament’s
decision after due process and resolution of 2/3rd majority by each house therefore allowing its
decision to be challenged by Junior Judges is unwarranted. The Committee is of the opinion that
an action against a Constitutional Authority should not remain unending. There is a finality attached
to a Presidential order which should not be challenged.
17.1 As for the appeal against an Order passed by the Council imposing one or other minor
measures, the Committee observed that the Judges should not be treated as ordinary Government
servants or ordinary citizens. Moreover, the power of Judicial review is with the Judiciary to
address the event of apparent injustice caused to an individual. While it is there, the provision for
statutory appeal is not necessary. On this premise, the Committee is against any provision for
appeal.

19
CHAPTER–IV
A COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING AND PROPOSED PROCEDURES OF
THE JUDGES’ INQUIRY AND THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE
18.0 The existing procedure for making a complaint against a Judge under the Constitution and
the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 is that the Member of Parliament initiate the procedure in either
House. To initiate the process an MP must necessarily receive a complaint from some source. It
could be an individual, a group of individuals, a litigant or anyone. Once a complaint is received
and if the MP finds that it carries grave charges against a Judge that need consideration, he would
muster requisite numbers in either House and give a notice for a motion praying for the removal
of the Judge. Once this is done it is for the Speaker, Lok Sabha or the Chairman Rajya Sabha to
either admit or refuse to admit the motion, after considering all the material on record. In case the
motion is admitted, a Committee of three members under the Judges’ Inquiry Act, 1968 is
constituted. The Committee conducts inquiry and investigation as prescribed under the 1968 Act
and presents its report to the Speaker or Chairman as the case may be. If the Committee’s
investigation lead to the conclusion that the Judge is not guilty of misbehaviour or incapacity, no
further action is taken in either House. However, if the report indicts the Judge of misbehaviour
or incapacity then it is taken up for consideration in the House and if it is adopted by each House
in accordance with the provisions of clause (4) of Article 124, then the request praying for removal
of the Judge is presented to the President.
18.1 The proposed Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 envisages two procedures for registering
complaints against the Members of the higher Judiciary viz. the complaint procedure and the
reference procedure. The complaint procedure is for the individual complainants and the reference
procedure is actually the impeachment procedure, with certain deviations, as prescribed under
Article 124(4) read with the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968. The complaint procedure is for enabling
any person to make “any allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity” in respect of a Judge of the
higher Judiciary to the National Judicial Council which is to be constituted under clause 3 of the
proposed Bill. The NJC has been vested with the discretion to dispose off the complaints
accordingly viz. (i) if the complaint is frivolous, dismiss it; (ii) if it is not frivolous, then to
constitute an investigating Committee for conducting preliminary investigation and if the
Committee’s finding is for definite charges, then the National Judicial Council shall propose to
conduct an inquiry and frame charges; (iii) if the charges are not proved in an inquiry, then dismiss
the complaint; (iv) if charges are proved and the National Judicial Council is of the opinion that
the charges proved do not warrant removal, then it would impose minor measures against the
Judge; and (v) if the Council is satisfied that the charges of misbehaviour or incapacity are of
serious nature warranting removal, it shall advise the President accordingly i.e. through the
President, it will go to Parliament.
18.2 The reference procedure as envisaged in the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 is actually, the
impeachment procedure as existing under Article 124(4) and Clause 3 of the Judges (Inquiry) Act,
1968 but with certain deviations. Under this provision, the proceedings against a Judge shall be
initiated in the either House of Parliament by way of a notice. This provision also requires notice
by one hundred Members, if given in the House of the People and by fifty Members if the notice
is given in the Council of States for a motion for presenting an address to the president praying
for removal of a Judge on the same grounds i.e. misbehaviour or incapacity. If the motion is
admitted, then the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, shall refer the allegations  to
the proposed National Judicial Council. The deviation here is that under the existing provisions
19

20
the Speaker or the Chairman are vested with the power to constitute a Committee for investigation
of the charges but in the proposed Bill they have to refer the matter to the National Judicial
Council. The National Judicial Council shall then frame definite charges against the Judge and hold
an inquiry and accordingly forward its report to the Speaker or the Chairman. The inquiry so
conducted by the National Judicial Council if it contains a finding that all or any of the charges
are not proved, or that any of the charges proved do not warrant removal then no further steps
shall be taken in Parliament.  However, if the report of the National Judicial Council contains a
finding that all or any of the charges are proved and the National Judicial Council has
recommended removal, then the Parliamentary process shall be invoked. Evidently, in both the
procedures viz the complaint procedure or the reference procedure, it is the NJC which
shall finally decide the matter and the Parliamentary process will be invoked only if the
National Judicial Council recommends “removal” of the indicted judge.
AN ANALYSIS OF THE COMPLAINT AND REFERENCE PROCEDURE
18.3 It may not be out of place to mention here the provisions of the proposed Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006 which have far reaching consequences and may also lead to anomalous situation. These
provision are enumerated in Clause 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,20 and 21 of the Bill. Clause 8,9, 10 and 20
deal with the Complaint Procedure and clause 11, 12 and 21 with the Reference Procedure.
COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
18.4 Clause 8 e nables any person to make a complaint against a Judge to the National Judicial
Council. The Clause further provides the particulars and format to be followed while making a
complaint. Clause 9 provides for the procedure for dealing with such a complaint. Sub-clause (3)
enables the National Judicial Council to constitute a Committee comprising of one or more
of its members for conducting preliminary investigation. Clause 10 envisages inquiry by the
Council and Clause 20 deal with the imposition of minor measures or advise to the President for
removal.
18.5 These clauses constitute what hitherto is known as the in-house procedure. In this
procedure, complaints received against the Judges are disposed off by the Judiciary itself. Since
the proposed NJC is composed of the Judges only, they will receive the complaints, investigate and
inquire by themselves and dispose them off accordingly. This entire procedure is internal to the
Judiciary. Whereas as per the provisions of the Constitution and the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968
proceeding with regard to inquiry against a Judge is to be initiated through MPs and is decided
by Parliament after discussion and debate. Sub-clause (3) of clause 20 envisages a situation where
a complaint by any individual may lead to removal of a Judge through impeachment on the
recommendation of the National Judicial Council.
REFERENCE PROCEDURE
18.6 Clause 11 stipulates what is known as the Parliamentary process for removal of a Judge.
The procedure initiates with notice by the MPs after mustering requisite numbers in either House.
It is for the Speaker or the Chairman to admit or refuse to admit the motion. Sub-clause (2) makes
it obligatory for the Speaker or the Chairman to refer the allegations to the Council once the motion
is admitted. Clause 12(1) stipulates that once the matter has been referred to the Council, it will
frame charges for holding inquiry against the Judge. Clause 21 speaks about the disposal of
reference from the Speaker or the Chairman by the Council. Sub-clause (2) of Clause 21 contains
a situation where if the Council comes to the conclusion that charges are not proved, then no
further proceeding shall be taken in either House. I t means that something originating in
Parliament may end in the Council.  Sub-clause (3) contains a situation where if the Council
recommends that the charges are proved, then the Parliamentary procedure for “removal” may be
invoked.

21
18.7 The above provisions only highlight that it will be the National Judicial Council which shall
be conducting inquiry and investigation against the Judge whether it be a Complaint Procedure or
a reference procedure. Secondly, provisions under clause 20(3) and 21(2) are anomalous and
may lead to a peculiar situation where a complaint from one single individual may result
in impeachment whereas a complaint from 100 MPs Lok Sabha and 50 MPs Rajya Sabha
forwarded by the Speaker or Chairman to the National Judicial Council may be dropped
altogether. Thirdly, clause 20(1)(b)(iv) lists “request that the Judge may voluntarily retire” as one
of the minor measures. The pertinent question here is whether requesting for voluntary retirement
could be on account of minor misbehaviour or incapacity. If it is a case for retirement it must be
on account of major misbehaviour or incapacity which should not have been included in the minor
measures.
19.0 The Committee feels that the proposed Bill by including the complaint procedure seeks to
include the in-house complaint procedure in addition to the reference procedure. The Chairman of
the Committee observed on the issue as “Actually the thing is, they want to synchronize the
two procedures which are already in existence. One is by an in-house procedure which is
followed by all the Judges. This is not by way of any law, but they have a procedure that
if there is any minor misbehaviour, they will sit as five members; they will deal with the
complaint and action will be taken by them within themselves. There is another procedure
which has been made by an Act of Parliament, and that is, where the Members can move
a motion of impeachment. Now they want to synchronize both the things. One is in practice,
not in law another is in law. They want to synchronize both in one Act, and hence this Bill
has been brought in”.
19.1 The difference between the two procedures being that in case of complaint procedure, the
complaint of an individual shall be tested for its veracity and if found vexatious or frivolous that
individual will incur penalty including punishment. No such consequences shall entail in case of
complaints received through reference procedure. It may not be out of place to mention here
that it is the right of the Parliament to go into the complaint right from its initiation till
its disposal which now is being sought to be vested in the National Judicial Council.
19.2 The provisions of the proposed Bill effectively extinguishes the right of Parliament and the
representatives of the people to initiate, discuss and participate in the proceedings for the removal
of a Judge. Further, there is no distinction when an individual is making a complaint or when 100/
50 MPs put a notice of complaints. In addition to that, the Parliament’s authority to constitute an
enquiry Committee shall devolve upon the National Judicial Council and still further that enquiry
Committee shall be composed of Judges only.
19.3 The Committee is of the considered opinion that in no case the existing right of Parliament
could be extinguished. It was observed by the Chairman of the Committee that “this Bill is a long
departure from the earlier Judges Inquiry Act of 1968, according to which the Parliament has
the authority to constitute the enquiry Committee. But, that Authority is also now taken
away and it is given to the sitting Judges in the name of the National Judicial Council. That
means you are usurping the powers of the Parliament which are already in existence”.
19.4 The Committee feels that the proposed procedures viz complaints and reference
procedure should be synthesized to provide a mechanism which has inbuilt checks and
balances including scrutiny of complaints whether coming through complaint procedure or
reference procedure before they go to the proposed National Judicial Council.
19.5 In this context the Committee recommends that there should be another authority in
between. The Committee is for evolving a bicameral system.  The National Judicial Council can
sit as suggested in the proposed Bill and carry out its functions as enumerated. The Committee

22
being suggested here will be in addition to the National Judicial Council which shall be performing
the work of a screening committee. This Committee could be named as “Empowered
Committee”. It could have one member as a representative of the Chief Justice of India. Two
Members from both the Houses of Parliament one each as a representative of the Speaker, Lok
Sabha and Chairman, Rajya Sabha. There could be one nominated representative of the Prime
Minister and one representative of the Bar Council of India. The Committee is suggesting for
inclusion of the representative of the Bar as it feels that it is this institution which knows about
the character and integrity of a Judge. The Committee is also guided by the observation of the
Supreme Court about the role of Bar in regulating the Judiciary in the famous case of Ravichandran
Iyer Vs. Justice A.M. Bhattacharjee. The Supreme Court had observed that “the Bar Association
could remain a useful arm of the Judiciary and in the case of sagging reputation of the particular
Judge, the Bar Association could take up the matter with the Chief Justice of the High Court and
await his response for the action taken thereunder for a reasonable period”. The composition
suggested here for this “Empowered Committee”  makes it an independent, high powered,
impartial, screening body. It can work in co-ordination with the National Judicial Council. This
body could be entrusted with the task of initially receiving the complaints from both the individuals
and reference from Parliament and closely examine them to see whether there is prima facie a case
for sending it to the National Judicial Council for detailed enquiry and investigation.
19.6 Such an Empowered Committee, if brought into existence will satisfy certain requirements
relating to the role of Parliament, the executive and the Judiciary and shall ensure elimination of
frivolous complaints at the initial stage itself after proper verification and facilitate the consideration
of genuine complaints. It will further satisfy the requirement of impartiality and transparency and
consequently save the Judges from public disrespect while providing for a complaint mechanism
and initiation of disciplinary process.
19.7 The Committee is recommending for an Empowered Committee as it feels that while
providing for any system of accountability, it should be kept in mind that the Supreme
Court and the High Courts are highly secretive or closed institutions on the administrative
side even though very open and transparent in respect of the proceedings they conduct i.e.
the Judicial proceedings.  Every proceeding with regard to administration of Justice is
conducted transparently in the courts from the very beginning, so much so, that the
statements of the engaged parties, adducing of evidence, cross-examination, arguments, etc.,
are conducted in the presence of the engaged parties. Further, everything is challengeable
till the evidence adduced leads to a final conclusion. This is a characteristic of this
institution, very innate to it, that at every stage till the final disposal of a case everything
is open and transparent in the Judicial proceedings. It is only in very rare cases that the
proceedings are kept secret. This is perhaps the reason that the judiciary is respected and
revered by the people more than any other  institution of the State. There is a consensus
that the Judiciary, as an Institution, cannot be subjected to an open mechanism of
complaints. There is a need to guard against such a system and create a mechanism which
is in consonance with the repute and reverence of the Judiciary.
20.0 The constitution of this Empowered Committee consisting of non-Judicial Members
representing the Legislature, Judiciary and Executive would create an additional powerful safeguard
to filter and eliminate frivolous complaint petitions. This will also create a reasonable via media
providing for both internal as well as external checks on Judicial disciplining process without
endangering the judicial independence. Further since the “Empowered Committee” is having the
presence of the Executive, Legislature, Judiciary and the Civil Society, it would satisfy the
Constitutional parameters and would create a system of checks and balances.
20.1 While recommending for creation of an “Empowered Committee” as an additional body the
Committee also takes into account the full court view of the Jharkhand High Court on the need
for a regulatory check on the complaints. The Jharkhand High Court on Clause 8 of the Bill has

23
opined that “there is no regulatory check for receiving the complaint. Any person/party against
whom an order is passed or any person with jealousy, enmity can lodge a complaint even without
examining himself or without producing evidences in support thereof. For entertaining a complaint
even in a minor criminal offence, the complainant is required to be examined himself and produce
supporting oral and documentary evidence before the summons is issued to the accused. But under
the provisions of this section, a complaint lodged only in writing with simple verification by any
person as also any complaint from any other sources can be entertained.” The Court has further
opined that “entertaining the complaint at one stage (which may ultimately be found frivolous) in
some cases would cause immense injury and damage to the prestige and dignity of the person
bearing high moral character and maintaining high tradition. There is absolutely no safeguard
against the said situation.  History is the witness that great men who are now worshiped as God
and even the names taken as God e.g. Lord Ram, Jesus Christ, Satyawadi Harishchandra and father
of the Nation-Mahatma Gandhi became victims of jealously, conspiracy and misconception. In such
a world, nobody is safe from mudslinging and malicious attempt, which may, in some cases, would
cause more agony and injury than the punishment spelt in the proposed Bill.’’
20.2. The Committee is suggesting the constitution of the “Empowered Committee” on another
premise also. The Committee feels that it is very unlikely that the members of the higher Judiciary
will take tough action against their brother Judges. It was observed by one of the Hon’ble Member
that “there is a conscious or unconscious trade unionism practised by the Judges and there
is a natural reluctance on their part to take unpleasant action against their brother
Judges”. In this scenario the Committee feels that it would be reasonable to have an independent
impartial body in between.
Apart from the above reasons the constitution of the “Empowered Committee” may
also be considered for the following reasons.
AN IMPARTIAL WIDER REPRESENTATIVE BODY
20.3. When any Authority or Body is created for investigation purposes, it should be an impartial
representative Body so that the interest of all involved are protected. There are certain offices/
designations which are constitutionally supposed to be impartial. These offices/designations are
supposed to conduct or do work as mandated by the Constitution. The offices of Chairman, Rajya
Sabha and Speaker, Lok Sabha are such offices. The representatives of these offices should be
there in the proposed Empowered Committee as the same shall satisfy the requirement of
Parliamentary presence which is a constitutional mandate as prescribed under article 124(4) of the
constitution. Further, since the endeavour is to provide a machinery dealing with Judicial
misconduct, a representative of the Judiciary should also be there in the body. Therefore the body
must necessarily have the nominee of the Chief Justice of India. Such a representative Body could
act very impartially and instill faith among all the interested parties that the matter rests in impartial
hands. Further, since, the body has wider representation, its scrutiny of the complaints would not
be viewed with suspicion from any quarter.
SCRUTINY OF COMPLAINTS
20.4. Since, the Judiciary is a highly respected institution, there should not be any attempt
to lower its image in the name of accountability. In fact, it is the only institution which has
survived the faith and trust of the people. Therefore, when providing for a system of
complaints from any quarter, reputation of the Judiciary must be guarded. This calls for a
close scrutiny of the complaints received against a Judge. The cardinal principle here is that
the proceeding of inquiry or investigation should not be initiated against a Judge unless
there is clear evidence against him. Mere allegations of misconduct and consequent
initiation of inquiry will not only undermine the credibility of the concerned Judge but also
of the Judiciary as a whole. It needs to be ensured that an honest and upright Judge is

24
saved from the ignominy of false complaints. The pertinent  question is who should conduct
such an initial inquiry in an impartial manner. The proposed Bill is vesting this
responsibility to the National Judicial Council whose Members are all Judges and which is
the final authority also. This proposition may lead to a conclusion in the minds of the
people that the Members of the Judiciary shall sit to receive complaints against the
Members of the Judiciary and dispose them off accordingly. In such a scenario what
complaints were received and scrutinized will not come out in public. Whereas, the purpose
of the proposed Bill is to ensure that genuine complaint cases should get final redressal.
This requires consideration of both the issues together viz.  elimination of frivolous
complaints and close scrutiny of genuine complaints for further action. This could
appropriately be done by an independent representative body.
MAINTAINING CREDIBILITY AND TRANSPARENCY
20.5. Judiciary has been a very closed institution till now. There have been certain in-house
practices followed in it. Charges of corruption and misconduct etc. have been dealt with through
this in-House procedure. There is no data available to apprise the people or other institutions about
the manner and number of such cases received and disposed off and the measures of accountability
taken thereof. In fact even an allied institution of judiciary i.e. the Bar may not be aware of such
data and consequent measures. Clearly this system is lacking both in credibility and transparency.
This again calls for having a body which is credible and which follows the principle of reasonable
transparency. The National Judicial Council, with no outside Members, may not command that
credibility in public eye and may not be that transparent as the same may be regarded as an internal
body of the Judiciary. This state of things also makes a case for the Empowered Committee.
NEED FOR BRINGING THE COMPLAINT AND REFERENCE PROCEDURE TOGETHER AND
PROVIDING FOR A SINGLE SCRUTINISING BODY
20.6. The proposed reference procedure, even though a modified version of the 1968 Act,
involves devolution of the powers of the constitutional functionaries i.e. the Speaker and the
Chairman and has the effect of curtailing the role of Parliament. This is not within the
constitutional framework in, as much as, that there could be a case when a process initiated in
Parliament could end in the National Judicial Council. Further more, the proposed National Judicial
Council is supposed to be a judicially exclusive Council with no outside presence, not even from
the Bar Council of India. It is very unlikely that the decisions of the National Judicial Council
would not be seen with suspicion by the public. They shall receive the complaints from the
individuals and the reference from Parliament and thereafter dispose them off accordingly. This
would be something similar to the in-house procedure in both the cases viz complaint and reference
cases. If the Empowered Committee is created, this could provide an integrated, two tier
system of eliminating frivolous complaints first at the initial stage,  after proper scrutiny and
verification by an independent body and later by the National Judicial Council also on its own
investigation and inquiry, thus minimizing the chances of injustice being meted out to either party.
20.7. In addition to the above factors, such a system would entail the following advantages also:—
(i) Since, there is scrutiny at two fora, it is only the genuine cases which will be investigated.
(ii) Penal provisions proposed in the Bill against frivolous complaints may discourage the
people and ultimately defeat the purpose of the Bill. Since there are two fora of
investigation, penal provisions could be taken off completely.
(iii) Right to information Act could be applied to both the fora.
(iv) There would not be any need for right to appeal provisions as an independent and in-
house forum, both are conducting the investigation.

25
CHAPTER–V
Appointment of Judges
21.0. While deliberating upon various provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006, the
Committee Members repeatedly raised the question of appointment of the Judges and the need
for bringing about a comprehensive legislation for Judicial appointments and accountability.
Interestingly, the legal luminaries who deposed before the Committee including the former Chief
Justices of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court also raised the issue of appointment
of the Judges. One of the Hon’ble Member observed on the issue as “the present Bill will not
take us anywhere near Judicial accountability. It is only a complaint mechanism. Judicial
accountability can be achieved only by an exhaustive legislation or a comprehensive
legislation giving powers to an independent National Judicial Commission for recruitment
of Judges, disciplinary action, promotion, etc. All these matters will have to be dealt with
by an independent agency”.
21.1. This led the Committee to consider the issue of appointment of Judges also. The relevant
provision of the Constitution which deal with the method of appointment of the Supreme Court
Judge is Clause (2) of Article 124 which states that every Judge of the Supreme Court is appointed
by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. However, the President’s power of
appointment of Judges is not unfettered. The Constitution requires him to consult such of the
Judges of the Supreme Court, and of the High Courts, as he may deem necessary. It also requires
him to always consult the Chief Justice of India in the appointment of a Judge other than the Chief
Justice of India. According to the Court’s interpretation of these provisions the process of
appointment of the Judges is initiated by the Chief Justice through a collegium consisting of himself
and four of the senior most Judges of the Court. The recommendation of the collegium is binding
on the President. He may, however, not appoint a person whom for specific reasons he does not
consider suitable for appointment. In such case, the collegium must reconsider his
recommendation. On reconsideration, it may either drop the name of the person not found suitable
by the President or reiterate its recommendation. In the latter case, the President is bound to accept
the recommendation. This interpretation of the constitutional provision by the court in 1993
has led to a situation wherein the executive’s discretion in the appointment of the Judges
has totally been negatived.  This in effect means that the President or executive is bound to
accept the recommendation of the collegium. The pre 1993 situation involved the discretion of the
President i.e. the executive in the appointment of Judges. This was reinforced in a 1982 judgment
of the court wherein it was expressly stated that in the matter of appointment of the Judges, the
President has primacy. However, by a 1993 judgment, the court overruled its earlier interpretation.
On this, one of the Hon’ble Member observed that “In 1993, the Judges took upon themselves
the solemn powers which the executive always enjoyed in our Constitution and which the
executives in all democratic constitutions everywhere in the world enjoy even today, that is,
to make appointments to the higher judiciary. By a very curious procedure of a judicial
examination of this case, they appropriated to themselves the power to appoint themselves”.
Another Member observed that  “......the 1993 Judgment of the Supreme Court actually
interpreted consultation into command. Consulting Supreme Court means you take
command from the Supreme Court. The executive has a role in this and that role must be
given its play. In fact, as is done by the 1993 Judgment, to mean it as a command is
unconstitutional. Therefore, that has to be corrected”.
25

26
21.2. Evidently, after, the 1993 judgment, the role of the executive on the appointment of Judges
has virtually been obliterated. It is the Judiciary which has arrogated to it all the powers with
regard to appointment of the Judges It is the collegium which selects and recommends the names
of the Judges for appointment which have to be accepted by the executive. It was observed by
one of the Members on the issue that “the way the appointments are being made today, every
Member of the Collegium has somebody to promote; they fight for his promotion and
bringing him to the High Court Bench or the Supreme Court Bench. When allegations are
made against such a person, do you expect that this Council, consisting of only Judges, is
going to shed all its trade unionism, favouritism? If we are dissatisfied with the method of
appointment, this power cannot reside only in a group of Judges. It has to be in a wider
body”. The constitutional provision expressly states as under: —
“....Article 124 : Establishment and Constitution of the Supreme Court:
(1) xx xx xx xx
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by
warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme
Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the
purpose and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years. Provided that in
the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of India
shall always be consulted”.
This phrasing itself is indicative of the executive’s primacy in the appointment of the
Judges. Now, the collegium has taken this consultative process to itself and it recommends names
which are to be accepted by the executive. This has resulted in a situation which is characterized
as Judges appointing Judges. This is in contrast to the constitutional provision. It was suggested
by a Member that “the proposed National Judicial Council should also be the authority
competent to recommend all names for appointments as Judges and Chief Justice of the
High Courts and the Supreme Court. It might be only fair and natural that the body which
dealt with complaints/references against the Judges and recommended the punishments to
be awarded to them, should also be the one to recommend the names of persons to the
President for appointment as Judges/Chief Justices of the High Courts and the Supreme
Court”. Another Hon’ble Member referring to Justice Malimath’s deposition before the Committee
stated that “Mr. Malimath, the eminent Ex-Judge and author of the March, 2003 Report on
Reforms of Criminal Justice System regretfully but candidly told the Committee that the
new method of selection of Judges, introduced not by constitutional amendment but by a
fresh constitutional interpretation by Judges themselves, holding that the decision of the
Judges will prevail over that of the Executive in making these high appointments had not
improved matters.”
21.3. Justice Malimath, during his deposition before the Committee had stated as under:—
“.......all that which I have always maintained is against the express tenor of the
Constitution. It is a wrong decision. It is an aberration. Sooner it is corrected, the better
it is. The earlier one was better. Actually, the quality of appointment of Judges in my
opinion has suffered after the 1993 Judgment of the Supreme Court which has abrogated
the exclusive power of virtually recommending the Judges, virtually neutralizing the Judges.
The quality of Judges appointed earlier, in my opinion, is much better than the quality of
Judges appointed after this collegium. It is against the express tenor of the Constitution. It
says the President can make an appointment in consultation with such Judges of the
Supreme Court or of the High Court. He can say that he can seek advice of any of the
Judges. This is what the Constitution says. But you now say that only these four Judges.

27
How can you do that? The Government seems to have abdicated its power which was
there. Virtually the Government has no say in the matter of appomtment........’’.
21.4. While taking stock of the impact of the post 1993 situation, former Chief Justice of India
Justice P.N. Bhagwati stated as under:—
“......but ask any lawyer, standard has gone down. Why it is because of the mode of
appointment. When the Supreme Court gave its Judgment that the appointment should be
in the hands of the judiciary and the Government should be bound by it and it should be
the end of judiciary, namely, Chief Justice and first four Judges. Everyone thought, perhaps,
at least, some people thought but I never thought that myself that this would improve the
appointment of or quality of appointment of Judges. I know what happens there in the
Committee of five. I don’t want to discuss that or disclose that but we see what
appointments have been made. I don’t know and I don’t have any idea. But I hear from
people, therefore, we have actually got to have a comprehensive law wherein with the
appointment of Judges we have to look into the manner in which you are going to deal with
them and then how to deal with them and how to deal with any misconduct and what
should be the procedure for impeachment. I don’t think it is possible to dissect all these
things into different laws but there may be some conflict between what you have provided
in one situation in one legislation and in another legislation. The situation may arise where
it may be very difficult to decide which particular law should be applied.......”.
21.5. While deposing before the Committee former Chief Justice of India Justice R.S. Pathak
stated on the issue of appointment of Judges as under:—
“........so far as the collegium is concerned, I must frankly confess that I have serious
reservations about it. In regard to the old practice that we used to follow in the appointment
of Judges, although this is not a matter really for today’s deliberations, in my Judgment in
S.P. Gupta case you will find that I thought we were quite happy with the old system
provided it worked out bona fide. ’’
21.6. Former Chief Justice of India Justice Ranganath Misra summed up on the issue of
appointment of Judges as under:—
“I had made a reference, as a Judge or as a Chief Justice, to a larger Bench of the Court
to find out how this process will be worked out. It sent to a Nine-Judge Bench. It was
a larger Bench. We wanted a decision from the Supreme Court on the question. It was not
a matter which was to go beyond a point and decide how the vacancies of the Judges
would be filled up. There was a wrong thing, probably, in my own way, I consider, that
the referring Bench had said that all other questions were closed and that was the only issue
to be discussed by the larger Bench. But what was referred to should have been looked
into, not how Benches would be created, how Judges will be allowed to come in and
whether the entire thing is to be reopened. It is a pity that the entire thing was reopened.
Ultimately, a principle was evolved by which appointment of Judges were made by the
Judges themselves and not by any other agency. The status of the Judges, taken as for the
Supreme Court collegium was of one type and for the other collegium were of different
type. The foundation on which the appointments were to be made and as were being made
that was given up and appointments in the Supreme Court were done on the
recommendation of a collegium, consisting of the Chief Justice and two Judges. Then, in
the High Courts, appointments were made in a particular way. I just indicate it for your
consideration that it is on the basis of the recommendation, out of them it was being done.
Between that came the authorised Bench of three, to be called a Collegium, and a Bench
of five for a Collegium of the Judges who were retiring or may not be retiring may be

28
already working, the system got disturbed. The power given to the President was taken.
The Constitution clearly reads that the Judges shall be appointed by the President on the
recommendation of the Government. If that is so, it was not open to exclude the President,
make it obligatory for the Judges of the High Court to work in a particular mechanism for
the selection, and this has brought in problem.”
21.7. It may not be out of place to mention here the views of the Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs, on the issue of appointment of Judges. The Secretary stated that “this is something we
are facing ever since 1993, when the Judges took over the power of appointment. Nowhere in the
world is this the case; Judges don’t appoint themselves. But we have walked into a trap where
judges appoint themselves and the executive has no role to play”. Stating further, the Secretary,
added that “there is a larger issue involved and this has to be taken up for review by the court
where the Parliament can assert its primacy in appointments”.
21.8. The Committee also feels that when the question of complaints is being addressed to,
the question of appointments should also be add ressed to appropriately. There was a
consensus among Committee members that pre 1993 position was a better option as it was
in consonance with the provision of the Constitution wherein the executive and the judiciary
both were involved in the consultative process and the executive had the primacy. The
Committee favours for the restoration of pre 1993 position.
21.9. The Committee further suggests that the appointments could also be entrusted to
wider a body other than the collegium with representation from both the judiciary and the
executive. The Committee is of the considered opinion that it could be entrusted to the
proposed “Empowered Committee” which could initially screen the names and thereafter,
refer the same to the National Judicial Council for final recommendations.

29
Chapter–VI
22.0. During the Committee’s deliberations certain other issues aroused the attention of the
Committee. These issues included the following:—
Decisions of the National Judicial Council (NJC)
22.1. It is not clear from the relevant provisions of the Bill by what method the National Judicial
Council will take its decisions? What will happen if there is a difference of opinion among the
Members of the National Judicial Council? The Committee feels that this vacuum will be addressed
when rules are framed and decision by simple majority is provided therein.
Non compliance with the decisions of the NJC
22.2. C lause 20 of the Bill authorizes the NJC to impose minor measures. What will happen if
a judge refuses to comply with the orders of the National Judicial Council? On this particular issue
it was observed by the Chairman of the Committee that  “suppose, this punishment is not
complied with, where is the power, or to whom is the power given to enforce this
punishment? Is the power given to the Chief Justice of India, or National Judicial Council’s
order is executable order? If yes, who will execute it? If there is a violation, how it has
to be monitored? The Committee thinks that non compliance with the orders of the
National Judicial Council should be treated as non ethical on the part of the Judge who is
refusing to comply with the orders of NJC and the NJC should recommend such a case for
impeachment proceedings.
Annual Report of the NJC
22.3. Since, the National Judicial Council is going to be the authority deciding each
complaint finally involving its own internal process, it would be reasonable if an annual
report is laid to Parliament in respect of the work done by it in furtherance to its
accountability to the people through Parliament.
Constitutional Validity of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
22.4. This issue came in for discussion as some members felt that the constitutional provision
under article 124 only provide for ‘removal’ and since this Bill seeks to provide for an additional
mode of removal and subjects a judge to additional penalties viz. minor measures which are not
provided for in the Constitution, the Bill is ultra vires the Constitution. In the opinion of the
members providing for additional mode of removal and additional penalties requires constitutional
amendment than a direct legislative method. It was pointed out by an Hon’ble member that
“Chapter IV of the Constitution deals with the Union Judiciary. The Judges of the Supreme Court
are to be appointed by the President after consultation with senior Judges of the Supreme Court
and the High Court as the President may deem necessary. A Judge may be removed from office
only by an order of the President after each House of Parliament has addressed him for such
removal and the address is supported by a prescribed majority in both Houses of Parliament. Apart
from this he retains his office till he attains the age of 65 years or earlier tenders his resignation.
Similar provision is made for appointment of High Court Judges except that they retire when they
complete 62 years of age. Neither the Chief Justice of India nor any senior Judges of the Supreme
Court individually or collectively can exercise any disciplinary powers over a brother Judge. Article
29

30
124 ensures his independence not only from executive but substantially from the Legislature also.
The present Bill cannot be described a Bill for the presentation of an address and for the
investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge. Moreover, as the Bill seeks
to provide an additional mode of removal and subjects a judge to additional penalties not provided
for in the Constitution, the Bill is ultra vires.”
22.5. The Chief Justice of the Jharkhand High Court also opined that ‘‘the provisions of the
Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006, providing a procedure for filing compliant by any person with an
allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge to the Council is contrary to the Constitutional
Provisions and Scheme. The Constitution does not contemplate the complaint of any kind against
a Judge.” He further opined that “Article 121 prohibits any discussion in the Parliament with
respect to the conduct of the Judge of the Supreme Court or of the High Court in discharge of
his duties except upon a motion for removal of a Judge. What cannot be discussed in the
Parliament cannot also be the subject-matter of the Parliamentary legislation. The conduct of a
Judge and imposing minor measures for such conduct, a fortiori cannot therefore, be a subject-
matter of Parliamentary legislation”. The Chief Justice further opined that “it is true that the object
is to bring some legislation for empowering a Special Forum to deal with the complaints regarding
the Judicial accountability to be shown by the Judges of High Courts and the Judges of Supreme
Court is laudable. But the said legislation should not cause an adverse effect on the independence
of the higher judiciary. Therefore, the Bill should be suitably modified”.
22.6. Some of the legal luminaries who had deposed before the Committee on the Bill were also
of the opinion that the proposed Legislative enactment requires constitutional amendment as the
Constitution only provides for “removal” and measures short of removal are not expressly provided
for in the Constitution as it stands. Leading legal luminary Shri Fali S. Nariman, suggested
amendment in the end of Article 124 in the following words “such law may also make provision
as to measures short of removal.” Another legal luminary was of the view that the provisions of
the proposed Bill are against the basic structure of the Constitution as they will undermine the
independence of the judiciary. Elaborating further the witness stated that the independence, in the
context of the Judiciary, does not mean independence from the legislature and executive alone, it
also means independence from other Judges acting singly or collectively against a Judge. The
provisions of the proposed Bill seeks to create a mechanism where brother Judges will Judge the
conduct of a Judge which in the opinion of the witness was unconstitutional.
22.7. However, in spite of the intense debate about the constitutional validity of the Bill, the
Committee took note of another view point which emerged during the course of the same
discussion. There were some Members and Witness who were of the opinion that the Constitution
does not prohibit measures other than “removal” altogether. These Members and Witnesses referred
to the in-house procedure being followed and adhered to in the judiciary. It was observed by one
of the Member that “The Bill is a first significant step toward providing a balanced
Regulatory Statutory mechanism for the higher Judiciary. Jettisoning the Bill either on the
ground of perceived unconstitutionality or on the ground of “under-inclusion” of several
other topics like appointment of Judges or on the ground of imperfection may well amount
to throwing the baby out with the bathwater”.  The Committee also took note of the Judicial
pronouncements in this regard. The Committee was guided by the interpretation of the Constitution
by the Supreme Court in the case of C. Ravichandran Iyer Vs. Justice A.M. Bhattacharjee
which ultimately laid the foundation for the in-house procedure in the higher judiciary to deal with
the cases of misconduct warranting measures other than “removal”. In the above quoted case it
was observed by the Supreme Court that “Guarantee of tenure and its protection by the
Constitution would not, however, accord sanctuary for corruption or grave misbehaviour. Yet
every action or omission by a judicial officer in the performance of his duties which is not
a good conduct necessarily, may not be misbehaviour indictable by impeachment, but its

31
insidious effect may be pervasive and may produce deleterious effect on the integrity and
impartiality of the Judge. Every misbehaviour in juxtaposition to good behaviour, as a
constitutional tautology, will not support impeachment but a misbehaviour which is not a
good behaviour may be improper conduct not befitting to the standard expected of a Judge.
Threat of impeachment process itself may swerve a Judge to fall prey to misconduct but it
serves disgrace to use impeachment process for minor offences or abrasive conduct on the
part of a Judge. The bad behaviour of one Judge has a rippling effect on the reputation of
the judiciary as a whole. When the edifice of Judiciary is built heavily on public confidence
and respect, the damage by an obstinate Judge would rip apart the entire Judicial structure
built in the Constitution”.  The Apex Court had further observed that “bad conduct or bad
behaviour of a Judge therefore, needs correction to prevent erosion of public confidence in
the efficacy of judicial process or dignity of the institution or credibility to the Judicial
office held by the obstinate Judge. When the Judge cannot be removed by impeachment
process for such conduct but generates widespread feeling of dissatisfaction among the
general public, the question would be who would stamp out the rot and judge the Judge or
who would impress upon the Judge either to desist from repetition or to demit the office
in grace? Who would be the appropriate authority? Who would be the principal mover in
that behalf? The hiatus between bad behaviour and impeachable misbehaviour needs to be
filled in to stem erosion of public confidence in the efficacy of judicial process. Whether the
Bar of that Court has any role to play either in an attempt to correct the perceived fallen
standard or is entitled to make a demand by a resolution or a group action to pressurize
the Judge to resign his office as a Judge? The resolution to these question involves delicate
but pragmatic approach to the questions of constitutional law”.
22.8. It was after this pronouncement that the Supreme Court, in its full court meeting, on 7th
May, 1997 had resolved that “an in-house procedure should be devised by the Hon’ble Chief
Justice of India to take suitable remedial action against Judges who by their acts of
omission or commission do not follow the universally accepted values of judicial life
including those indicated in the Restatement of Values of Judicial Life”.
22.9. The Committee also noted the view of the Allahabad High Court on this issue which stated
that “the Apex court itself has laid down that the Chief Justice of a High Court has ample power
to deal with any Judge who misconduct himself. Self regulation by Judiciary is the method which
has been emphasized by the Apex Court. The Chief Justice of India, as head of the judicial
fraternity has ample power to look into any complaint against any Judge. The in-house remedy for
restoring the confidence of people against errant behaviour or misconduct by any Judge has
functioned quite effectively”. It was further stated by the Allahabad Court that “In recent past
fruitful results of in-house procedure were seen by everyone. The Chief Justice of India being head
of the judicial fraternity does not lack means and power to discipline the Judges. On the advice
of the Chief Justice of India two Judges have tendered resignation from their office in recent past,
one of Delhi High Court and one of Rajasthan High Court. There are various other examples where
the Judges and even the Chief Justice of the High Court had resigned on the advise given by the
Chief Justice of India. The gap between proved misbehaviour and bad behaviour consistent with
high office can only be disciplined by self regulation through an in-house procedure”.
22.10. The C ommittee further notes that the Judiciary itself is not averse to self regulating
methods. It was observed by the Supreme Court itself in Ravichandran Iyer Vs. Justice A.M.
Bhattacharjee case that “this in-house procedure would fill in the constitutional gap and would
yield salutary effect. Unfortunately, recourse to this procedure was not taken in the case
at hand, may be, because of absence of legal sanction to such a procedure.”  The above
observation of the Supreme Court makes it evident that even the judiciary feels that there should
be some mechanism to fill in the gap between proved misbehaviour and bad conduct.

32
22.11. The Committee takes this opportunity to disagree with the Law Commission’s interpretation
of entry ll A in list III of the constitution on which the Law Commission of India has based its
argument in favour of the constitutional validity of the proposed Bill. Entry llA in list III deals with
the Administration of Justice; constitution and organisation of all courts, except the Supreme Court
and High Courts. It is evident that the particular entry expressly excludes High Courts and the
Supreme Court from its purview. Therefore, the Committee does not agree with the interpretation
of the Law Commission in favour of the constitutional validity of the proposed Bill.
22.12. Taking all the above discussion into account the Committee feels that the in-House
procedure devised bv the Judiciary had its foundation in the interpretation of the
Constitution viz. article 124. The procedure has been in practice for a decade and has been
accepted by the entire administration and the Courts as it is. There has not been a single
instance where it has been challellenged till date. The Committee also takes note of the
fact that the proposed Bill seeks to incorporate the provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Act,
1968, which again has been in place for about four decades without being challenged even
once. Therefore, the Committee feels that the proposed Bill is not seeking to give a new
interpretation to article 124 of the Constitution. In fact it is seeking to provide a statutory
basis to a procedure viz. in-house procedure sanctified by practice and fully accepted by the
judiciary. Therefore, despite the opinions of Law Commission and other witnesses the
Committee feels that though there is no need for a constitutional amendment the issue of
constitutional validity of this Bill be thoroughly examined once again before proceding
further with the Bill because many witnesses including jurists were of the opinion that this
Bill will not withstand constitutional validity in its present form without amending the
Constitution and the Committee can not and should not ignore the views of Legal
Fraternity.
Reservations in Judiciary
22.13. Several Members of the Committee raised the issue of reservations in judiciary for SCs/STs/
OBCs and other minority groups. The Committee had raised the issue of social justice in judiciary
in its other reports also viz. the 2nd report of the Committee pertaining to the Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Law and Justice wherein the Committee had observed “that during the course
of Committee’s deliberations with the representatives of the Ministry, a point was made for
adequate representation of SCs, STs and OBCs in the higher judiciary to meet the ends of
social justice and equity.” The opinion of an Hon’ble Member on the issue is listed below:—
22.14. Judiciary widens the ambit of social, economic and political justice to the people. It has the
prerogative of undertaking judicial review of the Constitution, which is not extended to the
executive. The legislations formulated and passed by the Indian Parliament are also subjected to the
appraisal of the judiciary.
22.15. Such a coveted institution should also exhibit the reality of the social milieu in which
the judiciary has been created. It cannot live in isolation in ivory tower and remain outside
the ambit of constitutional provisions. The Constitution of India provides for reservation to
socially and educationally backward citizens in all institutions of state such as legislature
and executive through Articles 15(4), 16, 38, 46, 340 and 93rd Constitutional Amendment.
22.16. Accordingly, a percentage of seats are reserved for socially and educationally
backward sections in the Parliament of India, State Legislative Assemblies, Local Bodies,
Central. and State Civil Services including IAS and IPS, Public Sector Units, Central and
State Governmental Departments and in all public and private educational institutions,
except in the minority and religious educational institutions.
22.17. Judiciary is manned and operated by learned Judges and other judicial officers. When
executive and legislature are brought under the ambit of constitutional reservation, it is but

33
natural that Judiciary, the third pillar of Democracy, should also be covered by the principle
of reservation. Otherwise, it creates a dubious distinction among the three pillars of
democracy. This is the major ration ale regarding Reservation in Judiciary.
22.18. Equality of status and of opportunity guaranteed by the Constitution is precisely
negated when the Judiciary closes the doors for the appointment of all classes of society.
India is a pluralistic  society. There are several distinct and differing interests of people with
multiplicity of religion, race, caste and community.
22.19. They need to be given equal opportunity in all walks of life for participation in every
sphere. Judiciary cannot be an exception. Reservation principle should be inclusive of
Judiciary. This alone can bring constitutional balance between the Legislature, Executive
and Judiciary. Then only the real cause of Social Justice can be served.
22.20. Denial of this opportunity to all classes of people, be they Backward Classes or SCs
or STs or Minority or Women goes contrary to the concept of participatory democracy. This
implies that the Judicial administration of the country should also be participated by all the
outstanding and meritorious candidates and not by any selective or insular group. This can
be ensured only when there is an explicit affirmative action in the form of Reservation in
Judiciary.
22.21. Today thanks to Reservation Policy, a large number of candidates from BCs, MBs,
SCs and STs have been well educated. They have become highly competent to occupy the
positions of judges in the High courts and Supreme court. AS the National Commission to
Review the working of the Constitution (NCRWC) observes “over 50 years of the progress
of education, however tardy, has certainly produced adequate number of persons of the SC,
ST and OBC in every State who possess the required qualification having necessary
integrity, character and acumen required for judges of Supreme court and High Court for
appointment as Judge of the superior Judiciary.”
22.22. It is true that Judges are appointed in accordance with the provisions of Articles 124
and 217 of the Constitution. These Articles do not make any specific provision for
reservation for any caste or class of persons. But why those who appoint Judges have not
taken a broader view of the Indian society and selected advocates from the neglected
communities? Through a shrewd process of manipulation, the Indian Judiciary has been
keeping the competent persons of the downtrodden communities from the purview of
appointment of Judges.
22.23. This has been vindicated by the Supreme Court Judgment delivered in 1993 which
states, “even today there are complaints that generations of men from the same family or
caste, community or religion, are being sponsored and initiated and appointed as Judges,
thereby creating a new “theory of judicial relationship”.
22.24. This nexus and manipulative Judicial appointments have to be broken. Reservation
in Judiciary is the only answer.
22.25. Besides, reservation alone can provide justice to majority sections of the society
which have competent persons but under represented. If we look at the statistics of judges
in higher courts, we notice a dismal picture. The National Commission to Review the
Working of the Constitution helps us to substantiate this point. It observed that “in higher
judiciary, the representation of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other backward
Classes is inadequate. Out of 610 judges in the various high courts, there are hardly about
20 judges belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes”.

34
22.26. The appointment of Judges from all strata of the society will have a tremendous
impact on the social fabric of the judiciary itself. After all, judiciary has to reflect the
aspirations of the people. These are articulated by the Indian Parliament and State
Legislatures which are accountable to the people. Only when candidates drawn from
different sections of society are appointed as judges, they would understand the social
flavour of the legislation passed by the Parliament and Legislatures.
22.27. They would properly interpret them from social angle. This would pave the way for
social progress of India., Judges, who have no linking of the social milieu or the living
conditions of the neglected sections of society sit as judges in Full Bench or Division or
Single Bench very often set aside the legislations passed by the Parliament and
Legislatures.
22.28. Adequate representation of the backward citizens especially Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in all the organs of the State, including the Higher Judiciary (Supreme Court and High
Courts) is a mandate of the Indian Constitution. It necessarily and naturally flows from the basic
features of democracy, equality and secularism.
22.29. Such representation in the Legislature is taken care of by Article 330 and 332 with the hope
that such provision for reservation can cease after a particular period once such representation
becomes certain even without reservation as hoped in Article 334. The adequate representation in
the executive wing of the state is ensured by the command of Article 335 read with Articles 14
and 16 (especially clauses 4, 4A and 48).
22.30. Such adequate representation in all other areas was implied in the Constitution and
assured by the mandate under Article 14 and 15, which require such reservation as a
necessary ingredient of the principle of equality and which has found its resonance in the
clauses 4 and 5 of Article 15. In addition, our Constitution secures equality of status and
opportunity as reflected in the Preamble. And, Article 14 not only permits, but also requires
classification on the basis of a rational nexus with a reasonable objective.
22.31. Moreover, the mandates of secularism (which includes pluralism, diversity and
adequate representation of different classes and groups) and democracy (which requires
representative, participative and dialogical character of all the organs and institutions of the
State) necessarily require a representative judiciary having adequate participation of un-
represented backward classes especially SCs and STs. Since this adequate representation
could not be attained even after 60 years of our independence, it is necessary to explicitly
provide for such reservation and representation of the backward classes among the Judges
of the Supreme Court and High Courts. Such provisions should be made and implemented
without brooking any further delay. Such provision is also mandated by the Directive
Principles of State Policy (Part IV) especially Articles 38, 39, 39A and 46. The same also is
in tune with Part-IV A (Fundamental Duties) of the Constitution. [The duty to cherish and
follow the noble ideals and other such duties especially Article 51A (a) (b) (e) (f) (j)].
22.32. Without needing any further Constitutional amendment, the provision for
reservation in the higher Judiciary has already been included in Article 14 and 15 of the
Constitution. Most specifically Article 15(4) provides for special provisions for Backward
Classes, SCs and STs, which special provision necessarily includes representation of these
groups in higher judiciary. Since the procedure for selection and appointment of judges has
not been laid down explicitly unlike in the case of Legislature and Executive, the application
of Articles 14 and 15(4) could not be provided explicitly, the fact that the implied procedure
did not bring about the ‘adequate representation’ of these classes only shows the failure of
the present implied procedure. Since the Constitution has to be read and interpreted

35
harmoniously and holistically, an interpretation of Article 124, 216 and 217 should have to
take into consideration the provision under Article 14 and 15(4) and the basic features of
democracy, equality and secularism, which necessarily includes provision for adequate
representation in the higher Judiciary.
22.33. To conclude, ir offends one’s common sense as to why there should not be any reservation
in a Constitutional body of law interpreters, while such reservation is available in the law-makers’
(Parliament and State Legislatures) and law-implementers’ body (Executive), where all the three
wings of our democracy are equal and important in the Constitutional architecture and flowing
from it the national policy of the country.
22.34. The Committee would like the Government to consider this issue earnestly.

36
CHAPTER–VII
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE CONSIDERATION
23.0. In the background of Committee recommendation to reexamine the issue of Constitutional
validity of the Bill in detail the Committee took up Clause by clause consideration of the Bill in its
meetings held on the 14th and 25th June, 2007.
Clause–2
23.1. Cl ause 2 is the definition clause defining various terms used in the Bill.
23.2. Sub-clause (i) defines the term ‘Judge’ as follows:—
“Judge means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and includes the Chief
Justice of a High court and also the Chief Justice of India for purposes of the reference
procedure but shall not include the Chief Justice of India for purposes of the complaint
procedure”.
23.3. The Committee notes that the exclusion of the Chief Justice of India from the
definition for the purposes of the complaint procedure was without any reasonable
justification. The Committee is for bringing the Chief Justice of India within the purview
of the complaint procedure since as discussed in the earlier part of the report, the
Committee is not in favour of keeping the reference procedure.
23.4. The Committee suggests to amend the definition as follows:—
‘‘Judge means a Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court and includes the
Chief Justice of a High Court and also the Chief Justice of India for purposes of
complaint procedure”.
23.5. Since the Committee is not in favour of keeping the reference procedure clause 2(1)
defining the reference procedure may be deleted.
23.6. Subject to the above amendment the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–3
23.7. Clause 3 provides for establishment of National Judicial Council and its composition.
23.8. The clause invited considerable discussions on two main issues (i) establishment of
the Council and (ii) its composition. The Committee notes that the Council, though
appointed by the President totally excludes the presence of the Executive and Parliament.
This in the opinion of the Committee is violation of the mandate given to the Parliament
under article 124(4).
23.9. The Committee further notes that the Chief Justice of India is the Chairperson of
the Council and other members of the Council are two senior most Judges of the Supreme
Court and two Chief Justices of the High Courts to be nominated by the Chief Justice of
India. The Committee is of the considered opinion that either the National Judicial Council
should be made broad based by including non-judicial Members representing Parliament, and
Executive or another additional body be created with representation from Judiciary,
36

37
Executive, Parliament and Bar to work in co-ordination with the National Judicial Council.
The Committee suggests for constitution of an “Empowered Committee” for the purpose as
part and parcel of National Judicial Council. Hence clause 3(1) should have provisions for
“Empowered Committee”.
23.10. The Committee, further notes that the words “to be nominated by Chief Justice of
India” in sub clauses (b) and (c) of clause 3(2) may be deleted as by virtue of seniority the
Judges will automatically become the Members of the National Judicial Council. The
Committee further suggests that other members should be appointed by the President and
not by the Chief Justice of India.
23.11. Sub-clause 3 may be added in Clause 3 providing for the composition of “Empowered
Committee” as referred to in para 23.9 above.  The Committee suggests that the consequent
changes in subsequent clauses may accordingly be made.
23.12. Subject to above amendments the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–4
23.13. Clause 4 provides for change in the composition of the Council under certain
circumstances.
23.14. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–5
23.15. Clause 5 prescribes functions of the National Judicial Council.
23.16. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that under sub-clause (2) of Clause 5,
the Council has been authorised to deal with the complaint cases coming under complaint
procedure (clause 8) and reference procedure (clause 11) in a similar manner. No distinction
has been made in the procedures even though the complaints are coming through two
different sources viz. from individuals and 100/50 MPs Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha respectively.
The Committee observed that this in effect amounts to one individual being treated at par
with 100 MPs.
23.17. The Committee also notes that it is a statutory provision that provides for 100/50
MPs making a reference to Parliament and it is the Parliament’s prerogative to decide on
such a reference. Now the provision of clause 5 vests that power of Parliament to the
National Judicial Council. Further, the similarity of procedure could lead to similar fate of
the complaints. There will not be any distinction when an individual is making a complaint
and when 100 and 50 MPs are making a complaint under constitutional provisions. The
Committee opines that the procedure under clause 5 may be confined to complaint cases
only.
23.18. Subject to above suggestion the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–6
23.19. Provides for the Council to conduct the investigation and inquiry into any act or conduct
of any person other than a Judge in so far as the Council considers it necessary.
23.20. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.

38
Clause–7
23.21. Provides for appointment of officers and employees of the Council for the purposes of
discharge of its functions and to fix their terms and conditions of service. It also provides for the
utilisation of the services of any officer or employee of the Government or any other agency.
23.22. Since the clause carried provisions for staff of the council it was adopted by the
Committee without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–8
23.23. Provides the procedure for making a complaint involving allegations of misbehaviour
or incapacity in respect of a Judge. It also provides for the particulars to be given in such
complaint.
23.24. The Committee notes that the complaint procedure incorporated in Clause 8 of the
Bill is in fact an in-house procedure which is being followed by the judges since 1997
whereby complaints against the judges are decided by the judges themselves. This clause
authorizes the proposed National Judicial Council to receive and deal with the complaints.
23.25. The Committee suggests setting up of a Screening Committee before the National
Judicial Council to scrutinize those complaints. That Screening Committee hereinafter
referred to as “Empowered Committee” will have representation not only from the National
Judicial Council but also from the Executive, Parliament and Bar to imbibe impartiality and
transparency in the scrutiny of complaints. In this clause the “Empowered Committee”
should do the verification, screening and selecting the complaints for investigation and
inquiry by the National Judicial Council under clause 5.
23.26. Proviso 2 and 3 to Clause 8(1) should be deleted as it will create an exemption in
favour of a Judge who has committed misbehaviour during the last years of his tenure.
23.27. Subject to above suggestion, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–9
23.28. Provides the procedure for v erification and preliminary investigation of the complaints. It
also provides for the dismissal of frivolous and vexatious complaints.
23.29. Sub-clause (3) of clause 9 stipulates constitution of an investigating Committee by
the National Judicial Council for conducting preliminary investigation with one or more of
its members. The Committee is of the opinion that it is violative of natural principles and
even administrative laws which stipulate that the disciplinary authority should not be the
inquiry authority also. The Committee recommends that this investigation should be done
by some other independent impartial authority. Since the Committee has suggested for an
“Empowered Committee” accordingly the complaints would be referred to the “Empowered
Committee” for verification, screening and selecting complaints that will go for
investigation to National Judicial Council under Clause 9. Hence, Clause 9(1) should be
modified by splitting verification screening to the “Empowered Committee” and the work of
investigation to National Judicial Council.
23.30. Subject to above suggestion the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–10
23.31. Lays down the procedure in respect of inquiry and framing of charges and written
statement of defence in a complaint case.

39
23.32. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any
change therein.
Clause–11
23.33. Deals with procedure of reference by the Speaker or Chairman as the case may be to the
Council and provides the method of notice of motion for presenting an address to the President
for removal of a Judge.
23.34. The Committee notes that the clause takes away the powers of the Speaker, Lok
Sabha and Chairman, Rajya Sabha to constitute a committee for investigation into the
charges of misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge and vest the same to the National Judicial
Council. Since the Committee has recommended for an “Empowered Committee” the
Speaker or Chairman can refer the matter to this Committee and not to the National
Judicial Council. The “Empowered Committee” shall sit as a screening committee to
consider the complaints received through the complaint procedure and send the same for
investigation.
23.35. In view of the above proposition, clause 11 may be deleted.
Clause–12
23.36. Requires the Council on receipt of a reference from the Speaker or Chairman to frame
definite charges against the Judge for holding inquiry.
23.37. Since, the Committee has suggested for constitution of an “Empowered Committee”
for initial verification and screening of the complaints this clause may be deleted.
23.38. In view of the Committee recommendation for constitution of “Empowered
Committee” the provision of chapter-IV Clauses 11 and 12 are obsolete hence may be
deleted.
Clause–13
23.39. Provides for the procedure for inquiry in case of physical or mental incapacity of a Judge
and it lays down the method for medical examination of the Judge in such cases.
23.40. The clause is adopted by the Committee without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–14
23.41. Provi des for the procedure for inquiry and requires such inquiry to be conducted in camera.
23.42. The Committee observes that there should be no media report about a Judge and
adopted the Clause.
Clause–15
23.43. Empowers the Council to regulate its own procedures in making the inquiry in accordance
with the principle of natural justice to give reasonable opportunity to the Judge of cross-examining
the witnesses adducing the evidence and of being heard in his defence.
23.44. Since the clause pertained to normal procedural matter, the Committee adopted it
without suggesting any change therein.

40
Clause–16
23.45. Provides for the Central Government to appoint an advocate to conduct the cases against
the Judge.
23.46. The Committee notes that the Clause allows the Central Government to appoint
an advocate to conduct case against the Judge. However, the clause does not have
provision enabling the judge to engage an advocate for his defence. The Committee desires
for an equal opportunity to be accorded to the judge including the legal aid in deserving
cases.
23.47. The Committee suggested to include the words “if a Judge is not able to arrange an
advocate, the Government may provide it” in the clause, with the suggested amendment the
Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–17
23.48. Provides that the Council shall, while conducting any preliminary investigation or inquiry,
has all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
23.49. Since the clause contained procedural matter, the Committee adopted it without
suggesting any change therein.
Clause–18
23.50. Provides for search and seizure of any documents that, in the opinion of the Council, would
be useful for, or relevant to any preliminary investigation or inquiry.
23.51. Since, the clause contained normal procedural matter, the Committee adopted it
without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–19
23.52. Provides for change in the composition of the Council due to elevation of any member as
Chief Justice of India or due to elevation of any Chief Justice of the High Court as a Judge of
the Supreme Court or in case any vacancy in the Council arises due to retirement or resignation
of a member of the Council.
23.53. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–20
23.54. Provides for the disposal of complaint and follow up action in complaint procedure after
conclusion of inquiry including imposition of minor measures.
23.55. The Committee recommends that the word “Minor” may be substituted with the word
“appropriate”. Sub-Clause (iv) of clause 20(1)(b) which lists “request that the Judge may
voluntarily retire” may be deleted as requesting the Judge to retire voluntarily may amount
to enabling a Judge to bypass the accountability process.
23.56. In Sub-clause (3) and (4) the word President may be substituted with the word
“Parliament i.e. Speaker or Chairman” as report of National Judicial Council under Clause
20 should be sent to the Chairman/Speaker in consonance with article 124(4) and (5) of the
Constitution.

41
Clause–21
23.57. Provides for disposal of reference from the Speaker or the Chairman under the reference
procedure.
23.58. Since, the Committee has recommended for constitution of an “Empowered
Committee” and deletion of Chapter-IV containing clauses 11 and 12 pertaining to reference
procedure, the provisions of Clause 21 may also be deleted as they pertain to procedure for
Clause 11.
Clause–22
23.59. Provides for the address to the President for the removal of the Judge by Parliament.
23.60. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–23
23.61. Provides for disqualification of the removed Judge for any diplomatic assignment,
employment under the Government of India or the Government of a State, or to act as an arbitrator
in any arbitration proceeding and also in respect of chamber practice.
23.62. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–24
23.63. Provides that intentional insult or interruption to the Council shall be an offence punishable
with imprisonment for a term that may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
23.64. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–25
23.65. Provides for powers to Council to try certain cases and for taking cognizance of the
offence showing cause.
23.66. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–26
23.67. Provides for the punishment for false and vexatious complaint. It also provides that any
person, who makes a complaint that is found by the Council to be false or vexatious or with an
intention to harass the Judge, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term that may extend to
one year and also to fine that may extend to 25,000 rupees.
23.68. This Clause came in for much discussions. Some of the Committee Members were
of the opinion that the clause itself is unnecessary as it will only discourage people from
making complaints against the Judges. The Committee suggests for insertion of the words
“after due process of enquiry” after the words “which is found by the council” so that a
complainant is protected.
23.69. Subject to above amendment, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–27
23.70. Provides for the confidentiality in complaint procedure and says that the complainant and
every person, who participate in the preliminary investigation and inquiry as a witness or as a

42
lawyer, must undertake that he shall not reveal his own name, the name of the Judge complained
against, the contents of the complaint or any of the documents or proceedings to anybody,
including the media without prior written approval of the Council.
23.71. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–28
23.72. Provides for keeping identity of complainant confidential.
23.73. The Committee is for deletion of the words “and also the Judge against whom the
complaint is made” because it feels that the Judge against whom a complaint is made
should have the opportunity to know about the motive of the complainant.
23.74. Subject to above amendment, the Committee recommends for deletion of the clause.
Clause–29
23.75. Provides for stoppage of assigned judicial work during the pendency of the preliminary
investigation or inquiry or address by both Houses of Parliament to the President.
23.76. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–30
23.77. Provides for appeal to the Supreme Court in the matter of an order of removal passed by
the President, or an order passed by the Council imposing one or other ‘minor measure’ on the
basis of a complaint.
23.78. The Committee notes that the Judicial service is not service in the sense of
employment. Therefore, the Judges should not be treated as ordinary Government servants.
The Committee further notes that a presidential order for removal is the Parliament’s
prerogative after due process/resolution of 2/3rd majority. It should not be allowed to be
challenged. On these grounds, the Committee opines for not keeping the provision for
appeal both in case of removal or “minor measures”. It feels that the very purpose for
which the Bill was introduced would be defeated if provision for appeal is given.
23.79. Accordingly, the Committee recommends deletion of the clause.
Clause–31
23.80. Provides for no action for contempt of court in respect of the allegations which are the
subject-matter of investigation or inquiry by the Council.
23.81. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–32
23.82. Provides that any preliminary investigation or inquiry pending before the Council will not
affect the criminal liability in respect of such allegations.
23.83. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–33
23.84. Provides that all records and documents related to complaint, preliminary investigation and

43
inquiry, shall be confidential, irrespective of anything contained in any other law, for the time being
in force, including the Right to Information Act, 2005.
23.85. The Committee is for creating an exception for making the final order under Clause
20 of the National Judicial Council known to people.
23.86. Subject to above amendment, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–34
23.87. P rovides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Council or
any official or person engaged by the Council for conducting preliminary investigation or inquiry,
in respect of anything that is done in good faith.
23.88. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–35
23.89. Provides that proceedings before the Council and the Committee shall be the judicial
proceedings for the purposes of section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and sections
193, 196 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
23.90. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–36
23.91. Provides for the Council to lay down a code of conduct for the Judges of the Supreme
Court or of the High Courts.
23.92. Justice R.S. Pathak, during his deposition before the Committee had suggested as under:-
“Clause 36(3) provides that the Code of conduct contemplated by Clause 36(1)
should require a Judge to give intimation of his assets and liabilities to the Chief Justice of
India or the Chief Justice of the High Court. I would suggest that intimation of the assets
and liabilities of his wife and unmarried children should also be included.”
23.93. The Committee is for making the code of conduct a public document so that it is
known to people.
23.94. Subject to above suggestion, the Committee adopted the clause.
Clause–37
23.95. Provides for the constitution of Joint Committees of both Houses of Parliament for making
rules.
23.96. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–38
23.97. Provides for the repeal for the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.
23.98. The Committee adopted the clause without suggesting any change therein.
Clause–1
23.99. Clause 1 states the title of the Bill and its commencement.

44
23.100. Sub Clause (1) of Clause I which states the title of the Bill, came in for some discussion.
It was observed that the existing title of the Bill does not convey the true intent of the legislation.
The Committee feels that if the title of the Bill is changed to “National Judicial Council
Act” it will convey the exact meaning of the new enactment. In Clause (1) for the figure
“2006” the figure “2007” be substituted. In the Preamble for the word “fifty seventh” the
word “fifty eighth” be substituted.
LONG TITLE OF THE BILL
23.101. The Committee notes that the matter relating to the conduct of an inquiry against
a Judge is by its very nature a sensitive matter as it is a matter against a constitutional
authority. It observes that an upright and honest judge may not like to remain in his seat
even if a warning is administered to him. The words minor measures do not find favour with
the Committee Members. Accordingly, the Committee suggests the substitution of the words
“minor measures” with the words “appropriate measures”.
23.102. Subject to the above suggested amendment; the long title was adopted as it is.
24. The Committee recommends that the above Bill, as reported by it, may be passed
along with the suggestions incorporated therein.

45
MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY
SHRI RAM JETHMALANI, M.P.
This Committee has been examining The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006, which was originally
drafted by the Ministry of Law and Justice in 2005 and was then examined by the Law
Commission of India. The Commission by its 105th Report has produced the present draft.
2. This Committee has had the benefit of long hearings at which eminent witnesses with
expert knowledge in the field expressed their views and answered queries from Members of this
Committee. Some of the witnesses sent valuable notes thereafter crystallizing their thoughts and
responses on matters arising out of the discussions at the hearings.
3. The Preamble of the Bill declares that the Bill is for ‘establishing a National Judicial Council
to undertake preliminary investigation and inquire into allegations of misbehaviour or incapacity of
a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and to regulate the procedure for such
investigation, inquiry and proof, and for imposing minor measures; and for the presentation of an
address by Parliament to the President and for matters connected therewith’.
4. The objectives in the above Preamble are carried out in the 38 Clauses of the Bill. The Bill
is accompanied by the usual statement of ‘Objects and Reasons’. It rightly proclaims Judicial
independence as one of the basic fundamentals of the Constitution and that independence and
accountability are inseparable. It follows from this assertion that provisions for accountability do
not curtail Judicial independence; in fact they fortify it. The Report of this Committee has taken
note of this very wholesome principle.
5. The statement further proceeds to declare ‘an urgent need of legislation for establishing a
mechanism to deal with allegations of misbehaviour or incapacity of Judges of the Supreme Court
and the High Courts’. This urgency has been accepted virtually by every witness who appeared
before the Committee. It is no pleasure for the Committee to recount the reasons for this urgency.
6. Mr. Malimath, the eminent Ex-Judge and author of the March 2003 Report on Reforms of
Criminal Justice System regretfully but candidly told the Committee that the new method of
selection of Judges, introduced not by constitutional amendment but by a fresh constitutional
interpretation by Judges themselves, holding that that decision of the Judges will prevail over that
of the Executive in making these high appointments had not improved matters. This is what the
witness said “Actually, the quality of appointment of Judges in my opinion has suffered after the
1993 judgment of the Supreme Court....... The quality of Judges appointed earlier, in my opinion,
was much better than the quality of judges appointed after their collegiums Our Founding Fathers
and the Constitution-makers never thought that judiciary would reach to this point. We have
betrayed their trust.”
7. Many other witnesses have testified to this tragic phenomenon. Some of the members of
this Committee, who are busy practicing lawyers, have also confirmed this sad development. The
Committee accepts this testimony fully.
8. At the very outset the Committee has been presented with the problem of the constitutional
validity of this Bill Chapter IV of the Constitution deals with the Union Judiciary. The Judges of
the Supreme Court are to be appointed by the President after consultation with senior Judges of
the Supreme Court and the High Courts as the President may deem necessary. A Judge may be
removed from office only by an order of the President after each House of Parliament has
45

46
addressed him for such removal and the address is supported by a prescribed majority in both
Houses of Parliament. Apart from this he retains his office till he attains the age of 65 years or
earlier tenders his resignation. Similar provision is made for appointment of High Court Judges
except that they retire when they complete 62 years of age.
9. Neither the Chief Justice of India nor any senior Judges of the Supreme Court individually
or collectively can exercise any disciplinary powers over a brother Judge. Article 124 ensures his
independence not only from the executive but substantially from the legislature also. Even though
the Parliament can present an address for removal for proved misconduct or incapacity, the
Parliament is debarred by Article 121 from holding any discussion on the conduct of a Judge
except upon a motion for presenting an address. The clear inference from this provision is that
the misconduct or incapacity on which the motion for removal is based must have been already
judicially determined by a Judicial Tribunal which does not suffer from any such prohibition. That
Judicial Tribunal has been created by the Judges Inquiry Act of 1968. This legislation has been
enacted in exercise of the powers conferred by Clause 5 of Article 124 which provides “Parliament
may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an address and for the investigation and
proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under clause (4)”.
10. The Bill seeks to repeal the 1968 Act. The present Bill cannot be described as a Bill for
the presentation of an address and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity
of a Judge. Moreover, as the Bill seeks to provide an additional mode of removal and subjects a
judge to additional penalties not provided for in the Constitution, the Bill is in the opinion of this
Committee wholly ultra virus. Many expert witnesses have shared this view. If the Government
wishes to go ahead with the Bill in its present form it will be well advised to secure the opinion
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India under Article 143 of the Constitution and to avoid the
embarrassment of the Supreme Court holding the Act to be invalid.
11. The Committee has seriously considered whether the problem of judicial corruption,
misconduct and incapacity, physical or intellectual can be solved by providing a National Judicial
Council contemplated by Clause 3 to investigate and inquire into any matter involved, arisen from
or connected with any allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity and empowering any person to
make a complaint in writing of such misbehaviour or incapacity.
12. Witness after witness has deposed before the Committee that the remedy lies not in creating
these additional measures and penalties and the Judicial Council to adjudge and inflict them but in
changing the method of initial recruitment. The experience of the Members of this Committee
supported by the convincing testimony of large number of witnesses compel the conclusion that
the methods of initial appointment which have been tried before and after 1993 have miserably
failed. Far from there being an improvement, there has been a steady decline of moral as well as
technical equipment of the appointees. A third method has to be devised in the hope that it will
serve the desired objective.
13. A weighty and conclusive reason is to be found in the nature of the Judicial office itself.
When a Judge has been advised to retire voluntarily or censured or admonished it deprives the
Judge of all his dignity and stature, makes him an object of contempt and enables every litigant
boldly to tell him that he has no confidence in him and that he should recuse himself from the
case in hand. The Judge will be in a pathetic position and any decision rendered by him will fail
to conform to the principle that justice must not only be done but seem to be done. This entire
system of minor punishments will expose the entire judicial system to ridicule and be totally
counterproductive. It will be destructive of the declared objectives of the proposed Bill.
14. Clause 21(2) of the Bill is repugnant to Article 124 of the Constitution inasmuch as it
deprives the Parliament of its constitutional rights to decide whether a proved misconduct does or
does not deserve removal. The Bill transfers this function to the Judicial Council.

47
15. Some of the witnesses who initially came to make their comments on the Bill on being
questioned by the Committee conceded that the proper remedy is the creation of the National
Judicial Commission and that the Bill must be rejected in toto. The Committee fully shares
this opinion. It is said that after 1993 the Judges of the Supreme Court have evolved an in-
house procedure under which all allegations made against any Judge are inquired by a
collegium and suitable action taken. The Committee regrets that there is no evidence before it
of any such effective functioning of the alleged in-house procedure. No Judge seems to have
incurred either the penalty of removal or any of the minor penalties mentioned in Clause 20 of the
Bill.
16. The Committee appreciates the argument which has been made by respectable and credible
witnesses that there is a conscious or unconscious trade unionism practiced by the Judges and
there is a natural reluctance on their part to take unpleasant action against their brother Judges.
When a case comes before a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Judge of the High Court for
hearing in open Court and the Judge discovers that one of the litigating parties is known to him
either as a friend or as an enemy, he voluntarily recuses himself from the case. This is a very
proper course of judicial conduct. How can senior Judges make judgments imposing punishments
on their colleagues with whom they sit in Court day in and day out and when they and their
families habitually meet interact and socialize. They are bound to have prejudices for and against
their colleagues and any judgment by them in the matters of their colleagues will not evoke public
confidence. Complainants will feel unfairly treated even if their complaints are rightly rejected. The
Committee has, therefore, come to the conclusion that the Judicial Council contemplated by the Bill
should be treated as a non starter.
17. The Committee recommends the creation of a body whether called Councilor Commission
in which the judiciary, the executive, the political opposition, the Bar, the academic world and
world of social sciences are adequately represented. Even the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968
contemplated one of the Members to be a Jurist to be selected by the Presiding Officer of the
relevant House of Parliament. The presence of a Jurist would ensure the academic excellence and
professional expertise of the persons appointed or promoted to Judicial Office.
18. The Committee feels fortified in its opinion by the fact that earlier Government had
introduced in Parliament a Judicial Commission Bill which unfortunately lapsed because of the
dissolution of the Lok Sabha. The Commission had all the powers of appointment and removal. It
is also right to point out that the primary object of the present Bill namely Judicial Accountability
itself assumes that the judiciary is accountable to some body else and not to itself. The Bill is thus
a caricature hardly designed to achieve any significant measure of accountability of our higher
judiciary.
19. The Committee feels as indeed most of the witnesses have conceded before the Committee
that the Organized Bar should also be represented on this body. The lawyers know much more
about the integrity and character of an aspiring Judge as well as sitting Judges than anyone else.
Witnesses have deposed before the Committee that the present system of appointment only ensures
the selection of children, relatives and friends of sitting Judges being preferred to better qualified
candidates. This grievance is not imaginary and the Committee cannot ignore it.
20. Without prejudice to this Committee’s complete rejection of this entire Bill, the Committee
wishes to draw attention to the following factors which should be taken care of if the Government
is determined to go ahead with the Bill.
(i) There is no justification for excluding the Chief Justice of India from being proceeded
against under the complaint procedure of Chapter III of the Bill.

48
(ii) The Judicial Council will be so much flooded with work that the Judges working on it will
have to abandon their normal judicial work and devote full time to the disposal of
complaints made by citizens. At least in the beginning there is going to be a flood of them.
(iii) Clause 30 of the Bill provides for appeal to the Supreme Court. This is absurd and
unworkable. Junior Judges will be sitting in Appeal over the decision of the senior Judges
and for every appeal atleast a five judge bench will have to be constituted. This will open
administration of justice in the Supreme Court to adverse criticism if not ridicule.
(iv) All orders of the Council must by constitutional amendment be excluded from the ambit of
Articles 32, 136 and 226 of the Constitution of India. This is also a further reason as to
why the Bill should be rejected in toto.
(v) Without these constitutional amendments the Bill will create another prolific source of
litigation. On one hand the Judges are thinking of creating night shifts for the working of
courts on the other hand they wish to create a further unbearable burden.
(vi) The drafting of the Bill leaves much to be desired. For example in Clause 3(2) senior most
Judges are senior most and they do not have to be nominated by the Chief Justice.
In Clause 9 (1) of the Bill the simple text should be as under:-
“If the Council is satisfied after such preliminary investigation and inquiry as it considers
necessary that the complaint is either false or not supported by credible evidence or does
not disclose a case of misbehaviour or incapacity it should dismiss the same and record its
reasons for the dismissal”.
These are only illustrations of bad drafting which is a prominent feature of the whole Bill.

49
MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED
BY SHRI VIRENDRA BHATIA, M.P.
I have gone through the proposed 21st Report on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill 2006, in my
view this Judges (Inquiry) Bill may be returned for reconsideration on account of following
reasons:
1. This Bill is in conflict with the constitutional provisions [Article 124(4)] and is likely to be
declared ultra-virus to the Constitution of India.
2. That if there is any necessity to bring the Bill, the Constitution amendment is required.
3. That it encroaches upon the right of the Parliament.
4. That even if no constitutional amendment is required, then it is in conflict with the
recommendation made by the Committee contained in Chapter (I) to (IV) and (VI) of
report.
5. That it will not be able to serve the purpose, for which the Bill is being brought, it will
lead to more serious repercussions.
6. That this Bill affects the independence of judiciary and if this Bill is passed, the Judges will
be under tremendous pressure and will not be able to discharge their duties, independently
and fearlessly.
7. That this Bill will help nuisance creators, they may be litigants or lawyers. It will also divide
the Judges among themselves and the Judges may form their own power groups.
8. That in future, in India the situation like Pakistan may, also, be created. By making false
complaints for the inquiry to be instituted, some pressure group may demand that the Chief
Justice of India or other Judges facing inquiry may be suspended. This may lead to the
same situation, that had taken place in Pakistan, where the Chief Justice of Pakistan was
suspended and next man was sworn in as Chief Justice.
9. That this Bill does not cure the root cause of the complaint against Judges. Cure lies at
appointment stage of the Judges. If honest, competent lawyers of proven integrity are not
appointed the Judges, then this Bill is not likely to serve any purpose.
My view is that this Bill may be returned with the recommendation that a comprehensive
reform Bill may be introduced, keeping in view the recommendations contained in Chapter (I) to
(IV) and (VI) of the report.
49

MINUTES

53
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 25th January, 2007 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
8. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
13. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Secretary (Justice) and Home Secretary
2. Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Additional Secretary
3. Dr. P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary
2. Shri B.A. Agarawal, Additional Secretary
3. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
4. Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary

54
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimat Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. The Secretary, Department of Justice, while making a brief presentation on the Judges
(Inquiry) Bill, 2006 apprised the Committee that the Bill was based on the recommendations of the
Law Commission of India contained in its 195th Report. He stated that it provided for the
constitution of a National Judicial Council to entertain and enquire into complaints against judges
of the Supreme Court as well as of the High Courts. He deposed that the Council would also
investigate into allegations of misbehaviour and incapacity against the judges received through
reference from the Speaker of the Lok Sabha or the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha as laid down
in the Constitution. He further narrated other salient features of the Bill and expressed the hope that
this Bill would ensure transparency and accountability of the higher judiciary. The Additional
Secretary, Department of Justice then made a power point presentation on the Bill. He replied to
the queries raised by the Committee.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 1.01 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

55
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 2nd February, 2007 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K Duggal, Secretary (Justice) and Home Secretary
2. Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Additional Secretary
3. Dr. P. K. Seth, Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Biswas, Director
5. Shri K. Gurtu, Director
II. Representatives of the Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri T.K Viswanathan, Law Secretary
III. R epresentatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary
2. Shri B.A. Agarawal, Additional Secretary
3. Shri P.B. Singh; Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
4. Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary
55

56
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B. Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. The Secretary, Department of Justice in furtherance to the presentation made by him before
the Committee on 25th January, 2007 on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006, clarified some points
raised by the Members on the Bill. He apprised the Committee of the existing procedure for
impeachment of a delinquent judge and explained the need for a permanent body such as the
National Judicial Council to deal with disciplinary matters of judges. He stated that the proposed
legislation was within the parameters of the provisions of the Constitution.
3. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs while deposing before the Committee on the Bill,
stated that it was brought forward on the basis of the recommendations of the Law Commission
of India. He traced the history of the Bill and stated that it sought to provide a statutory basis to
the already existing in-house peer review of judges.
4. Some of the Members expressed doubts as to whether the Bill in its present form would
ensure judicial accountability and advocated the need for comprehensive reforms in the judiciary.
5. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.

57
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. to 2.00 P.M. and again at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the
13th February, 2007, in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Virendra Bhatia
3. Dr. P. C. Alexander
4. Shri Tarlochan Singh
5. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
11. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
13. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
WITNESSES
1. Justice Ranganath Misra, Former Chief Justice of lndia.
2. Dr. K.N.C. Pillai, Director, Indian Law Institute.
3. Shri Prashant Bhushan, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India.
4. Dr. N.R. Madhava Menon, Former Director, N ational Law Academy, Bhopal.
5. Dr. (Justice) V .S. Malimath, Former Chief Justice of Karnataka and Kerala High Court.
6. Shri K.C. Mittal, Former President, Bar Council of Delhi.
7. Shri Rajeev Dhawan, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court.
8. Dr. M.P. Raju, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court.
9. Shri K.K. Venugopal, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court.
I. Representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice)
Shri K. Gurtu, Director
II. Representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri R.C. Gaba, Deputy Secretary
57

58
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
The Chairman welcomed Justice Ranganath Misra and other witnesses to the meeting and
requested them to give their views on the provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006.
2. Justice Ranganath Misra, while making general observations on the judiciary recommended
for a cautious approach on the whole issue as it involved the relationship between two important
organs of the State viz. the Executive and the Judiciary. Justice Misra then dwelt upon the issue
of appointment of judges by stating that the recruitment of judges to the Supreme Court and the
High Courts was unnecessarily disturbed earlier. He made a reference to a case wherein he, as the
Chief Justice of India, had referred the issue of appointments and the procedure to be followed
to a Larger Bench. He further stated that the outcome of the case resulted in a system of judges
appointing judges, thus disturbing the Constitutional system of appointments. He opined that the
system of three or five judges collegium was a wrong procedure which entrusted the judicial
administration to a few hands. He was in favour of evolving a system in which every judge is
allowed to participate in the judicial administration.
3. On the provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 Justice Misra was of the opinion that
the inquiry under the proposed Bill should be completed within a maximum period of eight weeks.
On being asked as to who should carry out the work of investigation, Justice Misra stated that
investigation could be carried out by a group of Judges, which could have a non-judicial member
also. Justice Misra further was against appeal provisions and exclusion of the Chief Justice of India
from the purview of the complaint procedure.
4. Thereafter, Dr. K.N.C. Pillai, Director, Indian Law Institute put forth his views on the
various provisions of the Bill. He suggested changes in the composition of the National Judicial
Council, which, according to him should include one Supreme Court Judge, one High Court Judge,
one senior advocate of the Supreme Court, one Professor of Law and one expert from medical
profession. He further opined that for frivolous complaints, instead of imprisonment, pecuniary
punishment and warning etc. would suffice the cause. He was in favour of reducing the duration
of inquiry to three months and was in favour of provision for one appeal against the decision of
the Council.
(The Committee then adjourned for lunch)
5. Shri Prashant Bhushan, Member, Committee on Judicial accountability and Senior Advocate,
Supreme Court stated that nobody would come forward to file a complaint in the National Judicial
Council because of penal provisions, requirement of verification of complaint by the complainant
and restrictions on giving any information of the proceedings in the Council to any outside agency
without the permission of the Council. He further opined that the Council being an inhouse body,
was very unlikely to take action against the sitting Judges. The witness stated that the existing
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 was better than the proposed Bill as it envisaged an inquiry Committee
to be constituted by the Speaker, Lok Sabha or the Chairman, Rajya Sabha. He opined that if the
judges of higher judiciary were to be held accountable, it should be through some outside body,
which could be named as the National Judicial Commission, with full time members and such a
body should not have a sitting Judge as a member.
6. Dr. Madhava Menon, former Director, National Law Academy was in favour of including two
distinguished jurists in the Council. He emphasized on credibility, transparency and accountability
in the complaint procedure. He suggested deletion of the proviso to clause 8, which stipulated that

59
no complaint shall be entertained and inquired into against a person who has demitted the office
of a judge. He further opined that the inquiry against a Judge should be completed within three
months.
7. The Committee Members then raised the issue of a comprehensive legislation dealing with
service, recruitment, inquiries and recommendations to the President for judicial appointments. The
Members sought clarifications from the witnesses regarding the Parliament’s power to impeach a
Judge and to discuss about the conduct of a Judge, representation of the Bar Council in the
proposed National Judicial Council etc. The Committee Members were of the opinion that the
powers of Parliament should not be diluted in the name of the National Judicial Council.
8. Dr. (Justice) V .S. Malimath while deposing on the Bill stated that the Chief Justice of India
should have powers of advising the errant Judge suitably or taking such other steps viz.
withdrawing of judicial work, censure, transfers etc. whenever an aberration in the conduct of the
judge was noticed. He opined that since the Chief Justice was Constitutionally responsible for
maintaining the dignity and decorum of the Courts, it was his moral responsibility to ensure that
the conduct of the Judges was impeccable. He further informed the Committee that America
followed such a system. On the appointment of Judges Dr. (Justice) Malimath stated that the
system of collegium recommending appointments was against the express tenor of the constitution,
which should be corrected. On the provisions dealing with inquiry, Dr. (Justice) Malimath
suggested that the Judicial Council should constitute an Inquiry Committee of retired Chief Justices
or retired Judges to hold an inquiry in place of the sitting judges. Regarding the appeal provisions
Dr. (Justice) Malimath opined that one right of review against all kinds of decisions must be given.
To the Committee's query regarding the right or privileges of Parliament to discuss and impeach
a judge, the witness replied that ultimately it was a question of voting only.
9. The Representative of the Bar Council of Delhi, during his deposition before the Committee
stated that the code of conduct referred to in the proposed Bill should be made part of the Bill
as an annexure. He further desired for giving representation of the Bar Council, in the National
Judicial Council. The representative was not in favour of any appeal provision on the premise that
a judge was not a government servant. The representative opined that the provisions for minor
measures would not serve any purpose, therefore, if prima facie evidence was found against a
judge, he should immediately go. Referring to the complaint procedure and reference procedure, the
representative stated that there was duplicity in the procedures as even a motion by 150 Members
of Parliament could go to the Judicial Council. In his opinion the procedure should start with the
complaint itself.
10. Shri Rajeev Dhawan, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court opined that the proposed Bill dealt
with two separate areas of Constitution. The first area was the procedure to be laid down for the
removal of a Judge, which was already covered by the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968. He emphasized
that the 1968 Act was much within the Constitutional parameters, hence should be left untouched.
Referring to Clause 12(1) and Clause 9 of the Bill, he stated that these provisions could put the
Parliament and the National Judicial Council at loggerheads. He suggested that the existing reference
procedure along with the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, should be left untouched and the proposed
Bill should only deal with the question of judicial misdemeanors. He opined that the Constitution
has made Parliament the final body to look at what misdemeanors should lead to removal, therefore
this autonomy of Parliament should remain with it and the removal procedure of a judge, being a
constitutional requirement should not be touched. Referring to the provisions of the Bill, he stated
that Clauses 8(2)(c) and 26(1) which required referring to the source of information and
punishment for false complaints were inhibiting in nature.
11. Shri K.K. Venugopal, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court, remarked that there was no harm in
including a foreigner in ‘‘any person’’ phrase if he has sufficient material to establish the dishonesty

60
or misconduct of a judge. He opined that clause 9 of the Bill was a sufficient safeguard against
false and frivolous complaints. He was of the considered opinion that the cases of judicial
misconduct should be dealt with by the Judiciary itself. He was also for bringing the Chief Justice
of India within the purview of the complaint procedure. On a specific question of need for an
amendment in the Constitution for enacting the Bill, he referred to the ‘‘California Experiment’’
wherein similar law was brought into existence in USA but with an amendment to the State
Constitution. He opined that a legislature of this nature would not have any legal infirmity.
12. Dr. M.P. Raju, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court suggested preliminary investigation of the
complaints to add to the credibility and transparency in the judiciary. He opined that through this
Bill, an attempt has been made to separate investigation and inquiry. In his opinion, investigation
could be confidential and could be carried out by the Council itself.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
14. The meeting was adjourned at 5.38 
P.M.

61
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 20th February, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Dr. C. Krishnan
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Shri Raj Babbar
11. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
WITNESSES
1. Justice P.N. Bhagwati, Former Chief Justice of India; and
2. Justice G.N. Ray, Former Supreme Court Judge and the Chairman, Press Council of
India.
I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Secretary; and
2. Shri K. Gurtu, Director.
II. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary.
III. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary; and
2. Shri B.N. Agarwal, Additional Secretary.
IV. Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Additional Secretary;
2. Dr. P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary; and
3. Shri N.M. Perumal, Director.
61

62
V. Representatives of the Election Commissions of India
1. Shri R. Bhattacharya, Deputy Election Commissioner; and
2. Shri R. Balakrishnan, Deputy Election Commissioner.
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
The Chairman welcomed Justice P.N. Bhagwati, former Chief Justice of India to the
meeting and requested him to give his views before the Committee.
The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
2. Justice Bhagwati was in favour of a distinction between minor deviations in the behaviour
of a Judge and a serious misdemeanour or a serious act of corruption inviting disciplinary action
of removal or impeachment. He emphasized that the procedure for disciplining the Judges for minor
deviations should be entrusted to the judiciary alone. However, disciplinary proceedings in the
nature of impeachment, should be with another body, which could be more broad based. He opined
that even the appointment of judges should be with such a broad based representative body. Justice
Bhagwati was in favour of giving of reasons, administrative or judicial, while rejecting a complaint
of an individual. Further, he was not in favour of appeal provisions. He opined that the standard
of judiciary had gone down in general in recent times. The members of the Committee raised
queries which were replied to by Justice Bhagwati. Agreeing to the Committee’s view point that
the judiciary was not amendable to public criticism, Justice Bhagwati remarked that there was no
contempt of court in the United States of America for criticizing a judge or his behaviour or
conduct.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

63
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 13th March, 2007 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
8. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
WITNESSES
1. Dr. M.S. Gill, Member, Rajya Sabha;
2. Shri Arun Jaitley, Member, Rajya Sabha; and
3. Shri Jaganath Patnaik, Chairman, Bar Council of India.
Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri K. Gurtu, Director.
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed Dr. M.S. Gill and Shri Arun Jaitley, Members, Rajya Sabha to
the meeting of the Committee and requested them to give their inputs on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006.
3. Dr. M.S. Gill, while deposing before the Committee, suggested that the Vice President
should preside over the proposed National Judicial Council. He suggested for democratic
63

64
representation in the National Judicial Council and for inclusion of the Vice President or the Union
Law Minister, in the Council. He further stated that the earlier system of appointments where the
Prime Minister and the President had a role was within the constitutional parameters. He was in
favour of re-establishing the authority of Parliament in the matter.
4. Thereafter, Shri Arun Jaitley, while referring to the pre-1993 position of appointment of
judges, stated that reverting to the pre-1993 position would entail increased politicization in terms
of judicial appointments. He stated that the proposed Bill was merely giving a statutory shape to
the already existing non-statutory in-house mechanism. He suggested for bringing into existence a
single body with three judges, the Union Law Minister and another fifth member, preferably an
eminent public personality, to represent public interest for both the appointments and for looking
into the allegations of misdemeanor. He stated that the suggested body would have a predominant
judicial presence, executive participation and a public watchdog.
5. Thereafter, the Chairman, Bar Council of India while deposing on the Bill stated that the Bar
Council of India should be given representation in the National Judicial Council. Commenting on
the existing system of appointments, he stated that it often led to delays in appointments, thus
resulting in inappropriate appointments being made.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting was adjourned at 6.15 
P.M.

65
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. to 1.48 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the
11th April, 2007, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
8. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Prof. M. Ramadass
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
15. Shri S.K Kharventhan
16. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri T.K Vishwanathan, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs;
2. Shri K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary, Legislative Department; and
3. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Secretary, Department of Justice.
II. Witness on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
Justice K. Ramaswamy, former Judge, Supreme Court
III. * * *
IV. * * *
65
*** Relates to other matter.

66
V. * * *
VI. * * *
VII. * * *
VIII. * * *
IX. * * *
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Justice K. Ramaswamy and requested him to make a
presentation on the Judges Enquiry Bill 2006, presently pending before the Committee for
examination and report. Thereafter, Justice K. Ramaswamy apprised the Committee over the various
provisions of the Bill which included strengthening of in House procedure to get over the impasse
of impeachment, constitution of National Judicial Council to look into the allegations of
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court, participation of
Executive in the inquiry procedure etc.
5. Members were unanimous that the Council constituted for this purpose must have the
powers to recommend to the President on the issue of appointments of Judges, Parliament’s right
of moving a motion by 100 Members of Lok Sabha or 50 Members of Rajya Sabha against a Judge
should not be curtailed or encroached upon after constitution of this Council etc.
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 6.19 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

67
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 12th April, 2007, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
8. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
10. Shri Harin Pathak
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
13. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
WITNESSES
1. Justice R.S. Pathak, former Chief Justice of India;
2. Dr. Jose Verghese, former Vice Chairman, Central Administrative Tribunal;
3. Shri B.K. Mohanty, Senior Advocate, High Court of Orissa;
4. Shri P.H. Parekh, Senior Advocate and former President, Supreme Court Bar Association;
5. Shri Gopal Subramanium, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court;
6. Dr. M.P. Raju, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court; and
7. Shri Vinod A. Bobde, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court.
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
67

68
2. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members. Thereafter Justice
R.S. Pathak, former Chief Justice of India was requested to express his views on the various
provisions of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 presently under consideration of the Committee.
3. Justice Shri R.S. Pathak, while deposing before the Committee on the Bill, opined that the
National Judicial Council (NJC) which was proposed to be set up under the Bill, should consist
of Judges entirely and that when the proposed Council dealt with cases relating to the Judges of
the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of the High Courts should not be included in the Council. He
was of the view that when a case against a High Court Judge was being considered by the NJC,
Chief Justice of the High Court of which the concerned Judge was a Member should not be
included in the NJC. He observed that the NJC should be granted the discretionary power to go
beyond the report submitted by the investigating Committee constituted by it and that clause 36(3)
of the Bill should envisage intimation of assets and liabilities of the wife and unmarried children
of Judges. He stated that such disclosure should be treated as a confidential document unless the
inquiry required its examination. The witness responded to the queries raised by the Committee on
the various provisions of the Bill.
4. Shri Gopal Subramanium highlighted the important aspects as far as Judiciary was
concerned such as transparency in the matter of appointment of Judges, machinery which should
be available for the purpose of seeking audit from Judges and a machinery to deal with errant
Judges. He opined that the hierarchical tier in Indian Judiciary was one of the reasons for
weakening the Judiciary and suggested measures to revamp the entire appointment process in the
Judiciary. He stressed upon the need for an audit of the performance of the Courts and suggested
that the Council which would enquire into allegations against Judges should comprise of persons
from the Judicial fraternity and also persons chosen by the President of India. He advocated that
this body must have a Secretariat consisting of people of outstanding rectitude who would first
investigate and conduct a preliminary inquiry and that on its recommendation, the NJC should take
up a case. He raised doubts as to whether a Judge who is amenable to censure should continue
as a Judge and emphasized the need to ensure an optimal balance between Judicial independence
and Judicial accountability.
5. Shri P.H. Parekh apprised the Committee that it was a widely acknowledged fact that there
were problems in the Judiciary. He was of the opinion that non-Judges need not be Members of
NJC because if non-Judges were to be appointed, it would be done by the President on the aid
and advice of the Council of Ministers which in turn, would mean taking into account views of
political parties. He suggested that in case of preference of appeal to the Supreme Court, it should
be decided by a five Judges Bench and that if a matter against a Judge was under consideration,
his name should not be considered for promotion till the matter was disposed of.
6. Shri Vinod Bobde, while tendering oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill, proposed
that the appointment and disciplining, in case of Judges, should be envisaged in a single body
which should have representation from the Legislature, Executive and Judiciary. He opposed the
provision for appeal against an order of removal of a Judge and opined that the Constitution
envisages removal of a Judge only and that the complaint procedure, as provided in the Bill, went
against the whole scheme of the Constitution. He recommended that in case of a Complaint
Procedure, the complaint should go to the Members of Parliament. He voiced his fear that if any
person was permitted to file a complaint, it could end up in disgruntled litigants filing false
complaints. He also expressed his reservations against imposition of minor measures against Judges
and opined that Judges should be independent not only from the Legislature and the Executive, but
also from Brother Judges.
7. Dr. M.P. Raju deposed that the impeachment procedure envisaged in Constitution of India
was both adjudicatory and political. He opined that Judges should not be judged by their peers and

69
that even the junior most Judge of the Supreme Court was no less than the Chief Justice of India
in terms of adjudicatory functions. Stressing upon the need to ensure accountability of the
Judiciary, he opined that Judicial independence did not mean insularity and that in the procedure
envisaged in the Bill, the investigation part alone should be confidential and that inquiry should be
an open one.
8. Shri B.K. Mohanty, while deposing on the Bill, stated that any action against a Judge should
be nothing short of impeachment. Dr. Jose Verghese propounded that a nodal agency might be
created which would receive a complaint, screen it, make an investigation and forward it to the
NJC if the complaint was found to be sustainable. He stated that the nodal agency should be
attached to the Department of Justice and that no action should be taken against the complainant
if the complaint was found to be unsustainable. The witnesses clarified the points raised by the
Chairman and Members of the Committee.
9. The Members voiced concern over the fact that there was no non-Judicial representation
in the NJC and emphasized the need to ensure judicial accountability.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The meeting was adjourned at 1.54 
P.M.

70
XX
TWENTIENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 8th May, 2007 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Prof. M. Ramadass
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
14. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
15. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
WITNESSES
I. Witness on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
1. Shri Fali S. Nariman, former Member, Rajya Sabha.
2. Shri A.K.Ganguli, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Fali S. Nariman, former Member, Rajya Sabha
to the meeting. The Chairman on behalf of Members of the Committee congratulated him on being
awarded Padma Vibhushan by the Government of India. He then asked him to make his
presentation before the Committee on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 presently pending before the
Committee for examination and report.
3. Thereafter, the witness deposed before the Committee on the various provisions of the Bill. He
drew the attention of the Committee to the two glaring Constitutional infirmities in the Bill, like
defining ‘proved misbehaviour’ and secondly, Section 2 (j) of the Bill should be deleted on the
70

71
grounds of language used in the Constitution of India in Article 124 (4). He then made a submission
before the Committee that the language must not be attempted to be improved upon by defining
the expression. The witness also drew the attention of the Committee on some other clauses of
the Bill which included suggestions like provision should be made by Constitutional amendment in
Clause 5 of Article 124: At the end of Article 124 (5) a line should be added i.e. ‘‘such law may
also make provision as to measures short of removal’’. On the composition of the National Judicial
Council he was of the view that apart from the Judges, the Council should comprise of Members
of Parliament from both the Houses, clause 36 (3) of the Bill should be re-drafted and the Code
of Conduct issued under sub clause (1) ‘may provide that every Judge should annually give
intimation of his assets and liabilities’.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Sh. A.K. Ganguli, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court at
the meeting and requested him to put forth his views on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill 2006. In his
deposition before the Committee, he highlighted some points, which included co-relation of
misconduct of a Judge with his appointment and accordingly the Council should be empowered for
appointment and also for taking disciplinary action, Council should comprise of representatives
from the Legislature, the Executive, the Judiciary and also from the Bar Council of India.
5. Members were unanimous that (i) the Body constituted for this purpose must have the
powers to recommend to the President on the issue of appointments of Judges to the Supreme
Court and the High Courts. (ii) Parliament’s right of moving a motion by 100 Members of Lok
Sabha and 50 Members of Rajya Sabha against a Judge should not be curtailed or encroached upon
after constitution of this Council. (iii) A Committee to be constituted under the Council for
preliminary inquiry of cases against the errant Judges which would thereafter submit its report to
the Council. (iv) Transfer of a Judge whose integrity had been in question from one High Court
to the other could not be a solution to the problem, rather a panacea or cure had to be explored
etc.
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 5.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

72
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 7h June, 2007, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
9. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Dr. C. Krishnan
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Prof. M. Ramadass
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
15. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice)
(i) Shri Madhukar Gupta, Secretary; and
(ii) Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Additional Secretary.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
(i) Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary; and
(ii) Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
III. Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary.
72

73
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimat Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the Secretaries and the representatives
of the Department of Justice, Legislative Department and the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry
of Law and Justice to the meeting.
The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for discussions the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006. Initiating
the discussion, the Chairman of the Committee observed that there was a doubt whether such a
Bill could be passed without a Constitutional amendment. Comparing the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
with the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, he stated that the Parliament’s power to constitute an Inquiry
Committee was now proposed to be vested in the Judiciary, in the name of the National Judicial
Council, which amounted to usurping the existing powers of Parliament. V oicing his concern on
the issue, he observed, that in 1993 through a Judgment, the Judiciary took total authority onto
itself for taking its own decisions regarding appointments, which was not within the constitutional
parameters. He suggested for creating a body with representation from the Judiciary, Executive and
Bar, which could perform the work of a Screening Committee. This Committee could be named
as ‘‘Empowered Committee’’ and could be entrusted with the work of receiving petitions,
scrutinizing them to find out whether a prima-facie a case was made out against a Judge and
thereafter forward it to the National Judicial Council for inquiry. Thereafter, the Chairman raised
certain queries viz. (i) when a matter relating to a Judge of the Supreme Court is to be considered,
why should there be a representative of the High Courts; (ii) why couldn’t there be non-judicial
members such as the Vice-President of India, Speaker of Lok Sabha or any other authority in the
National Judicial Council?
3. Replying to the observations and queries of the Committee, the Secretary, Department of
Justice stated that there was in existence, a peer group oriented in-house mechanism, which was
being given statutory basis through the proposed Bill. He clarified that the issue of need for a
Constitutional Amendment was examined in depth by the Law Commission of India and that they
had come to a conclusion that the Constitution of the Proposed National Judicial Council, was not
an undesirable delegation of the authority of Parliament. Regarding the inclusion of non-judicial
members in the National Judicial Council, the Secretary stated that they have been guided by the
opinion of the Law Commission of India, which had concluded that a body of the nature of
National Judicial Council, the functions of which are confined to inquiry and investigation of
complaints against errant Judges, it should be with a Judicial body, comprising of Judicial people
alone. Regarding the need to enact a comprehensive legislation to go into the issues of
appointments, promotions and transfers, the representative of the Ministry stated that the present
Bill confined itself to the issue of inquiry and disciplinary action with a new feature of minor
measures, in addition to the removal process. He further stated that the Government had not gone
into the issues of appointments and transfers etc.
4. Thereafter, an Hon’ble Member of the Committee observed that since the issue involved
here was judicial accountability, the Committee was bound to look into the question of appointment
of Judges along with the questions of complaints or dealing with the complaints from people
against the Judges. The Member further observed that in 1993 through judicial interpretation of a
case, the Judiciary appropriated to itself the power to appoint, whereas in the world over, this

74
power has always been in the hands of the Executive. It was further observed that with the
provisions of this Bill, in addition to appointing themselves, the Judges would also be judging the
misbehaviour of their colleagues in the Judiciary, which would destroy the whole concept of
Judicial accountability. The member cautioned that if only the senior-most Judges were made the
Members of the National Judicial Council, they would be too occupied in dealing with the
complaints against their brother Judges and this could seriously interfere with their Judicial work
resulting in more pendency of cases and thus seriously hampering the dispensation of Justice.
5. Agreeing to the observation of the Member, another Hon'ble Member laid emphasis on
accountability and transparency. The Member wondered whether transparency could be maintained
in such an insulated Institution and more so when the provisions of the Right to Information Act
were not to apply to certain provisions of the Bill. Another Committee Member opined that the
Indian judicial system was a unique one which could not tolerate anybody interfering in the system.
Now, the National Judicial Council could not have non-judicial members. The Member further
observed that even the Chief Justice of India could not take any disciplinary action against a Judge
in spite of knowing that the Judge was involved in some corrupt practice. The only action
permitted under the Constitution being impeachment, there existed no supervisory control of the
Chief Justice of India over his subordinates.
6. Another Hon'ble Member, during the Committee’s deliberation on the Bill, raised the issue
of social justice in Judiciary. He opined that there was no proper representation of the SCs/STs/
Minorities/OBCs in the Judiciary. According to the Member this was the reason for lack of social
commitment on the part of the Judiciary. The Member suggested for the formation of a disciplinary
Committee consisting of Members from fields other than the Judiciary, as it was very unlikely that
a Judge would take action against a co-judge. The Member further opined that the Executive should
have a say in the appointment of Judges otherwise the Supreme Court Collegium will go on
recommending any name of their choice for appointment. Another Member of the Committee
favoured the idea of an ‘‘Empowered Committee’’ as the same, in his opinion, would save the
Judiciary from frivolous and vexatious complaints. The Member also opined that the Government,
which was a decision making body need not be bound by the opinion of the Law Commission.
Referring to the 1993 Judgement of the Supreme Court, the member observed that the Supreme
Court interpretated ‘‘Consultation’’ into ‘ ‘Command’’ which should to be corrected.
7. One Hon'ble Member disagreed with the idea of including all sections of the society in the
Council. The Member was also against allowing everybody to make a complaint against the judges
as this would undermine the independence of the Judiciary. The Member opined that there was an
urgent need for a comprehensive Bill dealing with all the aspects of Judiciary. Another Member
suggested that the Council for the appointment of Judges should be headed by the Vice-President
of India. Some Members of the Committee observed that there was inter-dependence in the
functioning of the three organs of the state, thus there was an urgent need, on the part of the
Judiciary, to commit itself to social equity. There was, however, general consensus among the
Committee Members that the Judiciary should be composed of men from different walks of life.
Therefore, the composition of the National Judicial Council should include people, other than
Judges.
8. Thereafter, the Chairman raised certain queries relating to the various provisions of the Bill
regarding (i) the consequences in case of difference of opinion among the members of the Council;
(ii) which Body to execute the order of the Council under Clause 20 of the Bill and (iii) the
consequences in case a Judge refused to obey the orders of the Council. The Committee desired
that the representative of the Department of Justice should clarify on these issues and also on the
issue of appointment, while dealing with the disciplinary aspect. The representative of the
Department of Justice assured the Committee that they would look into all the suggested aspects.

75
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The meeting was adjourned at 1.04 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

76
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday the 14th June, 2007 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
7. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Prof. M. Ramadass
14. Shri Raj Babbar
15. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Secretary;
2. Shri K Gurtu, Director; and
3. Shri S. Twkkly, Director.
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary;
2. Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
3. Shri P. B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shri R.K Pattanayak, Additional Legislative Counsel.
76

77
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
2. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006.
The Committee noted that the exclusion of the Chief Justice of India from the definition of the
term ‘‘Judge’’ in sub clause (i) of clause 2 of the Bill was without any reasonable justification.
Regarding clause 3 of the Bill which provides for establishment of National Judicial Council (NJC),
the Committee opined that either the NJC should be made broad based by including non-judicial
Members representing Parliament and executive or another additional body should be created with
representation from Judiciary, Executive, Parliament and the Bar to work in co-ordination with the
NJC. It was further suggested that an ‘ ‘Empowered Committee’’ should be constituted which
would receive and examine the complaints against Judges and refer them to the NJC, if found to
be genuine. The Committee was also of the view that in future, the proposed Empowered
Committee should be made the body to scrutinize the nominations for the appointment of Judges
also.
3. The Committee considered the clauses 2 to 4 of the Bill and then decided to take up rest
of the clauses in its next meeting.
4. The witnesses responded to the points raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 1.04 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

78
XXIII
TWENTY THIRD MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday the 25th June, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
14. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
I. Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Additional Secretary; and
2. Shri K. Gurtu, Director
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Deputy Secretary;
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary;
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
78

79
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of the
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice to the meeting.
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Judges
(Inquiry) Bill, 2006. On Clause 3 of the Bill, the Committee noted that the National Judicial Council,
though appointed by the President, totally excluded the presence of the Executive and the
Parliament. The Committee opined that this was a violation of the mandate given to the Parliament
under Article 124(4) of the Constitution of India. The Committee suggested inclusion of non-
Judicial Members in the Council to make it more broad based. The Committee further suggested
deletion of the words "to be nominated by Chief Justice of India" from sub Clauses (b) and
(c) of Clause 3(2) as it felt that by virtue of seniority, the Judges would automatically become the
Members of the Council. The Committee further suggested that the other members of the Council
should be appointed by the President and not by the Chief Justice of India. While deliberating upon
this particular Clause, the Committee suggested constitution of a separate Committee viz., the
‘‘Empowered Committee’’ as a screening body to initially screen the complaints both of the
individuals and the MPs.
3. Regarding Clauses 5 and 11 of the proposed Bill, the Committee observed that there was
no distinction in the procedures under the complaint procedure and the reference proceedure even
though the complaints were coming from two different sources viz. from individuals and 100/50
MPs Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha. The Committee observed that the similarity of procedures could lead
to a situation where one individual would be at par with 100/50 MPs. The Committee opined that
the provisions of Clause 5 and 11 were delegating the powers of Parliament to the National Judicial
Council. The Committee took serious note of the fact that by virtue of the provisions of the
proposed Bill, there would be no distinction between an individual making a complaint under the
complaint procedure and 100/50MPs making complaints under reference procedure as per the
Constitutional provisions.
4. On Clause 8 of the Bill, the Committee noted that it sought to give a statutory basis to the
already existing in-House procedure which was being followed by the Judiciary since 1997,
whereby complaints against the Judges were decided by the Judges themselves. The Committee
further noted that this Clause was authorizing the proposed National Judicial Council to receive and
deal with the complaints. The Committee was in favour of setting up a Screening Committee to
initially scrutinize the complaints before they were referred to the National Judicial Council for
detailed investigation and inquiry.
5. Regarding Clause 9, the Committee observed that the provision was violative of the
principles of natural justice and the administrative law, which envisaged that the disciplinary
authority should not be the inquiry authority also. The Committee opined that investigation should
be done by some other independent, impartial authority.
6. On Clause 11 and 12 the Committee observed that since it had recommended the
Constitution of an ‘ ‘Empowered Committee’’ for initial screening and scrutiny of complaints under
both the complaint procedure and the reference procedure, hence both these Clauses should
accordingly be deleted. The Committee further observed that once the Empowered Committee was
brought into existence, the initial verification and screening of complaints could be done by it and
thereafter the work of investigation and inquiry could be carried out by the National Judicial
Council.
7. Regarding Clause 16, which stipulated appointment of an advocate by the Central
Government to conduct a case against a Judge, the Committee was in favour of including a
provision for legal aid to the Judge so that an equal opportunity of defending himself was accorded

80
to the judge. Clause 26 of the Bill also invited some discussion as it envisaged punishment for false
and vexatious complaints. The Committee felt that the provision was unnecessary and would deter
the people from making complaints. The Committee suggested inclusion of the words ‘‘after due
process of Inquiry’’ after the words ‘‘which is found by the Council’’ so as to provide a safeguard
to the Complainant.
8. Discussing Clause 30 of the Bill which provided for appeal against the order of removal
passed by the President or an order passed by the Council imposing minor measure, the Committee
observed that the Judges should not be treated as ordinary Government servants. The Committee
was of the categorical opinion that there should not be any appeal against the Presidential Order
of removal.
9. The Committee adopted the remaining Clauses without suggesting any changes therein as
they pertained to the procedural matters. As for the title of the Bill under Clause 1, the Committee
felt that if the title of the Bill was changed to ‘‘National Judicial Council Act’’ it would convey
the exact meaning of the proposed enactment. On the long title of the Bill, the Committee observed
that the inquiry against a Judge was by its very nature a sensitive matter, as being a matter against
the Constitutional Authority, therefore, the words ‘‘minor measures’’ should be substituted with the
words ‘‘appropriate measures’’.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 01.45 
P.M.

81
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 17th July, 2007, in Room No.‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
7. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
14. Shri Raj Babbar
15. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
16. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
WITNESSES
Shri Krishnamoni, Senior Advocate (Supreme Court)
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(i) Shri Satyanand Mishra, Secretary; and
(ii) Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary.
II. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
(i) Shri B.K. Sinha, Additional Secretary; and
(ii) Shri T.R. Raghunandan, Joint Secretary.
81

82
III. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri P. B. Singh, Joint Secretary
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
5. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Shri M.N. Krishnamoni, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court and former President of the Supreme Court Bar Association to the meeting and informed
him that the purpose of inviting them was to elicit his views/suggestions on the Judges (inquiry)
Bill, 2006 pending before the Committee for consideration and Report. He, then, requested
Shri Krishnamoni to make his observations on the different provisions of the Bill.
6. Thereafter, Shri Krishnamoni made his presentation before the Committee on various Clauses
of the Bill, which inter alia  included composition of National Judicial Council, appointments and
transfer of Judges, misconduct by Judges, Code of Conduct for Judges, application of RTI Act,
etc.
7. On the composition of Judicial Council, the witness was of the view that the Judicial
Council should comprise of 9 members which included not only Supreme Court Judges but also
representatives of the Government, Bar Council of India, Attorney General, etc. He then stressed
that if we would be able to groom the selection method, laid down the procedure and criteria for
appointment then one would have choice and the question of judicial misdemeanor may not arise
or could be reduced. On transfer of Judges he was of  the view that transfer should not be taken
as a measure of punishment because it would not serve the purpose rather lowers the dignity of
a Judge where he had been transferred. On misconduct of Judges he was of the view the Bill deals
with only those misconducts, which were committed within two years before retirement were
considered was not correct because by the time one discover the misconduct it would be more
than 2 years and nobody could be prosecuted or could be taken to task for the judicial misconduct.
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting was adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

83
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 04.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 24th July, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Dr. P.C. Alexander
8. Shri Tarlochan Singh
9. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
10. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Prof. M. Ramadass
15. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. Thereafter, the
Committee took up for consideration its Draft 21st Report on the Judges (Inquiry Bill), 2006.
During consideration of the Draft Report some Members desired to include the issue of reservation
in the higher Judiciary to address the cause of Social Equity. The Committee, thereafter decided
to meet again to reconsider and adopt its 21st Report on the 1st August, 2007.
3. The Committee adjourned at 05.10 
P.M.
83

84
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 1st August, 2007 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
13. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
14. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary.
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
84
*** Relates to some other matter.

85
Consideration and adoption of draft Report on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006
6. The Committee then considered the Draft Report on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 and
adopted the same. Shri Ram Jethmalani and Shri Virendra Bhatia, Members of the Committee
submitted their dissenting notes, on the report of the Committee. The Committee then decided that
the same may be appended to the Report as ‘Minutes of dissent’.
7. The Committee decided to lay/present the Report in both Houses of Parliament on
17th August, 2007. The Committee authorized Shri V arkala Radhakrishnan and in his absence,
Shri Shailendra Kumar to lay the Report on the table of the Lok Sabha and the Chairman and in
his absence, Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte to present the Report to Rajya Sabha.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 12.53 
P.M.

ANNEXURE

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 97 of 2006
THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL, 2006
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
MACHINERY FOR PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATION  AND INQUIRY
3. Establishment of National Judicial Council.
4. Composition of the Council to change under certain circumstances.
5. Functions of the National Judicial Council.
6. Council to conduct investigation and inquiry into any act or conduct of any
person other than a Judge.
7. Staff of the Council.
CHAPTER III
C
OMPLAINT  PROCEDURE
8. Complaints.
9. Verification and preliminary investigation of complaints by Council.
10. Procedure in respect of inquiries.
CHAPTER IV
REFERENCE  PROCEDURE
11. Notice of motion for presenting an address to the President for removal of a Judge.
12. Council to frame charges against the Judge.
CHAPTER V
PROCEDURE  FOR INQUIRY IN CASE OF PHYSICAL  OR MENTAL INCAPACITY OF A J UDGE
13. Medical examination of the Judge.
89
ANNEXURE-A

90
CHAPTER VI
PROCEDURE  FOR INQUIRY
CLAUSES
14. Inquiry to be conducted in camera.
15. Council to have power to regulate its own procedure.
16. Central Government to appoint an advocate to conduct case against the Judge.
17. Power relating to inquiries.
18. Search and seizure.
19. Change in the composition of the Council.
CHAPTER VII
P
ROCEDURE  AFTER CONCLUSION  OF INQUIRY
20. Disposal of complaint and follow up action in complaint procedure.
21. Disposal of reference from the Speaker or Chairman under the reference procedure.
22. Addresses by the Houses.
23. Disqualification of the removed Judge.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
24. Intentional insult or interruption to Council.
25. Power of Council to try certain cases.
26. Punishment for false and vexatious complaints.
27. Confidentiality in complaint procedure.
28. Keeping identity of complainant confidential.
29. Stoppage of assigning judicial work in certain cases.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. Appeal to Supreme Court.
31. No action for contempt to lie in certain cases.
32. Investigation and inquiry by the Council not to affect criminal liability.
33. All records, documents, etc., related to complaint, preliminary investigation and
inquiry to be confidential.
34. Protection of action taken in good faith.
35. Proceedings before Council or the Committee to be judicial proceedings.
36. Code of Conduct for Judges.
37. Constitution of Joint Committees of both Houses for making rules.
38. Repeal and saving.

91
Bill No. 97 of 2006
THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
for establishing the National Judicial Council to undertake preliminary
investigation and inquire into allegations of misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court
and to regulate the procedure for such investigation, inquiry and
proof, and for imposing minor measures; and for the
presentation of an address by Parliament to the President and
for matters connected therewith.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘Chairman’’ means the Chairman of the Council of
States;
(b) ‘‘Code of Conduct’’ means the guidelines issued by
the Council under sub-section (1) of section 36;
91
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.

92
(c) ‘‘Committee’’ means the investigating committee constituted
under sub-section ( 3) of section 9;
(d) ‘‘complaint procedure’’ means a procedure which is
initiated by way of complaint to the Council under section 8;
(e) ‘‘Council’’ means the National Judicial Council established
under sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
(f) ‘‘incapacity’’ means physical or mental incapacity which is
or is likely to be of a permanent character;
(g) ‘‘inquiry’’ means inquiry for proof of misbehaviour or
incapacity;
(h) ‘‘investigation’’ means preliminary investigation;
(i) ‘‘Judge’’ means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a
High Court and includes the Chief Justice of a High Court and also
the Chief Justice of India for purposes of the reference procedure
but shall not include the Chief Justice of India for purposes of the
complaint procedure;
(j) ‘‘misbehaviour’’ means wilful or persistent conduct which
brings dishonour or disrepute to the judiciary; or wilful or persistent
failure to perform the duties of a Judge; or wilful abuse of judicial
office, corruption, lack of integrity; or committing an offence involving
moral turpitude; and includes violation of Code of Conduct;
(k) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;
(l) ‘‘reference procedure’’ means a procedure which is initiated
by way of a motion for removal which is referred by the Speaker
or the Chairman under sub-section ( 2) of section 11;
(m) ‘‘Speaker’’ means the Speaker of the House of the
People.
CHAPTER II
M
ACHINERY FOR PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION AND INQUIRY
3. ( 1) With effect from such date as the President may, by
notification appoint, there shall be established a National Judicial
Council.
(2) The National Judicial Council shall consist of the following
namely:—
(a) The Chief Justice of India - Chairperson;
(b) Two senior most Judges of the Supreme Court, to be
nominated by Chief Justice of India—Members;
(c) Two Chief Justices of the High Courts, to be nominated
by Chief Justice of India—Members.
Establishment
of National
Judicial
Council.

93
4. ( 1) Where the Chairperson of the Council recuses himself,
then the President shall nominate the next senior most Judge of the
Supreme Court as the Chairperson of the Council.
(2) Where a Member of the Council recuses himself, then the
Chief Justice of India shall nominate the senior most judge of the Supreme
Court, or Chief Justice of the High Court, as the case may be, next in
seniority as a Member.
(3) Where the allegations are made in a complaint by any person
or in a reference by the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be, against
a Judge of the Supreme Court, the Council shall consist of the Chief
Justice of India and the four senior most Judges of the Supreme Court to
be nominated by the Chief Justice of India.
(4) Where a reference is received from the Speaker or the
Chairman and the allegations are against the Chief Justice of India, then the
Chief Justice of India shall not take part in the proceedings of the Council
and the President shall nominate the next senior most Judge of the
Supreme Court as the Chairperson and also another Judge of the Supreme
Court next in the seniority to be the Member of the Council;
(5) The Chairperson or the member of the Council so appointed
under sub-sections ( 1), ( 2), ( 3) and ( 4) shall cease to be such Chairperson
or Member thereof on the conclusion of the preliminary investigation and
inquiry.
5. ( 1) It shall be the duty of the National Judicial Council to
investigate and inquire into any matter involving arising from, or connected
with, any allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity against a Judge of the
Supreme Court or Judge of a High Court, as the case may be.
(2) The Council shall investigate and inquire into allegations, of
misbehaviour or incapacity, made to it under section 8 or under section 11
against a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a Judge of a High Court as
the case may be.
(3) Where the allegations are against a Judge who is a Member
of the Council, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2)
of section 3, the Chief Justice of India shall nominate the next senior most
Judge of the Supreme Court or the next senior most Chief Justice of a
High Court, as the case may be, as a Member for the purposes of
investigating or inquiring into the complaint against the said Judge.
6. The Council may also conduct investigation and inquire into
any act or conduct of any person other than the Judge concerned in so
far as it considers necessary so to do for the purpose of its investigation
into any such allegations and shall give such person a reasonable opportunity
of being heard and to produce evidence in his defence.
Composition of
the Council to
change under
certain
circumstances.
Functions of
the National
Judicial Council.
Council to
conduct
investigation
and inquiry
into any act
or conduct
of any person
other than a
Judge.

94
7. ( 1) The Council shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the
discharge of its functions (including verification, preliminary
investigation and inquiry in respect of allegations) under this Act,
appoint a Secretary and such other officers and employees as the
President may determine, from time to time, in consultation with the
Council.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Council may, for the purpose of dealing with any allegation or class of
allegations utilise—
(a) the services of any officer or employee or investigating
agency of the Central Government or a State Government with the
concurrence of that Government; or
(b) the services of any other person or agency.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the officers and employees
referred to in sub-section ( 1) and of the officers, employees, agencies and
persons referred to in sub-section ( 2) (including such special conditions as
may be considered necessary for enabling them to act without fear in the
discharge of their functions) shall be such as the President may determine,
from time to time, in consultation with the Council.
(4) In the discharge of their functions under this Act, the officers
and employees referred to in sub-section ( 1) and the officers, employees,
agencies and persons referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall be subject to the
exclusive administrative control and direction of the Council.
CHAPTER III
C
OMPLAINT PROCEDURE
8. ( 1) Any person may make a complaint in writing involving any
allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity in respect of a Judge to the
Council:
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained and inquired
into with respect to any act or conduct constituting misbehaviour which
has taken place before the commencement of this Act:
Provided further that no such complaint shall be entertained and
inquired into with respect to any act or conduct constituting misbehaviour
which has taken place two years prior to the filing of the complaint:
Provided also that no complaint shall be entertained and inquired into
against a person who has demitted the office of a Judge.
(2) The complaint under sub-section ( 1) shall—
(a) be in such form as may be prescribed;
(b) set forth particulars of the misbehaviour or incapacity
which is the subject matter of allegation;
Staff of the
Council.
Complaints.

95
(c) be verified at the foot of the complaint by the
complainant and shall specify, by reference to the numbered
paragraphs of the complaint, what he verifies of his own
knowledge and what he verifies upon information and shall refer
to the source of the information;
(d) be accompanied by a statement to the effect that the
complainant is aware of the fact that if the allegations in the
complaint are found to be frivolous or vexatious or not made in
good faith he is liable to be punished under section 26.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
Council may entertain any complaint from any other source.
9. ( 1) If the Council is satisfied, after considering the complaint
and after making such verification or where necessary, such preliminary
investigation as it deems appropriat,—
(a) that the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or is not
made in good faith; or
(b) that there are not sufficient grounds for inquiring into
the complaint; or
(c) that the complaint relates only to the merits of the
judgment or a procedural order,
it shall dismiss the complaint after recording its reasons therefor and
communicate the same to the complainant.
(2) The procedure for verification or preliminary investigation in
respect of a complaint under sub-section ( 1) shall be such as the Council
deems appropriate in the circumstances of the case and in particular, the
Council shall call for the comments of the Judge concerned.
(3) If the Council considers it expedient so, to do, it may
constitute an investigating committee comprising one or more of its members
for the purpose of conducting preliminary investigation and for finding
whether definite charges are required to be framed for conducting an
inquiry into the matter.
(4) The Committee shall have all the powers of the Council
while conducting such preliminary investigation.
(5) The Committee shall submit its report to the Council for
consideration and for taking a final view on the conclusions arrived at by
the Committee.
10. ( 1) If after the verification and preliminary investigation
under section 9 in respect of a complaint, the Council proposes to conduct
an inquiry, it shall frame definite charges against the Judge on the basis of
which the inquiry is proposed to be held.
V erification and
preliminary
investigation of
complaints by
Council.
Procedure in
respect of
inquiries.

96
(2) Charges framed under sub-section ( 1) together with the statement
of grounds on which each such charge is based shall be communicated to
the Judge and he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a
written statement of defence within such time as may be specified by the
Council.
CHAPTER IV
R
EFERENCE PROCEDURE
11. ( 1) If a notice is given of a motion for presenting an address
to the President praying for removal of a Judge, on the ground of
misbehaviour or incapacity signed,—
(a) in the case of a notice given in the House of the People,
by not less than one hundred members of that House;
(b) in the case of a notice given in the Council of States, by
not less than fifty members of that House,
then the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman may, after
consulting such persons, as he thinks fit and after considering such
materials, if any, as may be available to him, either admit the motion or
refuse to admit the same.
(2) If the motion referred to in sub-section ( 1) is admitted, the
Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, shall keep the motion
pending and refer the allegations on the basis of which the motion is based
to the Council:
Provided that where notices of motion referred to in sub-section ( 1)
are given on the same day in both Houses of Parliament, no reference shall
be made unless the motion is admitted in both Houses and where such
motion has been admitted in both Houses, a reference shall be made jointly
by the Speaker and the Chairman:
Provided further that where notices of the motion as aforesaid are
given in the Houses of Parliament on different dates, the notice that was
given later shall stand rejected.
12. ( 1) On receipt of a reference from the Speaker or the Chairman
under sub-section ( 2) of section 11, the Council shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in section 9, frame definite charges against the Judge
on the basis of which the inquiry is proposed to be held.
(2) Charges framed under sub-section ( 1) together with the statement
of grounds on which each charge is based shall be communicated to the
Judge and he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a
written statement of defence within such time as may be specified by the
Council.
Notice of
motion for
presenting an
address to the
President for
removal of a
Judge.
Council to
frame charge
against the
Judge.

97
CHAPTER V
PROCEDURE FOR INQUIRY IN CASE OF PHYSICAL OR MENTAL
INCAPACITY OF A J UDGE
13. ( 1) Where it is alleged that the Judge is unable to discharge
the duties of his office efficiently due to any physical or mental incapacity
and the allegation is denied, the Council may arrange for the medical
examination of the Judge by such Medical Board as may be appointed for
the purpose and the Judge shall submit himself to such medical examination
within the time specified in this behalf by the Council.
(2) The Medical Board shall undertake such medical examination
of the Judge as may be considered necessary and submit a report to the
Council stating therein whether the incapacity is such as to render the
Judge unfit to continue in office.
(3) If the Judge refuses to undergo medical examination
considered necessary by the Medical Board, it shall submit a report to the
Council stating therein the examination which the Judge has refused to
undergo, and the Council may, on receipt of such report, presume that the
Judge suffers ftom such physical or mental incapacity as is alleged.
(4) If the Judge agrees to undergo medical examination considered
necessary by the Medical Board, the said Board may permit him to
produce such other medical reports or opinions of experts as the Judge
deems it necessary to prove that he does not suffer from any physical or
mental incapacity, and thereafter the Medical Board shall submit a report
to the Council with its findings based upon the medical examination
conducted at the instance of the Board as well as the material produced
by the Judge as aforesaid.
(5) The Council may, after considering the written statement of
the Judge, the medical report submitted by the Medical Board and the
material submitted by the Judge before the Medical Board, if any, amend
the charges framed under sub-section ( 1) of section 10 or sub-section ( 1)
of section 12, as the case may be, and in such a case, the Judge shall be
given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a fresh written statement of
defence.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROCEDURE FOR INQUIRY
14. ( 1) Every such inquiry shall be conducted in camera by the
Chairperson and the Members of the Council sitting jointly.
(2) The Council shall hold every such inquiry as expeditiously
as possible and in any case complete the inquiry within a period of six
months from the date of receipt of the complaint:
Provided that the Council, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
may complete the inquiry within a further period of six months.
Medical
examination of
the Judge.
Inquiry to be
conducted in
camera.
97

98
15. Save as aforesaid, the Council shall have power to regulate its
own procedure in making the inquiry and shall give reasonable opportunity
to the Judge of cross-examining witnesses, adducing evidence and of being
heard in his defence.
16. The Central Government may, if requested by the Council,
appoint an advocate to conduct the case against the Judge.
17. The Council shall, while conducting any preliminary investigation
or inquiry, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 and in particular, in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
from any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or
other documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
18. ( 1) If the Council has reason to believe that any document
which, in its opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any preliminary
investigation or inquiry under this Act, is secreted in any place, it may
authorise any officer subordinate to it, or any officer of an investigating
agency referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 7, to search for and to
seize such document.
(2) If the Council is satisfied that any document seized under sub-
section (1) would be evidence for the purpose of any investigation under this
Act and that it would be necessary to retain the document in its custody,
it may so retain the said document till the completion of such investigation.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating
to searches shall, so far as may be, apply to searches under this section
subject to the modification that sub-section ( 5) of section 165 of the said
Code shall have effect as if, for the word ‘‘Magistrate’’, wherever it occurs,
the words ‘‘Council or any officer authorised by it’’ were substituted.
19. After the commencement of proceedings under this Act, if any
change in the composition of the Council arises due to elevation of any
member as Chief Justice of India or due to elevation of any Chief Justice
of a High Court who is a Member as a Judge of the Supreme Court or
if any vacancy in the Council arises due to recusal, retirement, resignation
or any other cause, the proceedings shall be continued from the stage from
which it was pending before such change and the Chief Justice of India
shall make such incidental changes as he deems necessary to continue the
proceedings.
Council to
have power
to regulate
its own
procedure.
5 of 1908.
Search and
seizure.
Central
Government
to appoint an
advocate to
conduct case
against the
Judge.
Power
relating to
inquiries.
Change in
the
composition
of the
Council.
2 of 1974.

99
CHAPTER VII
PROCEDURE AFTER CONCLUSION OF INQUIRY
20. (1) If, after inquiry in respect of a complaint, the Council
is satisfied that—
(a) no charges have been proved, it shall dismiss the
complaint and no further action shall be taken against the Judge
and the Judge and the complainant shall be informed accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section
21, ‘‘proved’’ means proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(b) all or any of the charges in regard to misbehaviour or
incapacity have been proved and the Council is of the opinion
that the charges proved do not warrant removal of the Judge, it
may impose all or any of the following minor measures, namely:—
(i) issuing advisories;
(ii) issuing warnings;
(iii) withdrawal of judicial work for a limited
time including cases already assigned;
(iv) request that the Judge may voluntarily retire;
(v) censure or admonition, public or private.
(2) The minor measure specified in sub-clause ( v) of clause ( b)
of sub-section ( 1) may be imposed on a Judge notwithstanding the fact
that he has demitted office due to superannuation or otherwise.
(3) If the Council is satisfied that all or any of the charges in
regard to misbehaviour or incapacity have been proved and that they are
of serious nature warranting his removal, it shall advise the President
accordingly.
(4) The President on receipt of advice under sub-section ( 3)
shall cause the findings of the Council along with the accompanying
materials to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(5) On laying of the advice of the Council along with the
accompanying material under sub-section ( 3), the Government shall move
a motion in either House of Parliament for presenting an address to the
President praying for the removal of the said Judge.
21. (1) Where the inquiry was initiated under sub-section ( 2) of
section 11 on a reference from the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case
may be, then the Council shall forward its report to the Speaker or the
Chairman.
(2) If the report of the Council contains a finding that all or any
of the charges of the misbehaviour or incapacity are not proved, or that
any of the charges proved do not warrant removal, then no further steps
shall be taken in either House of Parliament in relation to the report and
the motion pending in the House or the Houses of Parliament shall not be
proceeded with.
Disposal of
complaint and
follow up action
in complaint
procedure.
Disposal of
reference from
the Speaker or
Chairman under
the reference
procedure.
99

100
(3) If the report of the Council contains a finding that all or any of
the charges of misbehaviour or incapacity are proved and a recommendation
that the charges proved warrant removal, then the motion referred to in
sub-section ( 1) of section 11, shall together with the report of the Council,
be taken up for consideration by the House or the Houses of Parliament
in which it is pending.
22. If the motion referred to in sub-section ( 5) of section 20 or sub-
section ( 3) of section 21, is adopted by each House of Parliament in
accordance with the provisions of clause (4) of article 124 of the
Constitution or as the case may be, in accordance with that clause read
with article 218 of the Constitution, then the misbehaviour or incapacity of
the Judge shall be deemed to have been proved and an express address
praying for the removal of the Judge shall be presented in the prescribed
manner to the President by each House of Parliament in the same session
in which the motion has been adopted.
23. Where the recommendation of the Council for removal of a
Judge is accepted by the Houses and the removal order is passed by the
President, the Judge shall be disqualified—
(a) for any diplomatic assignment, appointment as an
administrator of a Union territory and such other assignment which
is required by law to be made by President by warrant under his
hand and seal;
(b) for further employment to any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of a State;
(c) to act as an arbitrator in any arbitration proceedings;
(d) to pursue chamber practice.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
24. ( 1) Whoever intentionally offers any insult, or causes any
interruption, to the Council while the Council or any of its Members is
making any verification or conducting any preliminary investigation or
inquiry under this Act, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both:
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 199 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply in relation to an offence referred to
in sub-section ( 1) as they apply in relation to an offence referred to in sub-
section (2) of the said section, subject to the modification that no complaint
in respect of such offence shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except
with the previous sanction of the Council.
25. ( 1) When any such offence as is described in sub-section ( 1)
of section 24 is committed in the view or presence of the Council, the
Council may cause the offender to be detained in custody and may at any
time on the same day take cognizance of the offence and after giving the
offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be
Addresses by
the Houses.
2 of 1974.
Disqualification
of the
removed
Judge.
Intentional
insult or
interruption
to Council.
Power of
Council to try
certain cases.

101
punished under this section try such offender summarily so far as may be
in accordance with the procedure specified for summary trials under the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and sentence him to simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
(2) In every case tried under this section the Council shall
record the facts constituting the offence with the statement if any made
by the offender as well as the finding and the sentence.
(3) Any person convicted on a trial held under this section may
appeal to the Supreme Court.
(4) The provisions of this section shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973.
26. ( 1) Any person who makes a complaint which is found by
the Council to be false or frivolous, vexatious or not in good faith or with
an intent to harass the Judge against whom such complaint is filed, shall
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year and also to fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.
(2) When any offence under sub-section ( 1) is committed, the
Council may take cognizance of the offence and after giving the offender
a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he. should not be punished
for such offence, try such offender summarily, so far as may be in
accordance with the procedure specified for summary trials under the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(3) Any person convicted on a trial held under this section may
appeal to the Supreme Court.
(4) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
27. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, the complainant and every person who participates in
the preliminary investigation or inquiry as a witness or as a lawyer or in
any other capacity, whether or not he seeks confidentiality about his name,
must undertake to the Council that he shall not reveal his own name, the
name of the Judge complained against, the contents of the complaint or
any of the documents or proceedings to anybody else including the media
without the prior written approval of the Council.
(2) If any complainant or other person who participates in the
preliminary investigation or inquiry as a witness or as a lawyer or in any
other capacity contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1), he shall be
punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both
and the provisions of section 25, so far as may be, shall apply.
28. The Council may, at the request of a complainant, direct
that the complainant be accorded such protection as it deems appropriate,
including but not limited to, keeping his identity confidential from every
body and also the Judge against whom the complaint is made.
Punishment for
false and
vexatious
complaints.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Confidentiality
in complaint
procedure.
Keeping identity
of complainant
confidential.

102
29. During the pendency of the preliminary investigation or inquiry
or address by the Houses to the President, the Council may recommend
stoppage of assigning judicial work including cases assigned to the Judge
concerned if it appears to the Council that it is necessary in the interest
of fair and impartial preliminary investigation and inquiry.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. A Judge aggrieved by—
(i) an order of removal passed by the President; or
(ii) a final order passed by the Council imposing one or other
‘‘minor measure’’ on the basis of a complaint;
may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court,
31. After the commencement of preliminary investigation under this
Act, no action for contempt of court shall lie or shall be proceeded with
in respect of the allegations, which are the subject matter of the investigation
or inquiry.
32. Any preliminary investigation or inquiry pending before the Council
will not affect the criminal liability in respect of such allegations.
33. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force (including the Right to Information Act, 2005 or similar laws
in force), all papers, documents and records of proceedings related to a
complaint, preliminary investigation and inquiry shall be confidential and
shall not be disclosed by any person in any proceeding except as directed
by the Council.
34. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the
Council or against any official or employee, agency or person engaged by
the Council for the purpose of conducting preliminary investigation or
inquiry, in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to
be done.
35. The Council and the committee shall be deemed to be a civil
court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and every proceeding before the Council and the
committee shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the  meaning
of sections 193 and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian
Penal Code.
36. ( 1) The Council shall, in the interests of administration of
justice, issue from time to time, a Code of Conduct containing guidelines
for the conduct and behaviour of Judges.
Stoppage of
assigning
judicial work
in certain
cases.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
No action for
contempt to
lie in certain
cases.
Investigation
and inquiry by
the Council
not to affect
criminal
liability.
All records,
documents,
etc., related
to complaint,
preliminary
investigation
and inquiry to
be
confidential.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Proceedings
before Council
or the
committee to
be judicial
proceedings.
Code of
Conduct for
Judges.
22 of 2005.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

103
(2) Till the Code of Conduct referred to in sub-section ( 1) is
issued, ‘‘The Restatement of Values of Judicial Life adopted by the Chief
Justices’ Conference of India. 1999’’, shall be the Code of Conduct for the
purposes of this Act.
(3) The Code of Conduct issued wider sub-section ( 1) may,
inter alia , provide that every Judge at the time of appointment as a Judge
of the Supreme Court or of the High Court and thereafter shall annually
give intimation of his assets and liabilities to the Chief Justice of India or
the Chief Justice of the High Court, as the case may be.
(4) The Code of Conduct shall be published in the Official
Gazette and the Council shall in the like manner amend the said Code from
time to time.
37. ( 1) There shall be constituted a Joint Committee of both
Houses of Parliament in accordance with the provision hereinafter contained
for the purpose of making rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Joint Committee shall consist of fifteen members of
whom ten shall be nominated by the Speaker and five shall be nominated
by the Chairman.
(3) The Joint Committee shall elect its own Chairman and shall
have power to regulate its own procedure.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section ( 1), the Joint Committee may make rules to provide for the
following among other matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of transmission of a motion adopted in
one House to the other House of Parliament;
(b) the manner of presentation of an address to the
President for the removal of a Judge;
(c) the facilities which may be accorded to the Judge for
defending himself;
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be,
provided for by rules or in respect of which provision is, in the
opinion of the Joint Committee, necessary.
(5) Any rules made under this section shall not take effect until
they are approved and confirmed both by the Speaker and the Chairman
and are published in the Official Gazette, and such publication of the rules
shall be conclusive proof that they have been duly made.
38. ( 1) The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Judges (Inquiry) Act,
1968 the rules made by the Joint Committee under section 7 of the said
Act shall continue to be in force till new rules are made by the Committee
under this Act.
Constitution
of Joint
Committees
of both
Houses for
making rules.
Repeal and
saving.
51 of 1968.
51 of 1968.

104
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A suitable legislative framework is the need of the hour for empowering a
judicial forum to deal with complaints against Judges of the Supreme Court and
High Courts. On the basis of the recommendations made in the 195th Report of
the Law Commission of India on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005, the Bill, namely
the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 has been prepared.
2. It may be recalled that the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 was enacted with
a view to lay down a procedure for removal for proved misbehaviour or incapacity
of Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court by way of address of the
Houses of Parliament by the President. The Law Commission of India in its 195th
Report has examined the issue of judicial accountability in the light of the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in its various judgments, which relate to the
interpretation of articles 121, 124 and 217 of the Constitution.
3. The Bill, namely, the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 is based on the premise
that judicial independence is one of the basic fundamentals of the Constitution.
Judicial independence and judicial accountability are inseparable. Thus, there is an
urgent need of a legislation for establishing a National Judicial Council to look into
the allegations of misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or
of a High Court, as the case may be, and to regulate the procedure for such
investigation, inquiry and proof in a complaint procedure in addition to the earlier
‘‘reference procedure’’ as contained in the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968. In a
complaint procedure, a complaint can be made by any person to the Judicial
Council against Judges of the Supreme Court (except the Chief Justice of India),
Chief Justices and Judges of High Courts. The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006, inter
alia, seeks to empower the National Judicial Council for imposing minor measures
also. The Bill also seeks to repeal the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; H. R. BHARDWAJ.
The 30th November, 2006.
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. K. 1l015/2/2006-US.II, dated the 11th December, 2006
from Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Judges
(Inquiry) Bill, 2006, has recommended under article 117(1) of the Constitution of
India, the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha.
104

105
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2 is the definition clause and it defines for the purposes of certainty
in the interpretation of the legislation ‘‘Code of Conduct’’ as the guidelines issued
by the Council under sub-section (1) of section 36, ‘‘complaint procedure’’ as a
procedure that is initiated by way of complaint; ‘‘incapacity’’ as ‘‘physical or
mental incapacity’’ that is likely to be of a permanent character; ‘‘inquiry’’ as
inquiry for proof of misbehavior or incapacity; ‘‘misbehavior’’ as wilful or persistent
conduct which brings dishonour or disrepute to the judiciary, or wilful or persistent
failure to perform the duties of a Judge or wilful abuse of judicial office, corruption,
lack of integrity, moral turpitude and includes violation of Code of Conduct; and
‘‘reference procedure’’ as procedure which is initiated by way of a motion for
removal which is referred by the Speaker or the Chairman under sub-section (2)
of section 11.
Clause 3 provides for establishment of National Judicial Council consisting
of (a) the Chief Justice of India – Chairperson; (b) two senior-most Judges of the
Supreme Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India – Members; and
(c) two Chief Justices of the High Courts to be nominated by the Chief Justice of
India – Members.
Clause 4 provides for composition of the Council to change in certain
circumstances when the allegations are against the Chief Justice of India, he shall
not take part in the proceedings of the Council. Where allegations are against the
member of the Council or they recuse themselves. The President in the case of the
Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of India in case of Members shall
nominate another member for the purpose of investigation and inquiry.
Clause 5 provides for functions of the Council to investigate and inquire
into the allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity against the Judge of the Supreme
Court or Judge of a High Court.
Clause 6 provides for the Council to conduct the investigation and inquiry
into any act or conduct of any person other than a Judge in so far as the Council
considers it necessary.
Clause 7 provides for appointment of officers and employees of the Council
for the purposes of discharge of its functions and to fix their terms and conditions
of service. It also provides for the utilisation of the services of any officer or
employee of the Government or any other agency.
Clause 8 provides the procedure for making a complaint involving allegations
of misbehaviour or incapacity in respect of a Judge. It also provides for the
particulars to be given in such complaint.
Clause 9 provides the procedure for verification and preliminary investigation
of the complaints. It also provides for the dismissal of frivolous and vexatious
complaints.
105

106
Clause 10 lays down the procedure in respect of inquiry and framing of
charges and written statement of defence.
Clause 11 deals with procedure of reference by the Speaker or Chairman
as the case may be to the Council and provides the method of notice of motion
for presenting an address to the President for removal of a Judge.
Clause 12 requires the Council on receipt of a reference from the Speaker
or Chairman to frame definite charges against the Judge for holding inquiry.
Clause 13 provides for the procedure for inquiry in case of physical or
mental incapacity of a Judge and it lays down the method for medical examination
of the Judge in such cases.
Clause 14 provides for the procedure for inquiry and requires such inquiry
to be conducted in camera.
Clause 15 empowers the Council to regulate its own procedures in making
the inquiry in accordance with the principle of natural justice to give reasonable
opportunity to the Judge of cross-examining the witnesses adducing the evidence
and of being heard in his defence.
Clause 16 provides for the Central Government to appoint an advocate to
conduct the cases against the Judge.
Clause 17 provides that the Council shall, while conducting any preliminary
investigation or inquiry, has all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Clause 18 provides for search and seizure of any documents that, in the
opinion of the Council, would be useful for, or relevant to any preliminary
investigation or inquiry.
Clause 19 provides for change in the composition of the Council due to
elevation of any member as Chief Justice of India or due to elevation of any Chief
Justice of the High Court as a Judge of the Supreme Court or in case any vacancy
in the Council arises due to retirement or resignation of a member of the Council.
Clause 20 provides for the disposal of complaint and follow up action in
complaint procedure after conclusion of inquiry.
Clause 21 provides for disposal of reference from the Speaker or the
Chairman under the reference procedure.
Clause 22 provides for the address to the President for the removal of the
Judge by Parliament
Clause 23 provides for disqualification of the removed Judge for any
diplomatic assignment, employment under the Government of India or the Government
of a State, or to act as an arbitrator in any arbitration proceeding and also in
respect of chamber practice.
Clause 24 provides that intentional insult or interruption to the Council shall
be an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term that may extent to six
months, or with fine, or with both.

107
Clause 25 provides for powers to Council to try certain cases and for
taking cognizance of the offence showing cause.
Clause 26 provides for the punishment for false and vexatious complaint.
It also provides that any person, who makes a complaint that is found by the
Council to be false or vexatious or with an intention to harass the Judge, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term that may extend to one year and also to
fine that may extend to 25,000 rupees.
Clause 27 provides for the confidentiality in complaint procedure and says
that the complainant and every person, who participate in the preliminary investigation
and inquiry as a witness or as a lawyer, must undertake that he shall not reveal
his own name, the name of the Judge complained against, the contents of the
complaint or any of the documents or proceedings to anybody, including the media
without prior written approval of the Council.
Clause 28 provides for keeping identity of complainant confidential.
Clause 29 provides for stoppage of assigned judicial work during the
pendency of the preliminary investigation or inquiry or address by both Houses of
Parliament to the President.
Clause 30 provides for appeal to the Supreme Court in the matter of an
order of removal passed by the President, or an order passed by the Council
imposing one or other ‘minor measure’ on the basis of a complaint.
Clause 31 provides for no action for contempt of court in respect of the
allegations which are the subject-matter of investigation or inquiry by the Council.
Clause 32 provides that any preliminary investigation or inquiry pending
before the Council will not affect the criminal liability in respect of such allegations.
Clause 33 provides that all records and documents related to complaint,
preliminary investigation and inquiry, shall be confidential, irrespective of anything
contained in any other law, for the time being in force, including the Right to
Information Act, 2005.
Clause 34 provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall
lie against the Council or any official or person engaged by the Council for
conducting preliminary investigation or inquiry, in respect of anything that is done
in good faith.
Clause 35 provides that proceedings before the Council and the Committee
shall be the judicial proceedings for the purposes of section 195 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and sections 193, 196 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 36 provides for the Council to lay down a code of conduct for the
Judges of the Supreme Court or of the High Courts.
Clause 37 provides for the constitution of Joint Committees of both Houses
ot Parliament for making rules.
Clause 38 provides for the repeal for the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.

108
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of National Judicial Council
comprising of Chief Justice of India as the Chairperson and Judges of the Supreme
Court and the Chief Justices of High Courts as members.
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Secretary and such other
officers and employees as the President may determine from time to time in
consultation with the Council.
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government if requested by the
Council to appoint an advocate to conduct the case against the Judge.
At this stage, it is not possible to give an estimate of expenditure involved
(recurring and non-recurring). However, the expenditure would be met from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
108

109
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 37(4) empowers the Joint Committee of both the Houses of Parliament
to frame rules for providing the form in which a complaint under sub-section (1)
of section 8 may be made.
Clause 22 provides for the manner of presentation of address to the
President for the removal of a Judge.
The matters in which rules may be made are matters of procedure or
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
109

110
110
ANNEXURE-B
Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice on the views/suggestions
submitted by individuals/organisations/experts
Sl. Name of Comments/Suggestion R esponse of Government
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
1. Vinod A. Bobde, Sr. (i) The provisions of the (i) The issue was examined
Advocate, Supreme Court. Bill for (a) complaints, by the Law Commission in
(b) withdrawal of judicial its 195th Report. The
work, and (iii) minor Commission has opined that
measures are invalid as no amendment of the
there is no power under Constitution is necessary if a
the Constitution to subject law is made by Parliament
a judge to such action at enabling the Judicial Council
the hands of a statutory to impose ‘minor measure’ as
body; part of an in-house
mechanism.
(ii) The Bill affects the (ii) The independence of
provisions of the Constitution Judiciary is being maintained.
for independence of judiciary
and separate powers;
(iii) The powers of the (iii) Art. 124(5) provides for
Parliament are restricted to enactment of law by
the amendment of the Parliament.
Constitution;
(iv) There is no reason to (iv) Impeachment will be
make impeachment easy invoked only if and when the
much less to bypass it by NJC concludes that charges
introducing ‘complaint proved warranting removal of
procedure’; a Judge. It is not being made
easy.
(v) Parliament is composed (v) No comments.
of members who represent
the people of the country
who in turn keep check on
misdemeanour by the judges;
(vi) Article 124(5) of the (vi) Law Commission has
Constitution provides for the stated that a law can be
procedure for presentation made under the later parts of
of the address and for Art, 124(5) and in any event,

111
12 3 4
investigation and proof of under Art. 246 read with
the misbehaviour or Entry 11-A of List III of
incapacity of a Judge. It is Schedule VII of the
not traceable to Entry 11-A, Constitution of India.
List III ‘Administration of
Justice’ as erroneously
thought by the Law
Commission in its 195th
Report and since it is a
Concurrent List, States
would also be enabled to
legislate on the procedure
for regulating the
presentation of an address
etc. which cannot be
countenanced because the
power is exclusively that
of Parliament.
(vii) Article 124(5) empowers (v ii), (viii) & (ix) Law
Parliament to legislate on Commission, in its 195th
‘the investigation and proof’ Report, has said that a
but does not empower complaint procedure, in
Parliament to create an addition to a reference
external forum like the procedure is not an
Council to entertain infringement of the
complaints from any person Parliamentary process
whatsoever. The complaint contained in Art. 124(4) and
procedure is ultra-vires the does not amount to
Constitution. impermissible delegation and
is valid. (page 407)
(viii) The accountability of
Judges must necessarily be
to a body like Parliament
and not some Judicial
Council activated by a
private complaint;
(ix) The Bill directly attacks [comments at prepage]
judge’s independence from
complaints by any person
and decision thereon by
other Judges who may now
exercise a power not
contemplated by the
Constitution to impose minor
measures against them;

112
12 3 4
(x) Once a complaint (x) (a) That the complaint
procedure is provided, the procedure will mark the
reference procedure will beginning of the end of the
never be resorted to; the fearlessness and independence
complaint procedure will of judiciary is a hypothetical
mark the beginning of the proposition; and
end of the fearlessness and
independence of the judiciary (b) Adequate safeguards have
as the loosing litigant shall been provided in the Bill to
file a complaint against the punish those making
judge who may fear vexatious complaints
besmirching their reputation;
There is no power under the
Constitution to put judges at
the mercy of any person who
deems it fit to complain to
the Judicial Commission and
set in motion a sort of
disciplinary proceeding.
(xi) There is separation of (xi) Impeachment will be
power within the assigned invoked only if and when the
sphere and the only check NJC concludes that charges
and balances are those proved warranting removal of
provided in the Constitution; a Judge. It is not being made
Under the Constitution, easy. The complaint
the only check on judiciary procedure is an additional
is through the power of procedure is an additional
impeachment which cannot mechanism for ensuring
be initiated by any person accountability of judges.
by filing a complaint nor any
body can entertain any such
complaint.
(xii) The Bill is unconstitutional (xii) These issues have been
as violating Article 124 as dealt with in paras above.
well as the independence of
the judiciary and separation
of powers which are part
of the basic structure of the
Constitution.
2. Digamber B. Nail, Panaji, (i) The Bill should include (i) (a) Comprehensive
Goa (a) misjudgment as a reason definition of ‘misbehaviour’ is
for complaint, (b) setting up already provided in the Bill;
of State Judicial Councils, and (b) Setting up of State
(c) the report of the inquiry Judicial Council is not
be subject to RTI Act after consistent with the
the inquiry is completed; constitutional scheme for
higher judiciary; (c) This will

113
12 3 4
compromise with the
confidentiality of the
proceedings of the Council.
(ii) The clause relating to (ii) The provision has been
imprisonment as mentioned made so that only genuine
in article 26 of the Bill may complainants register their
be deleted. complaints.
3. Ch. Prakashan Rao, The bill is misconceived and Adequate safeguards are
Hyderabad no useful purpose would be provided to ensure that the
served; rather it would bring complaint procedure will not
noble organ into bad name be misused. The Bill is aimed
and give room for to bring in accountability
undesirable elements, to make while preserving the
allegations; Efforts should be independence of judiciary.
made to select judges with
efficiency, integrity selfishness
and who are endowed with
impeccable character;
4. P.K. Gupta and others, The National Judicial The proposed law provides a
Delhi Commission should be under framework for empowering a
the Chairmanship of suitable judicial forum to deal
President or the Vice- with complaints against
President. judges of the Supreme Court
and High Courts.
5. Mukesh Kumar, Ghaziabad The composition of the There is no reservation in the
National Judicial Commission Judiciary.
should include outsiders
including those belonging to
SC/ST community.
6. The Third Eye, Mumbai (i) The composition of the (i) See 4 above.
Council should include
outsiders also;
(ii) Reasons should be (ii) & (iii) The scheme of
recorded by the Council the proposed Legislation is
while deciding the complaint self contained and also makes
which should be subjected provision for making rules by
to confirmation by the the Joint Committee of both
Confirmation Council; the Houses of Parliament.
(iii) The decisions of the
Council should be tabled in
the Parliament and on
confirmation President should
execute it.

114
12 3 4
7. T.G.N. Kumar, Kerala (i) The definition of
‘misbehariour’ in the Bill is
comprehensive.
(ii) See 4 above.
(iii) Matter has been duly
considered while formulating
the Bill.
(iv) This pertains to Code of
Conduct to be evolved by the
Council.
8. Sustainable Approach of (i) & (ii) These are not
Development for All, New relevant to the Bill.
Delhi
9. S.P. Goel, Delhi (i) See 4 above.
(ii) No comments.
(iii) There is already a
provision for appeal for the
aggrieved judge against whom
the Council has passed the
orders.
10. V .B. Dhudbhai, (i) The definition of
Ahmedabad ‘m isbehaviour’ in the Bill is
comprehensive.
(ii) See 4 above.
(i) The definition of
misbehaviour should include
‘character’ also;
(ii) Outsiders should be
nominated on the Council;
(iii) Misbehaviour taking place
before the commencement of
the Act should also be
inquired into by the Council;
(iv) Judges should keep
away from public meetings.
(i) The conduct of the
judges in the Courts should
be checked by installing
closed circuit TVs in the
Court;
(ii) For checking incapacity
of the Judge, they should be
subject to medical checks at
regular intervals.
(i) The Council should
include outsiders and their
terms should be one year
only;
(ii) The Judges should
not be subject to immunity
through any Act of its kind;
(iii) Decisions of the Council
should be final but the
aggrieved judge should be
able to represent to the
President of India.
(i) The definition of
misbehaviour should include
‘untouchability’ also;
(ii) The Council should also
include eminent persons from
outside;

115
12 3 4
(iii) The clause relating to (iii) This has been considered
the period of  two years necessary that a time limit be
within which the complaint fixed for filing complaints.
has to be made need to be
dropped;
(iv) The Councils decision (iv) The Bill does not make
should not be a binding any such provision.
on the Parliament.
11. B.S. Kumara, Bangalore (i) The composition of the (i) See 4 above.
Council should include
persons from outside;
(ii) CBI should specifically (ii) & (iii) As per the Bill,
be recognized as one of the Council will device its
the agencies for investigation own procedure for inquiry
under the Bill for any and investigation.
misbehaviour etc.
(iii) The Council should
have power for surveillance
and for taking suo-moto
action against errant judges;
(iv) Giving powers to the (iv) See 1 (i) above.
Council for minor measures
is contrary to the provisions
of the Constitution; Council
in its present form will
spoil the basis structure of
the Constitution; The
proposed bill surrenders the
powers vested in the
executive and the legislative
wings to the judicial wing.
12. F.S. Nariman (i) Defining “Proved
Misbehaviour”:
(a) It is superfluous and yet (a) to (g) The Bill provides a
not adequate enough. Section comprehensive definition of
2 (j) of the Bill should be ‘m isbehaviour’.
deleted.
(b) The word “misbehaviour”
as applicable to Judges of
the Supreme Court and the
High Courts, in the context
of Articles 124(4) and (5)

116
12 3 4
and other relevant provisions
of the Constitution, means
conduct or a course of
conduct on the part of a
Judge which brings dishonour
or disrepute to the judiciary
as to shake the faith and
confidence which the public
reposes in the judiciary. It is
not confined to acts which
are contrary to law and also
not confined to act connected
with, the judicial office. It
extends to all activities of a
Judge, public or private.
(c) The act or omission must
be willful. The willful element
may be supplied by culpable
recklessness, negligence,
disregard for rules or an
established code of conduct,
even though a single act
may not be willful.
(d) Monetary recompense
would not render an act or
omission any the less
misbehaviours if the personal
intentionally committed it.
(e) Misbehaviour is not
confined to conduct since the
Judge assumes charge of the
present judicial office.
(f) The standard of proof is
proof beyond reasonable doubt.
(g) The misbehaviour must be
held proved accordingly by the
Inquiry Committee.
(h) The Judge against whom (h) This will be decided by
an inquiry is being held is the Council.
under constitutional obligation
to co-operate with the
inquiring authority and not to
raise petty-fogging objections
to obstruct the inquiry.

117
12 3 4
(ii) Assuming that article (ii) (a) Law Commission, in
124(5) enables laws to be its 195th Report, has opined
made by Parliament to that a law providing for minor
make provision as to measures will not be
measures short of removal: unconstitutional.
It Does Not.
A constitutional amendment
is a must for the following
reasons:
(a) An errant Judge
arraigned before the Council
under new law is bound to
challenge the constitutionality.
of the provisions since they
are not strictly warranted by
sub-clause (5) of Article 124
as it stands.
(b) Section 20(1)(b) of the (b) See 1 (vi) above.
Bill —  imposition of minor
measures do not warrant
removal of the Judge: this is
not expressly provided for in
the Constitution as it stands.
It should be so provided.
There is no other way of
disciplining a judge, short
of removal.
(iii) In section 3(2)(c) - it (iii) It is a suggestion.
should not be any two
“Chief Justices of the High
Courts” but any two
amongst the senior most
Chief Justices of the High
Courts to be nominated by
the CJI.
(iv) Section 3: ‘Two retired (iv) It is a suggestion.
Chief Justices of India to
be nominated by the
President’ may be included
in the composition of the
NJC.
(v) There is no specific (v) This will be covered
provision for the NJC to under Rule making powers.
act — by majority or
unanimously.

118
12 3 4
(vi) First proviso to (vi) See 10 (iii) above.
section 8(1) in Chapter III
should be deleted as the Bill
when enacted will be
procedural, and a complaint
should be liable to be
entertained and enquired
into even in respect of
conduct constituting
“misbehaviour” that has
taken place before the act
is enacted.
(vii) In Section 23 it may (vii) & (viii) The Committee
be added that a Judge in may take a view in the
respect of whom removal context of clause 23(d).
order is passed by the
President, shall be prohibited
from practising law and
appearing as lawyer in any
Court or Tribunal in India.
(viii) In Section 29 the words
“or is necessary in the
opinion of Council for the fair
administration of Justice” may
be added. Section 9(1)(A) be
added to the Bill which may
read as:
“If the Council is
satisfied that the
complaint should
admitted; it shall
admit the same and
proceed to determine
summarily whether
the power under
section 29 should be
invoked.”
‘(ix) Section 36(3) should (ix) It is for the NJC to
be re-drafted to read as: draw up the Code of
Conduct and the clauses to
be included in it.
“The Code of
Conduct, issued under
sub-section (1) shall
provide inter alia  that

119
12 3 4
every Judge at the
time of appointment
as a Judge of
Supreme Court or
High Court and
thereafter shall annually
give intimation of his
assets and liabilities to
the Chief Justice of
India or Chief Justice
of the High Court as
the case may be.”
13. Vinod A. Bobde, Sr. Constitutional Provisions
Advocate, Supreme (a) Article 124(4) and (5)
Court of the Constitution shows (a) No comments are
that Parliament alone is considered necessary.
entrusted with the awesome
and responsible task of
judging the Judges.
(b) No law can be made to
shift this responsibility of (b), (c) & (d) The provisions
initiating and concluding of the Bill do not seek to
impeachment proceedings to delegate powers of
another body such as NJC impeachment to the National
to which a complaint can Judicial Council.
be made by any person.
(c) It is impermissible to
make a law empowering the
Councilor even Parliament to
impose ‘minor penalties’ and
to effectively suspend a judge
by stopping his judicial work
pending inquiry or as a minor
measure.
Clauses of the Bill
(d) Under Clause 2(i) any
person can complain against
a Judge and dispensing with
the provision of any notice
being given and adopted in
the Parliament. Council can
impose minor measures if the
charges of misbehaviour or
incapacity are proved and in
the opinion of the Council,
the charged proved do not

120
12 3 4
warrant removal of the Judge
(Clause20). This means that
the charges of misbehaviour
is proved but Parliament is
excluded from looking into the
findings and hearing the Judge
concerned and what worse,
the Council is empowered to
form an opinion that the
misbehaviour does not warrant
impeachment. The Constitution
simply does not envisage any
of this but entrusts the task
of finally judging the Judge
for misbehaviour to Parliament
and allows it to present or
not to present an address
for removal of the Judge to
the President and does not
allow it to impose ‘minor
measures.
(e) Clause 15 provides for (e) Under Clause 28, it is
opportunity to the Judge to left to the Council to
cross-examine witnesses, determine the circumstances
adducing evidence and for under which the identity of
being heard in his own the complainant can be kept
defence. How can be secret.
effectively do all this if
the very identity of the
complainant is kept secret
from him under Clause 28.
(f) Clause 29 introduces (f) Provisions of clause 29
absolutely irrelevant and are well founded and not
arbitrary considerations arbitrary.
for recommending stoppage
of work.
(g) Clause 31 which seeks (g) These provisions are in
to remove the contempt line with the spirit and
powers of a judge is plainly objects of the Act.
in violation of Articles 129
and 215 of the Constitution.
The power to punish for
contempt is a constitutionally
conferred power and no law
of Parliament can take it
away.

121
12 3 4
(h) The Government should (h) to (j) These are not
be concentrating on insulating relevent to the Bill.
the Judiciary from anything
that detracts from its
independence and fearlessness.
It should provide higher
remuneration and perquisites
not merely for the higher
Judiciary but more urgently
for the subordinate judiciary
which often does not have
proper housing or transport.
All possible steps should be
taken to reduce and perhaps
obliterate the temptation for
corruption. The best talent
should be attracted to the
Bench but after taking care
that their talent does not
extend to greed or
acquisitiveness or arrogance
after thoroughly checking the
background and character of
the candidate for judgeship.
Ramifications of the Bill on
the removal of other
constitutional functionaries
(i) Article 324(5) provides for (i) & (j) No comments.
removal of the Chief Election
Commissioner ‘in like manner
and on the like grounds as a
judge of the Supreme Court.’
So the complaint procedure
would. become applicable to
the CEC which would open
the floodgates for politicians
to make complaints and
seriously undermine the CEC’s
independence. The complaint
procedure will have the same
effect on him.
(j) Article 148 makes similar
provisions for removal of the
Comptroller and Auditor
General of India. The
complaint procedure will have
the same effect on him.

122
12 3 4
14. Shri Gopal (i) The Bill is constitutionally (i) Law Commission has
Subramanium, invalid. Constitution provides stated that a law can be
Senior Advocate powers under Article 124(4) made under the later parts
and Article 218 for removal of Article 124(5)and in any
of judges by Parliament and event, under Article 246 read
the present Bill attempts to with Entry 11-A of List III
modify the scheme for of Schedule VII of the
removal as specified in the Constitution of India.
Constitution.
(ii) The Council should have (ii) This is not relevant to
power of appointment and the Bill.
transfer in addition to
disciplinary powers.
(iii) The Council should be (iii) The proposed law
a broad based body having provides a framework for
representatives from judiciary, empowering a suitable judicial
government, opposition, Bar, forum to deal with
Social Sciences, etc. complaints against judges of
the Supreme Court and the
High Courts.
(iv) The retirement age for (iv) & (v) These are not
High Court Judges should relevant to the Bill.
be at par with that of
Supreme Court Judges.
(v) A new cadre for
Judicial Service should be
created to attract talent at
lower judiciary itself.
(vi) There need to be a (vi) This pertains to Code of
mechanism of audit–both Conduct to be evolved by
quantitative and qualitative. the Council.
(vii) If a Judge is found (vii) This is for the Council
to be guilty of misbehaviour, to decide. Impeachment will
allowing him to continue in be invoked only if and when
officer after the imposition the Council concludes that
of the minor measure may charges are proved
serve to lower the dignity warranting removal of a
of the judicial office. Judge.
(viii) In respect of removal, (viii) The provisions of the
the recommendation of the Bill do not seek to delegate
Council cannot be endowed powers of impeachment to
with a binding force. the National Judicial Council.

123
12 3 4
15. Himachal Pradesh The provisions of the Bill The Bill is aimed to bring in
High Court hit upon the basic structure accountability while preserving
of the constitution and have the independence of judiciary.
the potential of impinging
upon as well as eroding the
independence of Judiciary.
If put to practice and
implementation, these
provisions would shake the
people’s confidence and faith
in the judicial system which
ultimately can prejudice the
democratic judicial system.
16. The Indian Law (i) The dura tion of completion (i) The provision has been
Institute of the inquiry should be made after keeping all
reduced to 3 months. relevant factors in view.
(ii) It is not known how (ii) The Bill provides for
the complainant can remain punishment in case of
unknown to the judge if he disclosing the identity of the
has to prove the case and complainant and the judge
the judge has to defend without the approval of the
effectively. C ouncil.
(iii) Frivolous cases should (iii) As per the Bill, the
be filtered out in the first Council will device its own
instance and should be procedure for inquiry and
awarded warning/pecuniary investigation.
punishments.
17. Calcutta High Court The proposed Bill aims at The Bill is aimed to bring
destructing the basic features in accountability while
of the Constitution and preserving the independence
depriving the citizens of of judiciary.
their legal remedy through
an independent judicial
system.
18. Shri Justice M. (i) Instead of National (i) Such a provision already
Karpaga Judicial Commission, an exists. The proposed law
Vinayagam, In-house Committee provides a framework for
Chief Justice, should be constituted. empowering a suitable judicial
Jharkhand High forum to deal with complaints
Court against judges of the Supreme
Court and High Courts.
(ii) The procedure for
framing complaint against
a judge would be prejudicial

124
12 3 4
to the fearless functioning (ii) Adequate safeguards are
of the Judges of higher provided to ensure that the
judiciary as it will expose complaint procedure will not
every judge against false be misused. The Bill is aimed
and baseless complaints and to bring in accountability
the judges will be working while preserving the
under constant fear. independence of judiciary.
(iii) Under Clause 9 of the (iii) See 3(iii) above.
Bill, the nature of verification
of preliminary investigation
need to be clarified in order
to avoid any allegation of
discrimination, the specific
procedure for verification
and investigation should be
expressly provided.
(iv) To provide parallel (iv) See 1(i) above.
procedure in any act without
amending or altering the
Constitution will amount to
indirectly circumventing the
Constitution Scheme meant
to ensure independence of
judiciary.
(v) The Council requesting (v) The word is being used
the Judge to voluntarily under ‘minor measures’ for
retire and on the Judge which special provision is
not accepting the said being made in the Bill.
request, withdrawing the
work from the Judge takes
away the guarantee of
tenure from the Judge.
A Judge of the Supreme
Court or High Court never
voluntarily retires. A Judge
of Supreme Court or the
High Court can only resign
as provided for in the
Constitution.
(vi) The conduct of a (vi) & (vii) See 1(i) above.
Judge and imposing minor
measures for such conduct,
a fortiori cannot, therefore,
be a subject matter of
Parliamentary legislation.
The Bill portrays the intention

125
12 3 4
of the Parliament to bring the
judiciary under its purview.
(vii) The Constitution does
not empower the Parliament
to lay down service conditions
of the Judges so the
Parliament as such cannot
provide for conditions of
service for the Judges
including any power to
award minor punishment.
Thus the concept of
awarding minor punishment
violates the constitutional
scheme and is contrary to
the concept of independence
of judiciary.
(viii) The Constitutional (viii) No comments.
Bench of the Supreme Court
has held that the power of
stopping the judge from
functioning cannot be
exercised even during
pendency of the
impeachment proceedings
in the Parliament. When
such being the case, the
Council cannot be conferred
with the power of stoppage
of assignment of judicial
work to the judge concerned
during the pendency of
investigation of the private
complaint before it.
(ix) By providing appeal (ix) This is relevant to the
before the Supreme Court, working of the Supreme
the concept of confidential Court.
in-house procedure followed
by the Council, headed by
the Chief Justice of India,
will be lost as the Judges
of Supreme Court will sit
over the decision taken by
the Chief Justice of India
and other members of the
Council by way of an appeal.

126
12 3 4
19. Committee on (i) The composition of the (i) & (ii) See 1 (iii) above.
Judicial Accountability, Council should include
66, Lawyers persons from outside
Chambers, judiciary also.
Supreme Court of
India, New Delhi (ii) Bill requires complete
overhaul and replacement
by a constitutional
amendment for constituting
a Committee consisting of
not only sitting judges by
also outsiders.
20. Bar Council of (i) The Chief Justice of (i) Chief Justice of India
Delhi India should also be being the head of the
included in the definition institution has been kept
under Section 2(i) away from the common man
under complaint procedure.
However, a reference can be
made by the Parliament into
his conduct to the Council.
(ii) The composition of (ii) See 1 (iii) above.
the Council should include
persons from outside
judiciary also.
(iii) Under Section 4 (i) of (iii) No comments.
the Bill, the Chairperson
must give his grounds on
which he recluses himself
and the President shall
nominate the next seniormost
Judge of the Supreme Court
as the Chairperson of the
Council.
(iv) The complaint and the (iv) The Bill aims at devising
reference procedure may be suitable legislative framework
amalgamated into one. for empowering a judicial
forum to deal with complaints
against judges of the S upreme
Court and High Courts.
Reference procedure already
exists in the Judges (Inquiry)
Act, 1968 which substantially
remains unchanged in the Bill.
(v) There is no justification (v) The issue was examined
for minor measures. Once by the Law Commission in

127
12 3 4
the misbehaviour or its 195th Report. The
incapacity is proved, Commission has opined that
irrespective of being no amendment of the
serious or otherwise, Constitution is necessary if a
the removal process be law is made by Parliament
initiated. enabling the Judicial Council
to impose ‘minor measures’
as part of an in-house
mechanism.
(vi) In case an appeal is (vi) See 5(ix) above.
filed in the Supreme Court
by the aggrieved Judge in
which the Chief Justice of
India and the two seniormost
judges of the Supreme Court
have been made Respondents
having been members of the
Council, the Junior Judges
of the Supreme Court would
constitute a Bench which
would hear the appeal against
the Chief Justice of India and
the judges of the Supreme
Court. This a deep
contemplation.
21. Sikkim High The proposed Bill if enacted, See 4 above.
Court will ruin the independence
of the Judiciary and once the
provisions are put into effect,
the Judiciary of India will
cease to exist. The Bill
should be scrapped in toto .
22. Dr. M.P. Raju (i) Instead of sitting judges (i) See 1(iii) above.
of the Supreme Court and
the High Courts, a full-
time body, independent of
the Government as well
as judiciary is needed with
an investigative machinery
under its control. An
independent body is required
as (a) sitting judges will not
be able to devote adequate
time and attention and
commitment to the Council’s
work; (b) sitting judges
would find it difficult and

128
12 3 4
embarrassing to hold their
brother judges, guilty of
misdemeanors; and (c) the
alleged judge may have
occasion to reasonably
believe that the Council
members had an interest
in deciding against him–either
to victimize or to promote
their favourites.
(ii) Provisions should be (ii) See 3(iii) above.
made to separate stages of
investigation and inquiry and
the stages of investigation
alone be kept in-camera or
without publication.
(iii) The Code of Conduct (iii) To keep the judiciary
should not be mere independent and work
guidelines but should be fearlessly, it would not be
provided by the legislation desirable to legislate any Code
by Parliament. of Conduct by the
Parliament. The Bill provides
for the Council to evolve a
Code of Conduct for the
Judges.
(iv) At the end of Article 10 (2) (iv) It is for the Council to
of the Bill, the following decide about such matters.
may be added:
“Allegations not
specifically denied
shall be deemed to
have been admitted.”
23. Patna High Court In-house procedure in the See 4 above.
Judiciary itself is sufficient
protection for minor abrasion
and any misconduct. The
Chief Justice of a High Court
is empowered to allocate
work to other Judges. The
power of allocation of work
to Chief Justice contains
enough power to control
Judges functioning and
discharge of their duties.

129
12 3 4
24. Prof. (Dr.) Jose P. (i) Receiving complaints (i) See 5(ii) above.
Verghese from ‘any person’ may
reduce the NJC into any
other public forum.
(ii) The machinery provided (ii) See 3(iii) above.
in section 7 of the Bill
does not seen to be
capable of discharging that
function effectively and NJC
cannot perform that
function, which is technical
and complicated.
(iii) The Bill should restrict (iii) This for the Council to
disability of permanent decide.
nature or which cannot be
remedied by efflux of time
say by one year.
(iv) In article 36(1) provision (iv) See 9(iv) above.
may be made for a copy of
the individual audited account
to be submitted to CJI or CJ
when it is filed by the
individual judge as it certainly
contains all assets and
liabilities of an assessee.
(v) The clause for ‘minor (v) See 7 (v) above.
measures’ may be deleted as
it violated the cardinal
principle of a judge to be
beyond all reprobation and a
judge with minor penalty
might create embarrassment
for himself and the public.
(vi) The referral procedure (vi) Government has no
be classified as ‘Mandatory statutory powers for initiating
Reference’ and the any disciplinary action against
complaint procedure be the judges, both of Supreme
classified as ‘Optional Court and the High Courts.
Reference’ where disciplinary The Council shall themselves
proceedings would be investigate the complaints for
initiated on the basis of an their genuineness.
individual complaints
received from any person by
a Government Body who
would weed out all

130
12 3 4
frivolous complaints at that
stage and refer to NJC only
genuine complaints with
some substance.
25. Shri Justice G.B. (i) The Chief Justice of (i) See 7(i) above.
Pattanaik, former India should be brought
Chief Justice of under the definition of Judge
India in Section 2(i) of the Bill
for the purpose of complaint
procedure.
(ii) In section 4(1), in the (ii) Since NJC will be a
event of Chairperson recluses permanent body, it would be
himself, the provision should necessary that any change in
be that the seni ormost Judge the composition of the
of the Supreme Court would Council is made with the
automatically act as approval of the President.
Chairperson.
(iii) The Council should have (iii), (iv) & (v) See 3(iii)
its own investigating agency above.
and not depend on
Government agencies.
(iv) While section 14(2)
provides for a time limit for
completion of the inquiry,
there is no such time limit
in Section 9 in respect of
preliminary investigation.
Time limit should be provided
in Section 9 also.
(v) The proposed legislation
do not empower the
Council to take any action
pending conclusion of the
inquiry.

131
ANNEXURE-C
SUMMARY OF VIEWS RECEIVED FROM
V ARIOUS HIGH COURTS
1. Calcutta The proposed Bill aims at destructing the basic features of the
Constitution of India and deprives the citizens of this country of
their legal remedy through an independent Judicial System.
2. Himachal Pradesh The provisions of the Bill hit upon the basic structure of the
Constitution and have the potential of impinging upon as well as
eroding the independence of Judiciary. If put to practice and
implementation, these provisions would shake the people’s
confidence and faith in judicial system which ultimately can
prejudice the democratic judicial system.
3. Orissa No objection to the provisions made in the Bill. However, it is
suggested that section 26 of the Bill may be suitably amended to
make the penal provision more rigorous and complaint may be
defined in the Bill.
4. Andhra Pradesh Keeping in view the nature of the proposed enactment, it is not
proper for the High Court to express any view.
5. Sikkim The proposed Bill, if enacted, will ruin the independence of the
Judiciary and once the provisions are put into effect, the Judiciary
of India, as known hereunto will cease to exist. The Bill should be
scrapped in toto.
6. Jharkhand The proposed legislation shall cause harm and lower down the
dignity and majesty of the Judiciary having an adverse effect on the
independence of higher judiciary.
The ultimate object can be achieved by the “in house peer review”
which can be further tonned up and made more effective.
There is no regulatory check for receiving the complaint. Any
person can lodge a complaint in writing with simple verification.
Further, any complaint from any other source can be entertained.
This situation may cause immense injury and damage to the prestige
and dignity of the person (Section 8).
The nature of verification of preliminary investigation has not been
properly classified (Section 9).
The number of members has been arbitrarily fixed, [Section 11
(a & b)].
There is no provision for appointing an advocate in defence (Section
16).
131

132
In case of any proved charges, the only measure should be, as
provided under clause (iv) of Section 20 as for any proved
allegation continuation of such person is not desirable in such a high
office.
Provisions in clause (d) Section 23 would amount a multiple
punishment. Further punishment would offend Articles 14 & 21 of
the Constitution.
Keeping the identity confidential from one against whom the
complaint is made would amount to denial of opportunity of
effective defence and will be violative of the principles of natural
justice.
The provisions of the Act should not be made applicable to those,
who were appointed when there was no such legislation.
7. Allahabad The proposed Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 is in utter disregard to the
basic structure of the Constitution and would erode the
independence of the Judiciary. It will only harm the judicial system
and is bound to shake people’s confidence and faith ruining our
democracy. Thus, it should be denounced strongly.
The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 contains various provisions, which
are contrary to the law laid down by the Apex Court in different
cases.
The Constitution of India, Article 124 provides for establishments
and constitution of the Supreme Court. Article 217 provides for
appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of the High
Court. Article 124(4) provides that a Judge of the Supreme Court
shall not be removed from the office except by an order of the
President passed after an address by each House of Parliament
supported by a majority of the total membership of that House and
by a majority of not less than two third of the members of the
House present and voting has been presented to the President in the
same session for such removal on the ground of proved
misbehaviour of incapacity. Article 124( 5) provides that Parliament
may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an
address and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge under clause (4). According to Article 217(1)
proviso (b) a Judge of a High Court may be removed from the
office by the President in the manner provided in clause (4) of
Article 124. The Office of the judge of the Supreme Court or the
High Court is a constitutional office. The tenure of the office of a
Judge is secured under the Constitutional office. The tenure of the
office of a judge is secured under the Constitution with object and
purpose to maintain independence of  judiciary.
The Apex Court in (1995)6 S.C.C. 765; Union of India and others
vs. Pratibha Bonnerjes and another, held that a Judge of  the
Higher Judiciary occupies a unique position under the Constitution.
He would not be able to discharge his duties without fear or favour

133
unless he is totally independent of the Executive, which he would
not be if he is regarded as a government servant.
The independence of Judiciary is the essence and basic structure of
the Constitution. It is well settled by a series of  Constitutional Bench
judgments of this Court that judicial independence is a basic
structure of the Constitution which could not be tinkered with
by Parliament even in exercise of its amending power under
Article 368.
The Parliament in exercise of its power under Article 124(5) of the
Constitution of India has enacted the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968
which contains the provisions regulating the procedure for
presentation of an address and for the investigation and proof of
the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge. The Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006 shows the noticeable departure from the earlier 1968 Act
and contains various clauses, which erode the independence of
Judiciary.
The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 contains various clauses, which fall
beyond the legislative power given to Parliament under Article
225(5) of the Constitution. There are various clauses in the Judges
(Inquiry) Bill, 2006, which will erode the independence of Judiciary
and make the Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court
subservient to another body and they will function under constant
fear of investigation and inquiry on any complaint made by anyone
with varied reasons.
In the constitution of the Council as contemplated under Clause 3(2)
of the Bill the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court is not
made a member. In case of investigation of misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge of the High Court, the Chief Justice of that
High Court has to be necessarily included as a member of the
Committee.
Clause 4(3) of Chapter-II refers to about the allegations made in a
complaint by any person against a Judge of the Supreme Court or
the High Court. The complaint by any person against a Judge of the
Supreme Court or the High Court is not envisaged in the
Constitution and permitting such complaint shall be against the
constitutional scheme.
Chapter-III, while providing a procedure of complaint by any person
against misbehaviour or incapacity in respect of a Judge to the
Council is contrary to the constitutional provisions and the scheme.
The Constitution does not contemplate the complaint of any kind
against a Judge. The procedure for investigation and proof of
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge follows only when motion is
brought in each House of Parliament alleging any such misbehaviour
or incapacity.
The Procedure for permitting complaints against a Judge will be
prejudicial to fearless functioning of judges of the Higher Judiciary.

134
There will be a spate of complaints by litigants and lawyers of the
loosing party against the Judges. Our judicial system provides for
correction of the judgment by review, appeal and other mechanism.
The complaint procedure as envisaged in the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006 will expose every Judge to false and baseless complaints.
Considerable time of the Judges shall be taken in giving their
comments to such complaints which are likely to be filed looking to
the nature of the job which is being performed by the Judges. The
Judge shall always be under constant fear for being subjected to a
complaint whenever he decides a case.
A Constitution Bench of the Apex Court while interpreting Article
124(4) and 124(5) of the Constitution held that there cannot be any
machinery to enquire into the integrity of its Judges except the
constitutional machinery for removal of a Judge. The Bill permitting
complaint by any person against a Judge and investigation and proof
of such complaint by the National Judicial Council is against the
constitutional scheme and the law declared by the Apex Court.
Again, the Apex Court in C. Ravichandran Iyer vs. Justice A.M.
Bhattacharjee and others, reiterated that founding fathers of the
Constitution advisedly adopted a cumbersome process of
impeachment as a mode to remove a Judge. The Constitution does
not permit any action by any agency other than initiation of action
under Article 124(4) of the Constitution by the Parliament.
The Apex Court itself has laid down that the Chief Justice of a high
Court has ample power to deal with any Judge who misconduct
himself. Self regulation by Judiciary is the method which has been
emphasized by the Apex Court. The in-house remedy for restoring
the confidence of the people against errant behaviour or misconduct
by any Judge has functioned quite effectively.
The Chief Justice of India being head of the Judicial fraternity does
not lack means and power to discipline the Judges. The gap
between proved misbehaviour and bad behaviour inconsistent with
high office can only be disciplined by self regulation through an in-
house procedure as laid down by the Apex Court in C. Ravichandran
Iyer’s cases.
The provisions of the Bill in Chapter II providing for entertaining
private complaints and investigation of such complaints and action
thereof by the Council is contrary to the constitutional scheme,
independence of Judiciary and the law of land as laid down by the
Apex Court. Thus, the provisions of Clauses 8, 9, 10 and 11 of
Chapter-III, which permit entertainment of individual complaint by
any person and proceedings thereupon is completely against the
constitutional scheme and hampers fearless discharge of function by
a Judge.
The investigation regarding incapacity (physical or mental) can be
presented only in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the
constitution, i.e., only after a motion is admitted in Parliament.

135
Clause 13 is also not in accord with the constitutional scheme and
shall lead to undue interference in functioning of a judge.
Clause 20 of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 gives power to the
Council to impose minor punishment (measures) on a Judge when
the Council is of the opinion that the charges do not warrant
removal. In the Constitution there is no concept of awarding any
minor punishment on a such high constitutional office. The
Constitution of India does not contemplate the office of a Judge of
the High Court or Supreme Court as a service nor the Constitution
of India empowers the Parliament to lay down a service condition
of the Judges of the High court or Supreme Court. The National
Judicial Council is proposed to substitute the Committee of three
Judges provided in the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968. The Committee
is set up only for purposes of investigation and proof of
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge as provided under Article
124(5).
The concept of awarding minor measures violates the constitutional
scheme and is contrary to the concept of independence of Judiciary.
The constitutional protection to Judges is not for their personal
benefit but to protect the Judiciary and its independence, which is
in larger public interest.
The Constitution itself with regard to other constitutional office
provides the concept of suspension. It is deliberately not provided
with regard to office of the Judges of the High Courts and the
Supreme Court.
Clause 18 provides that even the identity of the complainant shall be
kept confidential from the Judge against whom complaint is made
out. This provision is wholly arbitrary and against the constitutional
scheme. Firstly no individual can be permitted to file a complaint
against a judge and secondly keeping the identity of the complainant
confidential from the Judge concerned will be against the principles
of natural justice.
Clause 29 of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 empowers the Council
during the pendency of the investigation or impeachment, stoppage
of assigned judicial work to the Judge concerned. While interpreting
the constitutional provisions of Articles 124(4) and 124(5) the
submission that the Judge can be restrained from performing his
judicial functions during pendency of the impeachment proceedings
was specifically rejected by the Constitution Bench of the Apex
Court. In sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability case, it was held
that when the power of stopping the Judge from functioning cannot
be exercised during pendency of the impeachment proceedings in
the Parliament, the Council cannot stop assignment of judicial work
during investigation on a private complaint.
Clause 37 empowers the joint Committee of both houses of
Parliament to make rules to carry out the purpose of the Act. Clause
37(4) indicates the matters on which the Committee can frame

136
rules, which include manner of transmission of motion, manner of
presentation of an address to the President and the other matters.
Article 124(5) mandates that it is the Parliament which may regulate
the proceeding for presentation of an address and allegation of proof
of misbehaviour. It is only the Parliament which by law regulate the
procedure for presentation of an address and for the investigation.
The said power to make law cannot be delegated or assigned to any
other body including the Committee.
V arious provision of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 are against the
basic feature of the Constitution. The independence of Judiciary
being one of the accepted basic feature the provisions of the Judges
(Inquiry) Bill, 2006, if enacted into an Act, shall erode the basic
feature of the Constitution.
The in-house procedure in the Judiciary itself is sufficient protection
for minor abrasion and any misconduct. Rules of every High Court
authorize the Chief Justice to allocate work to other Judges. The
power of allocation of work to Chief Justice contains enough power
to control the Judges’ functioning and discharge of their duties.
7. Punjab and Haryana The proposed Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 not only lack constitutional
back-up, but it also is a devise to nail the independence of the
judiciary. Clause (5) of Article 124 of the Constitution permits
Parliament to enact law to regulate the procedure for the
investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge
under Clause (4) thereof. Thus, the law to be enacted in exercise
of powers under Article 124(5) of the Constitution is to regulate the
procedure as to how an inquiry into the alleged misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge, on the basis of which Parliament can
recommend his removal from the Office under Article 124( 4), is to
be conducted. Clause (5) of Article 124 does not permit the
Parliament to introduce an Authority to determine misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge other than what the Constitution has provided
under Clause (4) of Article 124.
The proposed Bill has introduced an authority alien to our
constitutional scheme and proposes to create an authority not
envisaged by the Constitution under Clause (4) of Article 124. The
provision, asking a Judge to seek voluntary retirement or withdrawal
of judicial work is virtual removal from the office for all intents and
purposes and, thus, lacks constitutional sanctions.
No law can be enacted which may attempt to erode the
independence of the Judiciary. The residual law making power is not
available with Parliament especially when for issues like salary,
privileges, allowances and determination of age etc., it has been
expressly authorized to enact law under Articles 124, 125, 217 &
218 of the Constitution of India.
The power and strength of the Judiciary lies in public faith, enjoined
upon by it. It will not be possible for a Judges to work fairly and
fearlessly during the rest of his service tenure once he is issued

137
“warnings” or his judicial work is withdrawn albeit for a small
length of period. The censure or public admonition will take away
the moral authority with a judge to hold the Office.
Under the Constitutional scheme, the Judges of the High Courts are
not administratively subordinate to the Supreme court. Both the
institutions are independent of each other and exercise their judicial
powers within the well defined parameters. The Supreme Court
enjoys appellate judicial powers. The proposed Bill, on the contrary,
be-littles the position of High Court Judges and makes them
subordinate and amenable to the administrative control of the Judges
of the Supreme Court.
8. Madhya Pradesh The Bill makes serious and decisive inroads into constitutional
freedom conferred on the judges by permitting all and sundry to file
a complaint and by conferring power on the council to suo motu
take cognizance of any act which they feel needs to be corrected.
The Bill is against the basic structure of the Constitution which
envisages that the High Court and the Supreme Court Judges shall
have absolute freedom and independence in the performance of their
duties and that the High Court Judges are not subordinate to the
Supreme Court Judges and that they shall not be treated as common
government servants.
The complaint proceedure contained in Chapter III  and provision
for imposition of measures in Section 20 (1) (b) will seriously
affect the independence of the judiciary and will be inconsistent
with clause (4) and (5) of Article 124 and Article 218 of the
Constitution.
The in-house procedure developed by the Supreme Court is enough
to tackle aberrations not meriting impeachment in the conduct of
judges.
The Bill is contrary to specific provisions of the Constitution which
provides for appointment of a Judge and his removal from office
by the President by a specific procedure in the House. The
Constitution has specifically omitted to prescribe any procedure
for taking any disciplinary action by imposing lesser punishments.
From the scheme of the Constitution and various judgments of the
Supreme Court, it is clear that Judges are not subordinate to the
Chief Justice, the Parliament or to any Authority. The Bill seeks to
introduce a disciplinary authority/body to sit over the Judges and to
take disciplinary action against them.
The Bill is a deliberate measure to subvert the judicial independence
and individual independence of the judges as it seeks to create an
extra-constitutional body like the council with full power to control
and regulate the functioning and conduct of the judges.
The very concept of the Bill is misconceived as it seeks to vest the
supreme authority in the Chief Justice of India as if it is the
appointing, disciplinary authority of all the Judges in the country.

138
9. Chhattisgarh The full co urt unanimously resolved to oppose the Bill.
10. Gujarat The provisions of the Bill would erode the independence of the
judiciary, result in interference in the independent functioning of the
Courts and would also come in the way of the Judges of the
Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the performance of their
duties without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. Everyday, Judges
decide cases in which one of the parties is a loser. Our judicial
system provides for correction of the judgment by appeal, review
and other mechanisms, but the procedure as envisaged in
Chapter III of the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 will expose every
Judge to false and baseless complaints. Considerable time of the
Judges will be consumed in giving their comments to such
complaints which are likely to be filed looking to the nature of the
duties being performed by the Judges. Judges shall always be in
constant fear of being subjected to complaints whenever they decide
cases.
The Apex Court has held in Sub-Committee on Judicial
Accountability Vs. Union of India & Ors., (1991) 4 SCC 699 that
there cannot be any machinery to inquire into the integrity of a
Judge of the Higher Judiciary except the constitutional machinery
for removal of Judge.
The Constitution permits removal of a Judge only when the motion
is carried with requisite majority of both the Houses of Parliament
recommending to the President for removal of the Judge. In other
words, the Constitution does not permit any action by any agency
other than the initiation of an action under Article 124(4) or Article
217(1)(b) read with Article 124(4), as the case may be.
The Apex Court has laid down that the Chief Justice of the High
Court has ample power to deal with any Judge for any misconduct
or deviant behaviour not warranting impeachment. The
Constitutional scheme does not concede any such power to any
other authority.
While there are express provisions in the Constitution empowering
the Parliament/President to lay down the conditions of service of
holders of other constitutional offices, there is a marked and
deliberate absence of any such provisions with regard to laying
down conditions of service of Judges of the High Courts and the
Supreme Court except for the limited purpose of salaries and
allowances and rights in respect of leave of absence and pensions
as laid down in Article 125 and 221 and for the purpose of
regulating the procedure for impeachment under Article 124( 4) and
(5). It is, therefore, abundantly clear that Constitution never
contemplated the parliament to make law for imposing any minor
measure on the Judges of the Supreme Court or the High Courts.

139
ANNEXURE-D
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
Sl. Name of Witnesses Dates of hearing
No.
1. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 25.1.2007, 2 & 20.2.2007
(Department of Justice)
(i) Shri V .K Duggal, Secretary;
(ii) Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Additional Secretary; and
(iii) Dr. P .K. Seth, Joint Secretary.
2. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 25.1.2007,2 & 20.2.2007
(Legislative Department)
(i) Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary; and
(ii) Dr. B.A. Agarawal, Additional Secretary.
3. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 2 & 20.2.2007
(Department Legal Affairs)
Shri T.K Viswanathan, Secretary.
4. Witnesses 13.2.2007
(i) Justice Ranganath Misra, Former Chief Justice of India.
(ii) Justice V .S. Malimath, Former chief Justice of Karnataka &
Kerala High Court.
(iii) Dr. K.N.C. Pillai, Director, Indian Law Institute.
(iv) Dr. N.R. Madhava Menon, Former Director,
National Law Academy , Bhopal.
(v) Shri KC. Mittal, Former President, Bar Council of Delhi.
(vi) Shri Prashant Bhushan, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of india.
(vii) Shri Rajiv Dhawan, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India.
(viii) Shri M.P. Raju, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India.
(ix) Shri V enugopal, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of india.
(x) Justice P.N. Bhagwati, Former Chief Justice of india; and 20.2.2007
(xi) Justice G .N. Ray, Former Supreme Court Judge and the Chairman,
Press Council of India.
(xii) Shri Arun Jaitley, Member, Rajya Sabha; 13.3.2007
(xiii) Dr. M.S. Gill, Member, Rajya Sabha; and
(xiv) Shri Jaganath Patnaik, Chairman, Bar Council of India and others.
(xv) Justice K. Ramaswamy 1 1.4.2007
(xvi) Justice R.S. Pathak, Former Chief Justice of India. 12.4.2007
(xvii) Dr. Jose Verghese, Former Vice Chairman,
Central Administrative Tribunal;
139

140
(xviii) Shri B.K Mohanty, Senior Advocate, Orissa High Court;
(xix) Shri P.H. Parekh, Former President, Supreme Court Bar
Association & Senior Advocate;
(xx) Shri Gopal Subramanium, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court;
(xxi) Dr. M.P. Raju, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court; and
(xxii) Shri Vinod A. Bobde, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court.
(xxiii) Shri Fali S. Nariman, former Member, Rajya Sabha; and 8.5.2007
(xxiv) Shri A.K Ganguli, Advocate, Supreme Court.
(xxv) Shri M.N. Krishnamoni, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court. 17.7.2007

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.