Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO. 
78
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  2015)10th December,
The Commercial Courts
Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015
SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)

127
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT
The Commercial Courts
Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th December , 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 155


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (v)-(vi)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (vi i)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-20
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 21-25
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. 27-38
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 39-126
(i) The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial ............................... 43-85
Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015;
(ii) The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial ............................... 86-117
Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015;
(iii) Pendency of cases in High Court as on 31st March, 2014; ....................................... 1 18-119
(iv) A comparative statement of the Bill and Ordinance; and............................................ 120-124
(v) List of Extant Statutes. ............................................................................................... 125-1 26
* To be appended at printing stage.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2014)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappam — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
*10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Subrata Bakshi
13. Adv. Sharad Bansode
14. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
15. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
16. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
17. Shri Shanta Kumar
18. Shri Santosh Kumar
19. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
20. Shri Anoop Mishra
21. Shri B.V . Naik
22. Shri Vincent H. Palla
23. Shri V . Panneerselvam
24. Shri Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Dr. A. Sampath
26. Shri Bharat Singh
27. Shri Udhayakumar M.
28. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
(i)
* Change in the nomination of Shri Aayanur Manjunatha w.e.f. 30th September, 2014.

(ii)
29. Dr. Anshul Verma
#30. Shri Tariq Anwar
$31. Adv. Joice George
# Vacancy existing since the constitution of the Committee and filled-up on 11th September, 2011.
$ Change in the nomination of Shri Innocent w.e.f. 22nd December, 2014.

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted on 1st September, 2015)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappam — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Adv. Sharad Bansode
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary
16. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary
17. Adv. Joice George
18. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
19. Shri Santosh Kumar
20. Shri Bhagwant Mann
21. Shri Anoop Mishra
22. Shri B.V . Nayak
23. Shri Vincent H. Pala
24. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri  M. Udhayakumar
29. Shri V araprasad Rao V elagapalli
30. Dr. Anshul Verma
*31. Shri Shanta Kumar
* Resigned from Committee w.e.f. 9th October, 2015.

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok  K.  Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the
Seventy-eight Report of the Committee on the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015 (Annexure-I).
2. In pursuance of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 29th April, 2015 to
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
on the 1st May, 2015, for examination and report to Parliament.
3. In order to solicit the views of stakeholders, the Committee issued a Press Communiqué on the 13th
June, 2015. In response thereto the Committee received several memoranda containing suggestions from
various organizations/ individuals / experts. Comments of the Department of Legal Affairs on the views/
suggestions so received were obtained for consideration of the Committee. The Committee heard the views
of Department of Legal Affairs on the 18th May and the 10th August on the Bill. The Committee, in its sitting
held on 26th November, 2015 took cognizance of the promulgation of the Commercial Courts, Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015 (Annexure-II) on 23rd October,
2015 by Hon'ble President of India and heard the explanation given by the Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs of the circumstances under which the said Ordinance was promulgated.
4. The Committee had wider consultations with stakeholders from Bar, Business Chambers, Financial
Institutions, PSUs, and other commercial entities. The Committee heard the Registrar, Supreme Court of
India, representatives of PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII),
Indian Council of Arbitration, the Law Commission of India amongst others.
5. The Committee during its study-visit interacted with the Registrar Generals/Registrars of High Courts
of Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab & Haryana, and
Uttarakhand, State Governments of West Bengal, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu,
Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana and Uttarakhand.
6. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information placed
before it:-
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High
Courts Ordinance, 2015;
(iii) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015;
(iv) 14th, 128th, 188th, 189th,  220th, 231st, 236th and 253rd Reports of the Law Commission
of India;
(v)

(vi)
(v) Ninth Report of the Committee on The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003
(July, 2005);
(vi) The Ease of Doing Business Report (2011 & 2016) of the World Bank;
(vii) Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
Act, 2002;
(viii) Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993;
(ix) The Delhi High Court (Original Side) Rules, 1967;
(x) The Civil Procedure Rules, 1998 of  United Kingdom;
(xi) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Legal Affairs thereon;
(xii) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by various official
and non-official witnesses; and
(xiii) Replies of High Courts and other stakeholders to the Common Questionnaire prepared by the
Secretariat on the issues dealt with by the Bill.
7. The Committee considered and adopted its Report in its meeting held on the 8th December, 2015, and
decided to present/lay the Evidence tendered on the Bill in both the Houses of Parliament.
8. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
8th December, 2015 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel Public Grievances,
Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
CII : Confederation of Indian Industry
SICC : Singapore International Commercial Court
DIFCC : Dubai International Financial Centre Court
FDI : Foreign Direct Investment
BITs : Bi-lateral Investment Treaties
DRT : Debt Recovery Tribunal
DART : Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal
NALSA : National Legal Services Authority
SLP : Special Leave Petition
MRTP : Monopolistic and Restrictive Trade Practice
TRAI : Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
SEBI : Securities and Exchange Board of India
IRDA : Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
LCI : Law Commission of India
WS : Written Statement
(vii)

1
1
REPORT
The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts
Bill, 2015 (Annexure-I) seeks to set-up Commercial Courts/Commercial Divisions for fast track resolution of
commercial disputes of the value of rupees one crore and above. As mentioned in Statement of Objects and
Reasons of the Bill, the proposal to establish the Commercial Court and Commercial Division of High Court
shall:-
(i) accelerate economic growth;
(ii) improve the international image of Indian justice delivery system; and
(iii) improve the faith of investor world in the legal culture of the nation.
2. Growth of international trade in globalised economy has led to increase in commercial disputes.
Owing to increasingly internationalisation of commerce, specialised commercial courts have been instituted
by many countries to decide complex commercial cases expeditiously. It started with United Kingdom in
1895 as a part of Queens Bench Division of High Court; thereafter as many as seventeen countries,
namely, France, Canada, Belgium, Germany, Australia, New Zealand, United States of America (22 States),
Philippines, Pakistan, United Arab of Emirates, Poland, Russia, Romania, Ukraine, Ghana, Sri Lanka and
Singapore have set up commercial courts as a part of their municipal court for speedy settlement of
commercial disputes. Singapore and Dubai have emerged as commercial dispute resolution hub in South-
Asia and Middle East, respectively. Singapore International Commercial Court (SICC) which started in
January, 2015 happens to be a division of Singapore High Court having judges from other countries and
allowing foreign lawyers to appear before it on commercial disputes. Similarly Dubai International Financial
Centre Court (DIFCC) also decides cross-border commercial disputes on the consent of parties. But India
has not emerged as preferred destination of commercial dispute resolution due to delay in Indian judicial
forums.
3.  As against five months (150 days) in Sin gapore, it takes nearly four years in India (1420 days) for
enforcing a contract. The Union Government has been making internal corrections for easing business
in the Country. Judicial reforms in the form of providing fast track courts for resolving commercial
disputes is one of them to instil confidence amongst  domestic and foreign investors. The Law Commission
of India in its Two Hundred and Fifty Third Report (January, 2015) has reported that as on 31st March,
2014 more than three million civil cases are pending in various High Courts ( Annexure-III ). Delay in
adjudication in Courts amounts to breach of India's obligation under bilateral and multi-lateral investment
treaties to provide effective means of asserting claims. As reported in Law Commission's Two Hundred
and Fifty Third Report on Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts and
Commercial Courts Bill, 2015 (January, 2015), 51.7 percent of civil cases belongs to the category of
commercial dispute in the five High Courts having original jurisdiction. The break up in those High
Courts is given below:

2
Table - 1
Pendency of "Commercial Disputes" in High Courts with Original Jurisdiction
High Court Total Number of Civil Total Number of % age of
Suits pending Commercial Commercial
Disputes pending Disputes
Madras 6326 5865 92.71%
Calcutta 6932 5352 77.20%
Bombay 6081 1997 32.83%
Delhi 12963 3582 27.63%
Himachal Pradesh   354     88 24.8%
TOTAL 32656 16884 51.7%
4. In a globalised economy, several Bi-lateral Investment Treaties (BITs) have been signed by Union
Government.  Countries which have entered into BITs with India prefer judicial forum in other countries even
though cause of action has arisen in our country, as they have little confidence in the Indian justice delivery
mechanism which is plagued by inordinate delays. In the case of White Industries vs Union of India, the
arbitration award of International Chamber of Commerce has adversely affected the interest of the country in
the international arena.  The delay in justice delivery can have impact upon India's treaty obligation and terms
with other nations, ultimately commerce of our country. The Commercial Courts are proposed to overcome
the delayed judicial process.
5. The Government of India is committed to create an FDI friendly environment to attract more foreign
investments for economic growth of the country. In the "Ease of Doing Business" Report (2015) of the
World Bank, the overall rank of India has slipped to 142, out of 189 countries, from 140 in the year 2014. Out
of the ten parameters used for ranking, rank in all the parameters has declined except on "Protecting Minority
Investors", which has improved and the other on "enforcing contract" has remained constant at 186 rank.
There is an endeavour of the Government to improve the position of the country by placing within top 50
countries of the world. The current economic slowdown in China may be a contributing factor for acceleration
of economic growth.
BACKGROUND OF THE BILL
6. In the year 2003, the Law Commission of India suo motu took up for an in-depth study of international
practice of commercial courts and the need for such courts in India in post liberalised phase of economy. The
Law Commission in its One Hundred Eighty Eighth Report on Proposals for Constitution of Hi-Tech Fast -
Track Commercial Divisions in High Courts (December, 2003) felt the need for having efficient dispute
resolution mechanism for commercial disputes. It had also felt that quick enforcement of contracts, easy
recovery of monetary claims and award of just compensation for damages are, absolutely critical to encourage
investment and economic growth. In that Report it had recommended for setting up of fast track Commercial
Divisions in all High Courts.  Following were the main features of the Commercial Division of High Courts
Bill, 2009 are:-

3
Commercial Divisions of High Courts to comprise two judges to adjudicate high value commercial
disputes;
The pecuniary value of commercial disputes to be not less than rupees five crores;
Fast track procedure indicating time line for filing pleading, recording of evidence and delivery of
judgment by the Division Bench;
Case Management Conference for judges with the lawyers for the purpose of filing written statement
and completion of evidence;
Statutory appeal to Supreme Court from the orders and judgment of Commercial Division of High
Court; and
The jurisdiction of the tribunals and other forums were not to be affected by the jurisdiction of the
Bill.
7. The said Bill was examined by a Select Committee of Rajya Sabha which presented its Report on 29th
July, 2010 with certain amendments.  Those amendments were considered by Law Commission of India in
its Two Hundred Fifty Third Report (January, 2015).  Thus, the present Commercial Courts, Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015 is an improvement upon the Commercial
Division of High Courts Bill, 2009.
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE BILL
8. Following are the key features of the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015:-
Creation of Commercial Division in five High Courts having original jurisdiction (Calcutta, Bombay,
Madras, Delhi and Himachal Pradesh) and Commercial Courts in such districts to be decided by the
State Government in consultation with concerned High Court to fast track commercial disputes of
the value of rupees one crore and above;
All pending commercial suits to be transferred to Commercial Court/Commercial Division from
District or High Court concerned after the constitution of those courts. But those suit where the final
judgment has been reserved by the court prior to the constitution of Commercial Division/Commercial
Court, would not be transferred;
Commercial disputes to be heard by judges having demonstrable expertise and experience in commercial
law;
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts to hear appeal from the decisions/ judgments of proposed
Commercial Division/ Commercial Court and the following Tribunals/ Boards:-
(a) Competition Appellate Tribunal;
(b) Debts Recovery  Appellate Tribunal;
(c) Intellectual Property Appellate Board;
(d) Company Law Board or the National Company Law Tribunal;

4
(e) Securities Appellate Tribunal; and
(f) Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal.
Application or appeal in international commercial arbitration to be heard and disposed of by the
Commercial Appellate Division of High Court;
Introduction of case management conference; setting time line for both oral and written
arguments;
Civil Procedure Code proposed to be amended to fast track commercial disputes which would prevail
over existing High Court Rules and other provisions of Civil Procedure Code.
Time bound oral arguments to be supplemented by written submissions to be filed four weeks prior
to commencement of oral arguments;
Time bound delivery of judgement within ninety days from the conclusion of arguments;
Forfeiture of right to file written statement after expiry of 120 days;
No civil revision application or petition shall be entertained against any interlocutory order of the
commercial court including an order on the issue of jurisdiction;
All appeals against the order of Commercial Division/Commercial Court to be heard and disposed of
by the Commercial Appellate Division of High Court within six months from the date of filing of such
appeal;
9. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs during the meeting of the Committee held on 26th November,
2015, submitted that there was a pressure from the legal fraternity to give effect to Delhi High Court
(Amendment) Act, 2015. In the event of bringing into force all disputes of Rupees two crore and above
would have to be transferred to District Courts. Again with the enactment of Commercial Courts, Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015 all commercial disputes of Rupees one
crore and above would be taken back from District Courts to Commercial Bench of High Court of Delhi. In
order to save time, both the Acts have been given simultaneous effect from single day. Therefore, an Ordinance
was promulgated by Hon'ble President of India on 23rd October, 2015. He further added that a new Bill
would be introduced in the Parliament to replace the Bill under examination of the Committee. However, the
Government will take into account the recommendations of the Committee while introducing the new Bill on
the subject.
10. A compari son of both the Bill under consideration of the Committee and the Ordinance is at
Annexure -IV .
Existing system of dealing with Commercial Disputes
11. The Registrar of Supreme Court responding to the queries of the Committee on the definition of
'commercial disputes' has stated as under:-
…"Till date "Commercial Litigation" has neither been defined nor had been recognised as a class in
itself. The fact however remains that litigation pertaining to commercial matters has been and is
being agitated before the different hierarchy of "Courts throughout the Country. Illustratively matters
relating to Company Law, MRTP , TRAI, SEBI, IRDA, Civil matters, Mercantile Law, Commercial

5
Transaction including Banking, Simple Money and Mortgage matters, matters relating to Leases,
Government Contracts and Contracts by Local Bodies are and were being decided by different  courts
and at different levels right from the inception and till date....."
"......It would be worthwhile to mention that the cases mentioned in Section 2(1)(c) of the proposed
Bill are already being taken care of by the Hon'ble Supreme Court under its ordinary and appellate
jurisdiction. In fact, even cases relating to commercial disputes arising from the other statutory
Boards and Tribunals are also being decided by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as of now....."
"......Classification has been made on the basis of pre-existing subject categories in the Hon'ble
Supreme Court. Whatever matters were found to be related to trade and commerce from amongst the
existing subject categories were inserted in the list. However classification is also based upon the
cases filed under various enactments relating to commercial transactions......"
12. A special Bench for Commercial Litigation commenced on 1st July, 2015 in the Supreme Court of
India. The High Court of Madras is already having a Company Court to deal with matters arising out of the
Companies Act, 1956. During its study-visit, the Committee was apprised that Commercial Benches have
been made functional in High Court of Kolkata and Mumbai. The High Court of Delhi also recently established
two Benches of Commercial Courts in the Original Jurisdiction and two Benches in the Appellate Jurisdiction
on 26th March, 2015. As far as District Courts in Delhi are concerned, a Commercial Court at the Tis Hazari
Court Complex was created in 1990s.
13. The Committee approached all the High Courts and State Governments to furnish their written views
on provisions of the Bill through a common Questionnaire. Accordingly, the Committee received written
views of thirteen High Courts, i.e. Delhi, Sikkim, Calcutta, Madras, Hyderabad, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Allahabad, Rajasthan, Guwahati, Uttarakhand, and Punjab and Haryana on the various
provisions of the Bill. Except High Court of Sikkim, none of the High Courts have opposed the creation of
Commercial Courts.
14. The observation of Hon'ble Justice N. Ramamohana Rao of High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad
on the Bill is as under:-
"…The measure to create a Commercial Appellate Division in all High Courts, including those which
did not have original jurisdiction to entertain civil disputes such as the High Court at Hyderabad,
would help in resolving the disputes much faster…."
15. The observation of Hon'ble Justice P. Naveen Rao of High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad on the
Bill is as under:-
"…It is laudable object but functioning of alternative forums created is much to be desired. Unless
the purpose of speedy disposal is ensured, there is no point in creating such forums…."
16. To the query of the Committee on the need of Commercial Courts in the Country, State Governments
of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Telengna have felt that establishment of commercial courts for
expeditious disposal of high value commercial cases is the need of the hour. Even though this law does not
apply to Jammu and Kashmir, that State Government has supported the objectives of the Bill. The High Court
of Jammu and Kashmir has also felt that such a law is also needed in that State even though commercial
activities are limited to the areas of Jammu and Srinagar only. There are only fifty-six cases above the
pecuniary limit of rupees one crore are pending in that State.

6
17. State Governments of Uttarakhand, Sikkim, Mizoram and Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar
have expressed that there is no need for Commercial Courts in their States as commercial disputes of rupee
one crore are very limited. In Uttarakhand commercial disputes of rupee one crore and above are only twenty
five cases and which are confined to the district of Dehradun only. In the State of Sikkim there is only one
such case in the whole State. In Mizoram and UT of Andaman and Nicobar very few commercial cases are
pending.
Commercial Disputes - An inclusive definition
18. The definition of 'commercial dispute' proposed under Clause 2(1) of the Bill is quite exhaustive
having scope of addition of more items of commercial disputes in future by the Union Government. It covers
every kinds of commercial transaction by merchants, bankers, traders, investors, etc. The details of commercial
disputes enumerated in the Bill are as under:-
(i) Ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers, financiers and traders such as those relating to
mercantile documents, including enforcement and interpretation of such documents;
(ii) Export or import of merchandise or services;
(iii) Issues relating to admiralty and maritime law;
(iv) Transactions relating to aircraft, aircraft engines, aircraft equipment and helicopters, including
sales, leasing and financing of the same;
(v) Carriage of goods;
(vi) Construction and infrastructure contracts, including tenders;
(vii) Agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively in trade or commerce;
(viii) Franchising agreements;
(ix) Distribution and licensing agreements;
(x) Management and consultancy agreements;
(xi) Joint venture agreements;
(xii) Shareholders agreements;
(xiii) Subscription and investment agreements pertaining to the services industry including
outsourcing services and financial services;
(xiv) Mercantile agency and mercantile usage;
(xv) Partnership agreements;
(xvi) Technology development agreements;
(xvii) Intellectual Property Rights relating to registered and unregistered trademarks, copyright,
patent, design, domain names, geographical indications and semi-conductor integrated circuits;
(xviii) Agreements for sale of goods or provision of services;

7
(xix) Exploitation of oil and gas reserves or other natural resources including electromagnetic
spectrum;
(xx) Insurance and re-insurance;
(xxi) Contracts of agency relating to any of the above, or relating to such other commercial
disputes as may be prescribed; and
(xxii) Such other commercial disputes as may be prescribed.
19. The Delhi High Court (Original Side) Rules, 1967 under Chapter 'XVI' under caption 'Commercial
Suits' has defined the commercial cases which arises out of the ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers
and traders and relating to the construction of mercantile documents, export or import of mercantile,
affraightment, carriage of goods by land, sea or air, insurance, banking and mercantile agency and mercantile
usage.
20. The definition of 'commercial disputes' proposed in the Bill is wider than the definition mentioned in
the Delhi High Court Rules, 1967. However the definition enumerated under Rule 58 of Civil Procedure
Rules, 1998 of the UK (which deals with the procedure followed in English Civil Court) appears to be similar
with the definition proposed in the Bill.
21. The Registrar-General of High Court of Delhi in his written submission to the Committee on the
Clause 2 of the Bill has stated as under:-
….Execution of Judgments/decrees in commercial dispute should also be before Commercial
Division/Commercial Court. Else, the order/decree would remain on paper and defeat the
expeditious disposal. Objections of several nature, in execution under Order XXI of CPC, are
required to be decided as a suit and those proceedings also ought to be included in the definition
of 'commercial dispute'….
22. The Registrar of Madras High Court in his written submission to the Committee stated as
under:-
"…the establishment of a Commercial Court at District level, a Commercial Division in the High
Court and Commercial Appellate Division in the High Court could be achieved in the High Court of
Madras subject to a few amendments to be made to the Original Side Rules to be in tandem to the
amendments suggested by the Law Commission to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of
Commercial dispute of high value. Firstly, speaking on Commercial Courts at District level, at the
first instance a survey is required to be done to assess the number of commercial disputes/suits/
applications which were filed before the Civil Courts in a particular District. The data collected in
this regard will give a fair idea as regards the number of Commercial Dispute arising in a particular
District. This could enable the High Court to recommend to the Government to sanction a Commercial
Court for the District or depending upon the volume of work to notify an already existing Court to be
a Commercial Court apart from dealing with its regular works. When the Family Courts Act, 1984
was enacted, Family Courts were constituted in District Headquarters in a phased manner by assessing
the volume of work apart from other parameters which require the State Government to constitute a
Court-on a permanent basis. This procedure could be adopted in so far as the State of Tamil Nadu
after collection of the statistics…."

8
23. Suggestions received from Stakeholders
The present definition of commercial dispute is very wide and its sweeping effects will
practically take away all the litigation pending or to be instituted in subordinate courts all over
the Country.
The definition of commercial disputes should have generic terms rather than specific terms regarding
commercial disputes and it should not confine the definition in respect of specific contracts as
English Jurisprudence is not very specific on species of contract.
It was also suggested to specify relevant Statues in the Schedule of the Bill rather than listing
commercial disputes in the definition clause of the Bill.
The definition of 'commercial dispute' should specifically include disputes with both State and Central
Government as well as public sector enterprises wherein they are a party to the contract, pursuant to
the tender provisions or otherwise.
The power to classify other disputes as commercial disputes should be with the Chief Justice
of High Court and not with the Central Government as the latter itself is one of the largest
litigants.
The Bill has failed to include in its definition of commercial dispute, the disputes arising out of direct
and indirect taxes such as custom duties, central excise, etc.
A separate Commercial Appellate Division, especially for tax related cases may be established in each
High Court.
Oral understanding, agreements and other transactions between parties which are not in writing, but
promised on market practices, conventions and traditional usages may be included in the definition of
commercial dispute.
In sub-clause (j) of clause(c) of sub-section(1) of Section 2, the words "on such higher value as may
be prescribed" may be omitted, as it may create a situation where on Act pressed by Parliament is
amended by mere prescription without undergoing due legislative processes.
Items like E-commerce may also be included.
24. Apprehensions have been expressed that wider definition may create jurisdictional issue with the
proposed Commercial Court/Division. It was suggested that the relevant statutes governing commercial
activities be mentioned in the Schedule of the Bill so as to avoid jurisdictional problem which may delay the
trial of commercial disputes. An attempt has, however, been made to list some of the extant statutes in the
Annexure-V .
25. The Department of Legal Affairs has stated that wide range of commercial activities have been
mentioned in the definition clause and has been made as exhaustive as possible. To the query whether it is
feasible to list the statutes having commercial activities under the Schedule, that Department was open to the
idea of the Committee.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
26. The Committee feels that the definition of commercial dispute under Clause 2 (c) of the Bill
may lead to multiple interpretations and confusion as these provisions have already been defined in

9
their parent Acts. Therefore, to allay the apprehensions expressed by stakeholders on the said Clause,
the Committee feels that instead of inserting all the items in the Bill, having the provisions of
commercial angle, it would be appropriate to include in the Schedule, the list of Acts which deal with
commercial transaction(s). The Union/State Government may add any exact statute which it feel to
be having commercial transaction in the Schedule of the Bill.
27. The State of Sikkim and Uttarakhand are having one and twenty five commercial cases in
total, respectively. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that Government should establish
Commercial Courts/Divisions on a pilot basis in some States where commercial disputes are large in
number and thereafter, it be replicated in remaining States depending upon its requirement. The
Committee feels that the Government should have collected statistical data regarding the number
of commercial suits, applications, appeals, petitions pending before the various courts in the country
to determine the financial implication on the exchequer. The Committee recommends that data of
pendency of commercial cases be obtained and financial implications on the exchequer be calculated
during the pilot phase of the execution of the Bill so as to better equip it in respect of the logistical
and financial implications once the Bill is executed.
28. These pilot courts should be provided with adequate funds, state of the art infrastructure and
human resource including judges and staff members. A model court fee structure may be worked
out factoring into the recurring cost of those Courts. It should clearly indicate that the resolution of
a commercial dispute is a service provided by the State to a section of litigants who can very well
afford the cost of such adjudication. Such a revised court fee structure is the need of the hour. The
Committee feels that such a super specialty facility to be rendered by commercial courts could be
competitive with international institutional arbitration.
VALUATION OF DISPUTE AND ITS DETERMINATION
29. The specified value of the commercial suite in the Commercial Division of High Courts Bill, 2009 was
fixed at rupees five crore and above, whereas the monetary value of the suit should not be less than rupees
one crore under Clause 2(1) (j) of the present Bill. The determination of specified value of a commercial
dispute is provided under Clause 12 of the Bill.
Suggestions received from stakeholder
Dispute relating to any commercial transaction irrespective of its valuation should be treated as
commercial dispute;
While filing the suit, appeal, application, the actual value of the subject matter of the dispute in claim
or counter claim is taken into account whereas the aggregate value of claim and counter claim is
taken into account if such matter has been decided by arbitration before approaching Commercial
Court/Division. Therefore a clarification between actual and aggregate value of commercial dispute
is required to avoid confusion;
The specified value should not be fixed. It may vary from State to State. Determination of specific
value should be left to the concerned High Court as economic valuation of the commercial affairs
differs from State to State and case to case;

10
Section 2(1) may be amended and valuation of suit be not less than  rupees one crore or such higher
value as the Central Government may by notification, after consultation with the respective High
Court, from time to time prescribe;
Fixing of rupees one crore as specified value may preclude commercial disputes especially faced by
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises sector. Hence the specified value may be brought down from
one crore to rupees twenty five lakhs;
Specified value may be increased and fixed at rupees two crore.
30. The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act, 2014 has enhanced the pecuniary jurisdiction of District
Courts in Delhi to rupees two crores from twenty lakhs. The pecuniary jurisdiction of the High Court of
Bombay is rupees one crore; the High Court of Calcutta is rupees one crore; the High Court of Madras is
rupees twenty-five lakhs and High Court of Himachal Pradesh is rupees ten lakhs. The Law Commission of
India in its Two Hundred and Fifty Third Report (2015) has recommended that:-
"....Pecuniary jurisdiction of the High Courts having original jurisdiction to be raised uniformly to
rupees one crore and commercial divisions should be set up only when the pecuniary jurisdiction has
been so raised. Consequently, commercial divisions may be set up in Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, and
Madras High Courts once the pecuniary jurisdiction is raised to rupees one crore...."
31. The observation of Hon'ble Justice A. Ramalingeswara Rao of High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad
on the Bill is as under:-
"…There need not be any specific provision with regard to the determination of 'specified value' as
'pecuniary jurisdiction' is already decided by various decisions when the suits under C.P.C. were
filed. Thus Clause 12 in Chapter III can be omitted but the 'specified value' for different tiers can be
notified by the Central Government from time to time…."
32. The Registrar-General, High Court of Himachal Pradesh in his written submission to the Committee
on the Clause 2 (c) of the Bill has stated as under:-
"....weightage shall have to be given to all the commercial suits whether the same are above one crore
or less than one crore, otherwise, it would give a wrong signal in the society as well as world over that
even Indian Judicial System treats elitist people and the egalitarian society differently whereas in the
eyes of law everyone should be equal...."
33. The Co-ordination Committee of All District Court Bar Associations of Delhi in their written submission
to the Committee on the Bill stated as under:-
"…The proposed Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts and
Commercial Courts Bill, 2015 provides to enhance the original jurisdiction to Rupees one crore only.
This is in direct conflict with the Delhi High Court (Amendment), Bill 2014 which was unanimously
passed in the Rajya Sabha…."
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
34. The Committee feels that the transfer of all pending commercial disputes to the proposed
Commercial Court/Division may overburden the said courts and defeat the very purpose of establishing
them. There may not be requirement of Commercial Courts in some States as they have limited

11
number of such cases. The Committee recommends that instead of transferring the pending cases to
Commercial Courts, a sunset clause may be inserted in the Bill whereby only fresh cases with a
pecuniary limit may be transferred to Commercial Courts. However, the litigants may be given a
choice to move Commercial Courts if the pending dispute is of commercial nature as per the Schedule
of the Bill.
35. Since the pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi has been enhanced to rupees two
crore from rupees twenty lakhs, the Commercial Division of High Court of Delhi may not entertain
commercial disputes upto the value of rupees two crore. Therefore, the value of dispute to be
entertained by the Commercial Division of High Court of Delhi should be more than rupees two
crore. This calls for harmonisation between the provisions relating to pecuniary jurisdiction in the
Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act, 2015 and the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015. Moreso, the valuation of property in metro
cities has increased and the cost of a two bedroom flat in those cities are generally above rupees one
crore. The Committee, therefore, feels that specified value of the commercial dispute should not be
less than rupees two crore.
36. The Committee also takes note of the apprehension that many cases pending in District
Courts may be transferred to the designated Commercial Court as a result of which many District
Courts may be having limited number of cases and a designated Commercial Court may be
overburdened with commercial disputes particularly when the value of commercial disputes is rupees
one crore. The Committee has been apprised by the Registrar, High court of Delhi that a designated
Commercial Court in Tis Hazari Court Complex has been made functional from 1990s. The Committee
notes that the High Court of Delhi has created a Commercial Court in Delhi on need based to fast
track those cases. Even after creation of such Commercial Court in Tis Hazari Court Complex,
pendency in six other District Courts has not been reduced. Therefore, the interest of practising
advocates would not be affected in the event of creation of designated Commercial Court. Further,
increase of specified value of commercial dispute from rupees one crore to two crore would also allay
the apprehension expressed by the legal fraternity.
APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES TO COMMERCIAL COURT
37. The judges of the commercial courts will be appointed by the concerned High Court and where more
than one judge is appointed, the senior judge to be designated as principal judge. According to Clause 4 (1) &
(2) of the Bill the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court is to nominate judges having experience in
dealing with commercial cases for Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division for a period of
two years or as determined by the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court.
Suggestions received from Stakeholders
The provision of appointment of judges of Commercial Court by the High Court of the concerned
State under Clause 5(3) of the Bill is an apparent encroachment upon the power of the Governor
of the State and also is in a contravention of Articles 233 and 234 of the Constitution.  State
Government of Tamil Nadu has submitted that appointment of judges of Commercial Court, if
restricted to, the judges of District Court exclusively would not violate aforesaid Articles of the
Constitution.

12
The person appointed in Commercial Court should be qualified to be appointed as a District
Judges or a District/Additional District Judge. The terms and conditions of service of the
judges of Commercial Court be similar to District/Additional District Judges. Since prescribing
service conditions of the rank of the District Judge is in exclusive domain of the Governor of
the State in consultation with the High Court, this power cannot be exercised by Central
Government.
Appointment of a judge of a Commercial Court shall be made by the relevant High Court from
amongst the judicial officers of the State qualified to be appointed as a district judge and having
demonstrable expertise and experience in commercial disputes. Chief justice needs to consult and
obtain the views of the judge proposed to be nominated. Terms and conditions of service for judges
of Commercial Court shall be same as that of the post of the rank which such judicial officer would
have otherwise got in that State/UT.
The existing vacancies in the High Courts must be filled up first, otherwise the objectives of the Bill
will fail.
38. Judges for the Commercial Court would be appointed from amongst District Judge/Tribunal having
proficiency and experienced in commercial disputes by the Chief Justice of High Court concerned in a State.
Articles 233 and 234 of the Constitution stipulate that Governor is the appointing authority for District
Judges. Apparently, Clause 5(3) is in contravention with Articles 233 and 234 of the Constitution.
39. The observation of Hon'ble Justice N. Ramamohana Rao of High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad
on the Bill is as under:-
".…Section 5 provided adequate freedom to the High Court for appointing the Judges of the Commercial
Courts….however, there should have been freedom to appoint/choose experienced and retired Senior
District Judges, who maintained good track record and also possessed integrity, for a period of two
(2) years. Similarly, nomination of appropriate Judges by the Chief Justice as Judges of the Commercial
Division or Commercial Appellate Divisions gives freedom to utilise the service of the Judges who
are capable of resolving commercial disputes in real quick time…."
40. The Registrar-General of High Court of Delhi in his written submission to the Committee on the
Clause 5 of the Bill has stated as under:-
"…A provision should be made for better infrastructure of the Commercial Court, with the facility,
may be also of a vehicle, to save the commuting time for the Presiding Officer of the Commercial
Court. Since the Judges of Commercial Courts will be dealing exclusively with high value matters, an
appointee should have a sufficiently long remaining tenure and should not be on the verge of the
retirement. Often, it is found that Judges manning such Special Courts go on long leave necessitating
the High Court to intervene in exercise of powers under Article 226…"
41. The Registrar-General of Madras High Court in his written submission to the Committee on the Bill
has stated as under:-
"…The Hon'ble Judge dealing with such commercial disputes should be equipped to deal with them.
The nomination of such Hon'ble Judge by the Honble Chief Justice of the High Court shall be by
assessing the capability of the Hon'ble Judge to deal with such high value commercial suits. In order
to better, enable those Hon'ble Judges to deal with these specialized matter which may require expertise

13
or exposure to certain branches of law or principles, the Hon'ble Judges so identified/nominated by
the Hon'ble Chief Justice be imparted special training to better equip themselves. The present
establishment viz., State judicial Academy has the necessary infrastructure to impart such training
and effectiveness of the training would be by devising a proper training module/curriculum with
experts in the concerned branch as resource persons…."
42. The Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice submitted that the introduction of the
Bill would not violate the constitutional provisions under Articles 233 and 234 as the Chief Justice will
nominate from the existing cadre of judges available in the prescribed manner in the Bill and no new requirement/
appointment will be done for the Commercial Courts/Divisions as the judges will be nominated from the
existing pool of the District and High Court.
43. The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts
Ordinance, 2015 has replaced Clause 5(3) of  the Bill with Clause 3 of the Ordinance wherein the appointing
power of Commercial Court has been vested with State Government in consultation with the High Court
concerned of the State.  Thus, the Ordinance has pruned the deficiency pointed out in Clause 5 of the Bill.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
44. The Committee observes that the power of appointment of person to the post of District
Judge in State lies with Governor of that State who exercise that power in consultation with the High
Court of the State concerned. The Clause 5(3) of the Bill, however, gives that power to Chief Justice
of the High Court concerned. This is not in conformity with provision under Article 233 of the
Constitution.  The Committee feels that the appointment of judges of Commercial Courts by the
concerned High Court will encroach upon the powers of the State Government and infringe upon the
federal structure provided under the Constitution of India. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that appointment powers of the State Government should be left as provided in the Constitution.
The Committee also takes note of the Clause 3(3) of the Ordinance issued by Government on the
23rd October, 2015. The said Clause empowers the State Government in consultation with the concerned
High Court to appoint judges of Commercial Court from the Higher Judicial Service of the State.
The Committee feels that this Clause is in conformity with the constitutional scheme.
45. The Committee notes that as of 1st September, 2015, out of 1017 sanctioned post of judges,
392 posts are lying vacant in various High Courts of the Country. The Committee feels that without
filling-up of these existing vacancies, the present Bill, may prove counter-productive far from achieving
its objective. Therefore, the Committee recommends to the Government to fill-up the existing
vacancies in these High Courts taking into consideration the specialised knowledge and experience
requirement for appointment.
APPEAL TO COMMERCIAL APPELLATE BENCHES FROM TRIBUNALS
46. Clause 14 of the Bill states that any appeal filed in a High Court against the orders of certain Tribunals/
Boards like: (i) Competition Appellate Tribunal; (ii) Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal; (iii) Intellectual Property
Appellate Board; (iv) Company Law Board or the National Company Law Tribunal; (v) Securities Appellate
Tribunal; and (vi) Telecom Dispute Settlement and Appellate tribunal shall be heard and disposed of by the
Commercial Appellate Division of the High Court, if the matter relates to a commercial dispute. The Commercial
Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015 has, however,
removed Clause 14 of the Bill.

14
47. Suggestions received from Stakeholders
If commercial cases pending in tribunals are transferred to Commercial Courts or Commercial Division
of High Courts then tribunals would become redundant.
The proposed Bill will take away the jurisdiction of certain tribunals like Debt Recovery Tribunals and
other Tribunals of similar nature.
High Court's jurisdiction except under Articles 226 and 227 of Constitution have been ousted by
specific statutes by setting up of specialised Tribunal/Board have been brought in without amending
those specific statues causing jurisdictional challenge in future.
48. The specified value in commercial dispute is rupees one crore and above, as per Clauses 2(1)(j) and
12 of the Bill, whereas, Section 1(4) of Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993
stipulates  that dispute relating to banks over rupees ten lakh can be filed in Debt Recovery Tribunal(DRT)
and Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal(DART). After the creation of commercial courts, cases above rupees
one crore can be filed by the banks in DRT/DART under Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993. In other words, banking related cases of rupees one crore may not come to Commercial
Court/Division even dispute relating to bankers and financers is a commercial dispute and can be filed in
Commercial Court/Division. Therefore, there would be jurisdictional overlap between Commercial Court/
Division and DRT/DART.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
49. Jurisdiction of regular courts are ousted in the commercial disputes by the specific statute.
Commercial Court is also a regular civil Court; jurisdiction thereof may be ousted by invoking
Section 18 of Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 in the debt
related cases. The Committee, therefore, feels that harmonisation between the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015 and Recovery of
Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 is required so far as commercial dispute
relating to banking sector is concerned.
50. The decision/orders of six tribunals/Boards mentioned under Clause 14 of the Bill are appealable
to Commercial Appellate Division of concerned High Court. Three Tribunals viz.,  Securities Appellate
Tribunal, Competition Appellate Tribunal and Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal
are headed by sitting or retired judges of Supreme Court of India or the sitting or retired Chief
Justice of High Courts, whose decisions are appealable in Supreme Court. Therefore, the Clause 14
of the present Bill is in contravention of Section 15(z) of Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992, Section 53(T) of the Competition Act, 2002 and Section 18 of The Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India Act, 1997. Suggestions have been received that creation of so many tiers of appeal in the
case of tribunals referred to in the Bill have been increased to four as the decision of appellate
tribunals would now lie to Commercial Appellate Bench of High Court.  The cases which are fast
tracked may be stuck up in appeals. Therefore, the Committee feels that tiers of appeal should not
be more than two including tribunal also.
51. The Committee also notes that the Ordinance issued by the Government has omitted Clause
14 of the Bill and thereby excluded all the six Tribunals/Boards from the appeal to be heard and
disposed by the Commercial Appellate Division of the concerned High Court.  The Committee is in
agreement with such exclusion.

15
52. The Commercial District Courts for commercial matter such as Debt Relief, Intellectual
Property, SEBI, Income Tax etc. can replace the tribunals with full District Commercial Judges for
quicker and fast track remedy with statutory one appeal to Division Bench in High Court. This will
attract the investors to choose this 'Fast Track' courts rather than expensive international Arbitration.
The Committee in its Seventy-fourth Report on the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals & Other Authorities
(Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014 had noted that many posts in various tribunals are lying vacant
leading to huge number of pendency of cases. The Committee feels that once commercial courts are
created, there is no need for the tribunals system of deciding high value commercial disputes.
ENHANCED COURT FEE OR COST OF LITIGATION IN COMMERCIAL SUITS
53. The resolution providing forum for a dispute is no doubt is a sovereign duty of the State but court
fees have to borne by parties to civil disputes under the Code of Civil Procedure 1908. Sometimes, parties
cleverly resort to higher judicial forum under Public Interest Litigation by paying minimum court fee to get
their dispute resolved. The Committee in its Twentieth Report on the Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Amendment Bill, 2008 dealt with the issue of court fee in details and observed that the time spent by the
courts at various levels and the expenses incurred upon the exchequer while settling such disputes has never
been taken into account and thereby allowing the corporate, commercial/statutory bodies making use of the
judicial infrastructure at the minimum expenses for settling their disputes worth crores of rupees.
54. The issue of court fee was dealt by the Law Commission of India in its Fourteenth Report on
Reforms of the Judicial Administration (September, 1958), One Hundred and Twenty-eighth Report on Cost
of Litigation (1988), One Hundred and Eighty-nine Report on Revision of Court Fee Structure (February,
2004), Two Hundred and twentieth Report on Need to fix Maximum Chargeable Court Fees in Subordinate
Civil Courts (March, 2009), Two Hundred Thirty-first Report on Amendments in Indian Stamp Act, 1899
and Court-Fees Act, 1870 Permitting Different Modes of Payment (August, 2009), Two Hundred Thirty-
sixth Report on Court Fee in Supreme Court vis-à-vis Corporate Litigation (December, 2010) and Two
Hundred and Fifty-third Report on Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts
and Commercial Courts Bill, 2015 (January, 2015). In its Fourteenth Report on Reforms of the Judicial
Administration (September, 1958), the Law Commission of India was of the view that India is the only
modern country to impose a tax on legal remedy. The Commission in its One Hundred twenty-eight Report
on 'Cost of Litigation' (1988) has stated that administration of criminal justice is the obligatory duty of the
State as part of its sovereign function; no fee can, therefore, be levied for performing the same.  But, the civil
justice system is a public service and fees for that service is chargeable by the court system. In its One
Hundred Eighty-ninth Report on the Revision of Court Fee Structure (February, 2009), the Commission
recommended that rate of court fee may be enhanced by linking it to devaluation of rupee, as it has not
revised for a long time. However, the Commission was of the view that high court fee must not become a
barrier to access to justice. In the same Report the LCI has observed that high cost of litigation is one of the
impediments in access to justice. In its Two Hundred and Twentieth Report on Need to fix Maximum
Chargeable Court Fees in Subordinate Civil Courts (March, 2009), the Commission was of the view of
having a fixed maximum chargeable court fees in the country.  In Two Hundred and Thirty-sixth Report on
Court Fee in Supreme Court vis-à-vis Corporate Litigation (December, 2010), the Commission was of the
view that court fee should be based on the value of the suit and may be charged on ad valorem basis subject
to a reasonable ceiling limit. In its Two Hundred and Fifty-third Report on the Commercial Division and
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts and Commercial Courts Bill, 2015 (January, 2015), the

16
Commission was of the view that court fee needs to be linked with the time consumed by the litigants in the
conduct of their case, so as to discourage frivolous litigants.
55. Frequent adjournment sought by the clever parties is the main cause of judicial delay and pendency in
courts.  LCI in its Two Hundred and Fifty-third Report (January, 2015) has observed that present culture of
charging fees per hearing incentivise   the lawyers to delay the cases.  The apex court in Subrata Roy Sahara
vs Union of India 2014(8) SCC, 470 has observed that
"....The Indian Judicial system is grossly afflicted with frivolous litigation ****.  There are some
litigants who continue to pursue senseless an ill-considered claims to somehow or the other to defeat
the process of law *********.  When the litigant party understands that it would have to compensate
the party which succeeds, unnecessary litigation will be substantially reduced.  At the end of the day
court time lost is direct loss to the nation...."
56. The LCI has also felt that litigation culture in our country needs to be shifted from 'litigant managed'
to 'court-managed' litigation process.  In UK, the Civil Procedure Act, 1997 and Civil Procedure Rules, 1999
governs civil justice procedures which have been framed on the basis of reforms proposed by Lord Woolf
which has entailed sharp drop of cases from 10,000 to 2,000 in a month, affording more time to judges to
dispose-off pending case.
57. The LCI has also observed that existing cost regime and court fee regime does not deter litigants
from filing false and vexatious claim or seeking adjournment to delay the proceedings.  Litigants who prolong
matter and abuse the court's process pay the same court fee as the litigants who do not indulge in such
practices.  To remedy such situation, the court fee will need to be related to time consumed by the litigants in
the conduct of their cases.  Singapore model has been quoted by LCI.  In Singapore, no court fee is chargeable
for first three hearings; SGD 8000 is payable for first five hearings, SGD 20,000 is payable for first ten
hearings.  That increases by SGD 5000 per hearing from eleventh hearing onwards.
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
58. The Committee, however, feels that establishment of Commercial Courts will, in no way,
infringe the rights of common/poor litigants and will not violate their human rights as part of
judicial reforms. Specialised courts and institutions similar to the  Commercial Courts are already
established and functioning for different matters like Family Court, CBI Court, Lok Adalat, Nyaya
Panchayat, etc.  The Committee recognises that it is  our constitutional obligation to provide free
legal aid to poor which is enumerated under Article 39A under Part-IV - Directive Principles of
State Policy of the Constitution. An individual can file 'Pauper Suit' under Order XXXIII, Rule 1
of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to avail justice without paying any court fee. National Legal
Services Authority (NALSA) has been constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
to fulfil the constitutional objective which provide panel of lawyers to economically handicapped
litigants.
59. The Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice submitted that the subject matter of
court fee falls within the exclusive domain of State Legislatures, except the Supreme Court. Any Change in
the law will be required to be undertaken by the States and not by the Central Government. However, the Law
Commission in its Two Hundred and Fifty Third Report (January, 2015) proposed a re-look of the court fee
regime by State Governments.

17
60. The observation of Hon'ble Justice M. Seetharama Murti of High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad
on the Bill is as under:-
"…Lis valuation Rules and Court fee structure shall be uniform in the entire Country and Jurisdictions
of Courts for entertaining the disputes shall be well defined without any vagueness or uncertainness
to avoid Forum Shopping and to prevent orders of remands and rehearing of the matters on technical
issues…."
61. Registrar-General of Calcutta High Court in his written submission to the Committee on the Bill stated
as under:-
"…. simplified system of valuation must be adopted otherwise valuation itself will be cumbersome
process and will invite interference of the proposed adjudicatory bodies on additional issues of
valuation…."
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
62. The Court fees in various States are governed by separate Acts which are also very low and
have not been revised for a long time due to various reasons. The minimum court fee for filing
Special Leave Petition  (SLP) in the apex court is ` ` ` ` ` 5000 only as prescribed by Supreme Court Rules,
1950 ( Amended in 2014) . The Committee is of the view that the present court fee structure is
encouraging litigants to go for appeal, thus leading to pendency and arrears in cases. The Committee
feels that initial court fee should be lower and the fee may be hiked at each stage of appeal, as in the
case of Singapore where the cost increases at each stage of appeal, to discourage unnecessary appeal.
63. The Directive Principles of State Policy under Article 39A of the Constitution provides equal
justice and free legal aid. It reads "State shall secure that the operation of legal system promotes
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable
legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not
denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities".  For fulfilling this Constitutional
obligation, the State has been providing accessibility of justice to economically unaffordable litigants
through Legal Aid schemes of Lok Adalat set-up under the 'National Legal Services Authorities Act,
1987' and such other enactments by Parliament and State Assemblies in addition to provisions of
Civil Procedure Code, 1908 enabling the Court to give exemptions of all costs of suit on proof of
inability of the party. Hence the persistent perception of judiciary and public activists that the entire
cost of running of judiciary is met by the tax payers' money also needs to be clarified to the effect
that the sovereign duty of providing Criminal Justice is different from that of Civil Dispute Resolution
system for economically affordable persons in the "Globalised Economy".  There are sections of
people ready to incur the actual cost of justice delivery system, provided there is transparency,
reliability, accountability and fast tracking of the Civil Dispute Resolution. The Committee, therefore,
recommends for institution of "Professional Cost Accountants Wing" in the Supreme Court and
High Courts to prepare a "Cost Impact" of establishing and running the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Benches in High Courts and Supreme Court to fix the court fee. Accordingly, the courts
should manage the "Justice Delivery System" by gradually reducing "Demands for Grant" from the
Consolidated Fund of India. This will lead to real "Financial Independence" to judiciary as enjoyed
in developed countries.

18
CASE MANAGEMENT HEARING AND IMPOSITION OF COST
64. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is proposed to be amended to introduce 'Case Management
Hearing' for the purpose of setting time lines for the following:-
Filing of Wr itten Statement (WS) by the defendant within 30 days from the date of service of
summon and within 120 days with the payment of cost as the Court may deem fit. However, the
defendant shall forfeit the right to file the WS after the expiry of 120 days from the date of
summon.
Written argument containing the provisions of laws being cited and citations of judgment relied upon
by the party, within four weeks prior to commencement of oral argument.
Completion of oral argument within six months from the first case management hearing.
Commercial Court/Commercial Division/Commercial Appellate Division/to pronounce judgment within
90 days from the conclusion of argument.
65. In the "case management hearing" the court shall decide the timeline for filing affidavit of evidence by
parties, dates on which evidence of witnesses to be recorded, etc. Generally, no adjournment of "case-
management hearing" to be made due to absence of Counsel but exceptionally it can be granted by the court
on the payment of cost. The court may impose exemplary cost upon the defaulting parties who wilfully or
negligently failed to disclose all documents under their possession, custody and control, pertaining to the suit.
The court may order to the unsuccessful party to pay reasonable cost inter-alia including fees and expenses
incurred on the witnesses, legal fees and other expenses.
66. The Registrar-General of Madras High Court in his written submission to the Committee on the Bill
has stated as under:-
".… to restrict the length of pleading as adopted by various commercial courts elsewhere in the
World. Likewise, the Rules can provide for restriction of time granted for arguments, subject of
course to, the discretion of the Courts concerned. This will enable to substantially reduce the number
Court hours spend on each case…."
"… till the pleadings are complete, Annexure and documents filed, the matter shall not be listed
before the Court for hearing. This would ensure that the parties to the litigation do not adopt dilatory
tactics by filing affidavit or documents across the Courts when matters set down for hearing. In fact,
in the Original Side of the High Court of Madras, a Judicial Officer in the cadre of District Judge is
appointed as a Master of the Original Side before whom the cases are listed for the purpose of
complying the requirement regarding Pleading, service of notice on the Respondents/Defendants,
Miscellaneous Applications such as to bring on record the Legal Representative of the deceased
parties etc., Apart from the Master in the Original Side, Additional Masters have been appointed to
record evidence. Hence on constitution of Commercial Division/Appellate Division the duties which
were hitherto dealt by Master/Additional Master shall be assigned to an exclusively Master Court
could be termed as Commercial Division Master who shall deal with cases which are heard by the
Commercial Division/Appellate Division…."
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
67. The Committee is of the view that best international practices in 'Case Management System'

19
needs to be introduced for ensuring expeditious disposal of commercial disputes.  Case management
system should enhance the quality, responsiveness and timeliness of Court and trained personnel
may be provided to manage these courts so as to fast track the resolution of commercial disputes.
The Committee is also of the view that adjournment should be a matter of last resort and unnecessary
adjournment should not be granted to the parties to delay a dispute resolution. The Committee,
however, suggests that there should be a provision of a fee/cost to be paid by the party seeking
adjournments beyond a definite limit and such fee/cost should progressively increase for subsequent
adjournments.
68. Under Section 35 (A) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, court can impose cost for filing
vexatious cases/claim in the courts which consume time of the courts. The Committee feels that
amount of imposition of cost should be clearly mentioned in the Act to discourage the parties and
their counsel abusing judicial processes and wasting the time of the court on tax payers' money. It is
the duty of High Courts and Supreme Court under Articles 145, 146, 227 and 229 of the Constitution.
69. The Constitution of India has given the power regarding the case management, cost
management, time management by delegating rule making powers under Articles 145, 146, 227 and
229 to the Supreme Court and High Courts. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 Order XXXVII
provides for a summary procedure. Similarly, Commercial Courts can have Order XXXVII A by
incorporating Schedule in the present Bill under Clause 17. These are under the domain of Judicial
Management and Accountability to the People of India. Parliament need not take over the Judicial
Administrative Powers by making many provisions in every legislation by giving detailed procedure
creating doubts to the people with multiplicity of procedures. British Government, Ministry of Justice,
has updated till 13th November, 2015, the Civil Rules of Practice including Digital filing. In the
United States of America, Federal & State Courts formulate Rules of Civil Procedure. The Supreme
Court of India and High Courts are already publishing the rules of procedure. In such circumstances,
it is better to leave the domain of laying procedures and accountability to the disposal of cases on
time bound case management and cost management to the judiciary and on their request, the
Parliament can bring accreditation under Art 145 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court may be
requested to formulate rules of procedure for Supreme Court and all High Courts should have
common Rules of Procedure and Practice.
INSTITUTIONAL ARBITRATION IN COMMERCIAL DISPUTE
70. During its study visit the Committee interacted with representatives of High Courts of Calcutta and
Hyderabad, wherein they suggested that mediation as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism as provided
in Section 89 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,  may be introduced to reduce pendency of cases and save
money and time of both the court and litigants.
71. The Committee during its visit to the High Court of Delhi was apprised of the excellent work done by
'Samadhan', its Mediation and Conciliation Centre in the field of mediation. The Banglore Mediation Centre of
the Karnataka High Court is also doing excellent job in the field of mediation.
72. The Registrar-General of High Court of Madhya Pradesh in his written submission to the Committee
on the Bill has stated as under:-
"….under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1995, no appellate jurisdiction under Section 37 has
been conferred to the "Court" defined under Section 2 (1) (e) thereunder. Therefore, reference of

20
"Appeals" under Sub-clause 3 of Clause 10 of the Bill, 2015, as referred above may be deleted as it
is not necessary…."
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
73. The Committee notes that National Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, Chapter VI A,
provides for Pre-Litigation Conciliation and Settlement with permanent Lok Adalat by voluntarily
surrendering right of appeal. The Committee feels that Government may contemplate a similar
provision for the Commercial disputes.
74. The appeal against the award of domestic as well as international arbitration in high value
Commercial dispute will lie to Commercial Appellate Division of High Court under Clause 10 of the
Bill. The arbitration system is a parallel to the regular courts and the commercial entities prefer the
arbitration route for expeditious disposal of commercial disputes even though that system is highly
expensive. Most of the commercial entities prefer International arbitration available in Singapore,
London, Dubai, etc. The Committee observes that the award of the arbitration should be binding on
the parties without giving the option to  the parties to challenge the same in the court of law. The
parties should decide ab initio to take the route of Commercial Court or arbitration on the commercial
disputes. The Committee, therefore, feels that institutional arbitration with accredited arbitration
may be provided to the commercial entities so that, they can avail either of those two institutions.
The Committee takes this opportunity to urge upon the Government to develop India as a hub of
institutional arbitration which can attract foreign investors to invest or even settle their dispute
within the country in a faster and reliable manner. Therefore, Clause 10 of the Bill needs revision
accordingly. The Committee further wishes that the Government should also look into the Committee's
suggestions/recommendations made in its earlier Report viz., the Ninth Report of this Committee
On The Arbitration And Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003, presented to Parliament on 4th August,
2005.

21
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee feels that the definition of commercial dispute under Clause 2 (c) of the Bill
may lead to multiple interpretations and confusion as these provisions have already been defined in
their parent Acts. Therefore, to allay the apprehensions expressed by stakeholders on the said Clause,
the Committee feels that instead of inserting all the items in the Bill, having the provisions of
commercial angle, it would be appropriate to include in the Schedule, the list of Acts which deal with
commercial transaction(s). The Union/State Government may add any exact statute which it feel to
be having commercial transaction in the Schedule of the Bill. [Para 26]
2. The State of Sikkim and Uttarakhand are having one and twenty five commercial cases in
total, respectively. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that Government should establish
Commercial Courts/Divisions on a pilot basis in some States where commercial disputes are large in
number and thereafter, it be replicated in remaining States depending upon its requirement. The
Committee feels that the Government should have collected statistical data regarding the number
of commercial suits, applications, appeals, petitions pending before the various courts in the country
to determine the financial implication on the exchequer. The Committee recommends that data of
pendency of commercial cases be obtained and financial implications on the exchequer be calculated
during the pilot phase of the execution of the Bill so as to better equip it in respect of the logistical
and financial implications once the Bill is executed. [Para 27]
3. These pilot courts should be provided with adequate funds, state of the art infrastructure and
human resource including judges and staff members. A model court fee structure may be worked
out factoring into the recurring cost of those courts. It should clearly indicate that the resolution of
a commercial dispute is a service provided by the State to a section of litigants who can very well
afford the cost of such adjudication. Such a revised court fee structure is the need of the hour. The
Committee feels that such a super specialty facility to be rendered by commercial courts could be
competitive with international institutional arbitration. [Para 28]
4. The Committee feels that the transfer of all pending commercial disputes to the proposed
Commercial Court/Division may overburden the said courts and defeat the very purpose of establishing
them. There may not be requirement of Commercial Courts in some States as they have limited
number of such cases. The Committee recommends that instead of transferring the pending cases to
Commercial Courts, a sunset clause may be inserted in the Bill whereby only fresh cases with a
pecuniary limit may be transferred to Commercial Courts. However, the litigants may be given a
choice to move Commercial Courts if the pending dispute is of commercial nature as per the Schedule
of the Bill. [Para 34]
5. Since the pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi has been enhanced to rupees two
crore from rupees twenty lakhs, the Commercial Division of High Court of Delhi may not entertain
commercial disputes upto the value of rupees two crore. Therefore, the value of dispute to be
entertained by the Commercial Division of High Court of Delhi should be more than rupees two
21

22
crore. This calls for harmonisation between the provisions relating to pecuniary jurisdiction in the
Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act, 2015 and the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015. Moreso, the valuation of property in metro
cities has increased and the cost of a two bedroom flat in those cities are generally above rupees one
crore. The Committee, therefore, feels that specified value of the commercial dispute should not be
less than rupees two crore. [Para 35]
6. The Committee also takes note of the apprehension that many cases pending in District
Courts may be transferred to the designated Commercial Court as a result of which many District
Courts may be having limited number of cases and a designated Commercial Court may be
overburdened with commercial disputes particularly when the value of commercial disputes is rupees
one crore. The Committee has been apprised by the Registrar, High court of Delhi that a designated
Commercial Court in Tis Hazari Court Complex has been made functional from 1990s. The Committee
notes that the High Court of Delhi has created a Commercial Court in Delhi on need based to fast
track those cases. Even after creation of such Commercial Court in Tis Hazari Court Complex,
pendency in six other District Courts has not been reduced. Therefore, the interest of practising
advocates would not be affected in the event of creation of designated Commercial Court. Further,
increase of specified value of commercial dispute from rupees one crore to two crore would also allay
the apprehension expressed by the legal fraternity. [Para 36]
7. The Committee observes that the power of appointment of person to the post of District
Judge in State lies with Governor of that State who exercise that power in consultation with the High
Court of the State concerned. The Clause 5(3) of the Bill, however, gives that power to Chief Justice
of the High Court concerned. This is not in conformity with provision under Article 233 of the
Constitution.  The Committee feels that the appointment of judges of Commercial Courts by the
concerned High Court will encroach upon the powers of the State Government and infringe upon the
federal structure provided under the Constitution of India. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that appointment powers of the State Government should be left as provided in the Constitution.
The Committee also takes note of the Clause 3(3) of the Ordinance issued by Government on the
23rd October, 2015. The said Clause empowers the State Government in consultation with the concerned
High Court to appoint judges of Commercial Court from the Higher Judicial Service of the State.
The Committee feels that this Clause is in conformity with the constitutional scheme. [Para 44]
8. The Committee notes that as of 1st September, 2015, out of 1017 sanctioned post of judges,
392 posts are lying vacant in various High Courts of the Country. The Committee feels that without
filling-up of these existing vacancies, the present Bill, may prove counter-productive far from achieving
its objective. Therefore, the Committee recommends to the Government to fill-up the existing
vacancies in these High Courts taking into consideration the specialised knowledge and experience
requirement for appointment. [Para 45]
9. Jurisdiction of regular courts are ousted in the commercial disputes by the specific statute.
Commercial Court is also a regular civil court; jurisdiction thereof may be ousted by invoking
Section 18 of Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 in the debt
related cases. The Committee, therefore, feels that harmonisation between the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015 and Recovery of
Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 is required so far as commercial dispute
relating to banking sector is concerned. [Para 49]

23
10. The decision/orders of six tribunals/Boards mentioned under Clause 14 of the Bill are appealable
to Commercial Appellate Division of concerned High Court. Three Tribunals viz.,  Securities Appellate
Tribunal, Competition Appellate Tribunal and Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal
are headed by sitting or retired judges of Supreme Court of India or the sitting or retired Chief
Justice of High Courts, whose decisions are appealable in Supreme Court. Therefore, the Clause 14
of the present Bill is in contravention of Section 15(z) of Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992, Section 53(T) of the Competition Act, 2002 and Section 18 of The Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India Act, 1997. Suggestions have been received that creation of so many tiers of appeal in the
case of tribunals referred to in the Bill have been increased to four as the decision of appellate
tribunals would now lie to Commercial Appellate Bench of High Court.  The cases which are fast
tracked may be stuck up in appeals. Therefore, the Committee feels that tiers of appeal should not
be more than two including tribunal also. [Para 50]
11. The Committee also notes that the Ordinance issued by the Government has omitted Clause
14 of the Bill and thereby excluded all the six Tribunals/Boards from the appeal to be heard and
disposed by the Commercial Appellate Division of the concerned High Court.  The Committee is in
agreement with such exclusion. [Para 51]
12. The Commercial District Courts for commercial matter such as Debt Relief, Intellectual
Property, SEBI, Income Tax etc. can replace the tribunals with full District Commercial Judges for
quicker and fast track remedy with statutory one appeal to Division Bench in High Court. This will
attract the investors to choose this 'Fast Track' courts rather than expensive international
Arbitration. The Committee in its Seventy-fourth Report on the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals &
Other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Bill, 2014 had noted that many posts in various tribunals
are lying vacant leading to huge number of pendency of cases. The Committee feels that once
commercial courts are created, there is no need for the tribunals system of deciding high value
commercial disputes. [Para 52]
13. The Committee, however, feels that establishment of Commercial Courts will, in no way,
infringe the rights of common/poor litigants and will not violate their human rights as part of judicial
reforms. Specialised courts and institutions similar to the  Commercial Courts are already established
and functioning for different matters like Family Court, CBI Court, Lok Adalat, Nyaya Panchayat,
etc.  The Committee recognises that it is  our constitutional obligation to provide free legal aid to
poor which is enumerated under Article 39A under Part-IV - Directive Principles of State Policy of
the Constitution. An individual can file 'Pauper Suit' under Order XXXIII, Rule 1 of Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 to avail justice without paying any court fee. National Legal Services Authority
(NALSA) has been constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 to fulfil the constitutional
objective which provide panel of lawyers to economically handicapped litigants. [Para 58]
14. The Court fees in various States are governed by separate Acts which are also very low and
have not been revised for a long time due to various reasons. The minimum court fee for filing
Special Leave Petetion  (SLP) in the apex court is  ` ` ` ` `  5000 only as prescribed by Supreme Court
Rules, 1950 ( Amended in 2014) . The Committee is of the view that the present court fee structure
is encouraging litigants to go for appeal, thus leading to pendency and arrears in cases. The Committee
feels that initial court fee should be lower and the fee may be hiked at each stage of appeal, as in
the case of Singapore where the cost increases at each stage of appeal, to discourage unnecessary
appeal. [Para 62]

24
15. The Directive Principles of State Policy under Article 39A of the Constitution provides equal
justice and free legal aid. It reads "State shall secure that the operation of legal system promotes
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable
legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not
denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities".  For fulfilling this Constitutional
obligation, the State has been  providing accessibility of justice to economically unaffordable litigants
through Legal Aid schemes of Lok Adalat set-up under the 'National Legal Services Authorities Act,
1987' and such other enactments by Parliament and State Assemblies in addition to provisions of
Civil Procedure Code, 1908 enabling the Court to give exemptions of all costs of suit on proof of
inability of the party. Hence the persistent perception of judiciary and public activists that the entire
cost of running of judiciary is met by the tax payers' money also needs to be clarified to the effect
that the sovereign duty of providing Criminal Justice is different from that of Civil Dispute Resolution
system for economically affordable persons in the "Globalised Economy".  There are sections of
people ready to incur the actual cost of justice delivery system, provided there is transparency,
reliability, accountability and fast tracking of the Civil Dispute Resolution. The Committee, therefore,
recommends for institution of "Professional Cost Accountants Wing" in the Supreme Court and
High Courts to prepare a "Cost Impact" of establishing and running the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Benches in High Courts and Supreme Court to fix the court fee. Accordingly, the courts
should manage the "Justice Delivery System" by gradually reducing "Demands for Grant" from the
Consolidated Fund of India. This will lead to real "Financial Independence" to judiciary as enjoyed
in developed countries. [Para 63]
16. The Committee is of the view that best international practices in 'Case Management System'
needs to be introduced for ensuring expeditious disposal of commercial disputes.  Case management
system should enhance the quality, responsiveness and timeliness of Court and trained personnel
may be provided to manage these courts so as to fast track the resolution of commercial disputes.
The Committee is also of the view that adjournment should be a matter of last resort and unnecessary
adjournment should not be granted to the parties to delay a dispute resolution. The Committee,
however, suggests that there should be a provision of a fee/cost to be paid by the party seeking
adjournments beyond a definite limit and such fee/cost should progressively increase for subsequent
adjournments. [Para 67]
17. Under Section 35 (A) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, court can impose cost for filing
vexatious cases/claim in the courts which consume time of the courts. The Committee feels that
amount of imposition of cost should be clearly mentioned in the Act to discourage the parties and
their counsel abusing judicial processes and wasting the time of the court on tax payers' money. It
is the duty of High Courts and Supreme Court under Ar ticles 145, 146, 227 and 229 of the
Constitution. [Para 68]
18. The Constitution of India has given the power regarding the case management, cost
management, time management by delegating rule making powers under Articles 145, 146, 227 and
229 to the Supreme Court and High Courts. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 Order XXXVII
provides for a summary procedure. Similarly, Commercial Courts can have Order XXXVII A by
incorporating Schedule in the present Bill under Clause 17. These are under the domain of Judicial
Management and Accountability to the People of India. Parliament need not take over the Judicial

25
Administrative Powers by making many provisions in every legislation by giving detailed procedure
creating doubts to the people with multiplicity of procedures. British Government, Ministry of Justice,
has updated till 13th November, 2015, the Civil Rules of Practice including Digital filing. In the
United States of America, Federal and State Courts formulate Rules of Civil Procedure. The Supreme
Court of India and High Courts are already publishing the rules of procedure. In such circumstances,
it is better to leave the domain of laying procedures and accountability to the disposal of cases on
time bound case management and cost management to the judiciary and on their request, the
Parliament can bring accreditation under Art 145 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court may be
requested to formulate rules of procedure for Supreme Court and all High Courts should have
common Rules of Procedure and Practice. [Para 69]
19. The Committee notes that National Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, Chapter VI A,
provides for Pre-Litigation Conciliation and Settlement with permanent Lok Adalat by voluntarily
surrendering right of appeal. The Committee feels that Government may contemplate a similar
provision for the Commercial disputes. [Para 73]
20. The appeal against the award of domestic as well as international arbitration in high value
commercial dispute will lie to Commercial Appellate Division of High Court under Clause 10 of the
Bill. The arbitration system is a parallel to the regular courts and the commercial entities prefer the
arbitration route for expeditious disposal of commercial disputes even though that system is highly
expensive. Most of the commercial entities prefer International arbitration available in Singapore,
London, Dubai, etc. The Committee observes that the award of the arbitration should be binding on
the parties without giving the option to  the parties to challenge the same in the court of law. The
parties should decide ab initio to take the route of Commercial Court or arbitration on the commercial
disputes. The Committee, therefore, feels that institutional arbitration with accredited arbitration
may be provided to the commercial entities so that, they can avail either of those two institutions.
The Committee takes this opportunity to urge upon the Government to develop India as a hub of
institutional arbitration which can attract foreign investors to invest or even settle their dispute
within the country in a faster and reliable manner. Therefore, Clause 10 of the Bill needs revision
accordingly. The Committee further wishes that the Government should also look into the Committee's
suggestions/recommendations made in its earlier Report viz., the Ninth Report of this Committee
on the Arbitration And Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003, presented to Parliament on 4th August,
2005. [Para 74]

MINUTES

29
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 18th May, 2015 in Committee Room G 074, Parliament House
Library, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Rajani Patil
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
7. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
8. Shri B.V. Naik
9. Shri Vincent H. Pala
10. Dr. A. Sampath
11. Shri V araprasad Rao Velagapalli
12. Dr. Anshul Verma
13. Shri Tariq Anwar
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
1.  Shri D. Bhardwaj, Additional Secretary
2.  Shri M.K. Khandelwal, Additional Govt. Advocate
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. He then apprised the Committee
that the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill,

30
2015 had been referred to this Committee for examination and report by 29th June, 2015.  He underlined that
Commercial Court at district level, Commercial Division in certain High Courts and Commercial Appellate
Division in all High Courts have been proposed as exclusive channel for expeditious disposal of commercial
disputes. The Committee decided to hear views of Bar Councils, State High Court's Bar Associations, State
Government, Financial institutions, Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Public Sector/Statutory bodies
amongst others on the various provisions of the Bill. The Committee also decided to visit Kolkata, Mumbai,
Hyderabad, Tirupati and Chennai from 14th to 23rd June, 2015. The Committee further desired that a press
communiqué may be issued in print and electronic media inviting feedback/comments/suggestions from the
stakeholders.
 (After the arrival of the witnesses)
3. The Chairman welcomed the Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and other senior
officers of the Ministry of Law and Justice to the meeting. He requested the Additional Secretary to touch
upon financial impact of the Bill on the exchequer for creation of necessary infrastructure, facility and
manpower for setting up of such courts in States and number of pending cases to be transferred to Commercial
Benches. He added that percentage of commercial suits to total pending cases, break-up of commercial cases
pending in the High Courts may be provided to the Committee. He also wanted Additional Secretary to explain
the legal feasibility for setting up of Commercial Benches in High Courts of Delhi, Madras and Himachal
Pradesh without raising their pecuniary jurisdiction to Rupees one crore. He also desired to know if the
provision of appointment of judges of Commercial Courts by the concerned High Courts was legally feasible
in view of Articles 233 and 234 of the Constitution of India.
4. Addl. Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, in his deposition stated that the Bill was introduced to
deal with high value business disputes. He stated that the commercial dispute has been defined to mean
dispute arising out of ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers, financiers, traders, insurance and other
areas. He added that almost all the High Courts have supported the Bill and in the present Bill, improvements
have been made in certain areas of the the Commercial Division of High Courts Bill, 2009.  He added that once
approved by Parliament all pending commercial cases involving a claim of Rupees one crore and above in the
High Courts and civil courts will be transferred to the relevant Commercial Division/Courts. He added that
Commercial Divisions will be set up in those high courts which are already exercising ordinary original civil
jurisdiction. He added that the Ministry does not have details of pending suits in all High Courts of the
Country; however, he furnished details of pending cases in High Courts which has original jurisdiction. On
the question of financial implications to the Government due to establishment of Commercial Divisions/
Benches and other issues, he added that the Department will work out on the issue.
5. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries. Some Members raised queries on the following issues:-
(i) Legislative competence of Parliament to legislate Clause 5 of the Bill which is at variance
with Articles 233 and 234 of the Constitution.
(ii) Need for making court fee structure uniform and for recovering the cost from the parties
to the disputes and whether the Bill should provide certain guidelines in this regard for
State Governments.
(iii) Comparison of Commercial courts in UK, USA and other South Asian countries with the
provisions of the Bill.

31
6. Additional Secretary in his reply mentioned about Singapore Model of Court fee however, he
could not respond to some other  queries and agreed to send written replies in respect of those quer ies.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4:30 P.M. to meet again on 26th May, 2015.

32
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 10th August, 2015 in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
7. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
8. Shri B.V. Naik
9. Dr. A. Sampath
10. Shri Bharat Singh
11. Shri Udhayakumar M.
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Adv. Joice George
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Official witnesses
I. Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary; and
2. Shri M. Khandelwal, Additional Govt. Advocate.
II. Non-official witnesses
Shri D. Sengupta, Registrar-cum-Additional Director, Indian Council of Arbitration, New
Delhi.
32

33
2. Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
and Registrar-cum-Additional Director, Indian Council of Arbitration. In his opening observation, the Chairman
flagged following points for the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs to respond in his deposition:-
(i) Feasibility of listing Statutes having provisions on commercial matters in the Schedule of
the Bill in lieu of classifying commercial disputes in the definition clause of the Bill;
(ii) Revision of court fee for commercial court to make those courts self-sustainable;
(iii) Uniform court fee structure for Commercial Court/Division to discourage Bench-hunting;
(iv) Reducing tiers of appeal in the case of Tribunals mentioned under Clause 14 of the Bill to
avoid unnecessary delays;
(v) Enhancement of specified value of commercial disputes from rupees one crore to two
crores in the light of recent increase of pecuniary jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi to
Rupees two crore.
(vi) Inconsistency between Clause 5 and Articles 233 & 234 of Constitution relating to the
appointment of judges in commercial court.
3. The Secretary in his deposition submitted that timely resolution of commercial dispute had been
considered essential for development of economy as a lot of revenue is locked-up in those disputes.  A
separate set of mechanism with distinct procedure (i.e., case management hearing) with stipulated timelines
for fast-tracking of commercial disputes had been proposed on the basis of recommendations of Law
Commission of India contained in its 253rd Report.  He added that forthcoming amendments to the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 and the instant legislation would provide robust legal system to boost confidence
of foreign and domestic investors.  He was optimistic that the procedures suggested for commercial court to
reduce delays would be extended to remaining civil litigations in future as a measure of judicial reform.
3.1 On the issue of definition of commercial dispute, he was of the view that the proposed definition
happened to be quite broad-based and inter alia included the matters relating to ordinary commercial transaction,
joint venture, partnership agreement, Intellectual Property Rights, insurance, arbitration, etc.  But the suggestion
of the Committee for enlisting the relevant Statutes in Appendix of the Bill is worthy of consideration by the
Ministry.  He added that Commercial Court/Division have been forbidden to entertain and decide suits in
respect of which jurisdiction of Civil Courts is barred under specific statutes.  But appeal from certain
appellate Tribunal would lie to Commercial Appellate Division of High Court under Clause 19 of the Bill.
3.2 As to specified value of the commercial dispute, he was of the view that lower limit of the dispute
had been proposed to be Rupees One Crore which is subject to revision depending upon the requirement.
3.3 Regarding inconsistency between Clause 5 of the Bill and Articles 233 & 234 of the Constitution, he
submitted that the Clause had been drafted by the Law Commission of India but intention of Ministry was to
enable the Chief Justice of High Court to pick up District Judges having aptitude, proficiency in commercial
and corporate law for the commercial courts.
3.4 On the issue of Court Fee, the Secretary apprised the Committee that as it falls within the exclusive
domain of State Legislatures, any upward revision in the court fee have to be undertaken by the concerned
State.
4. The response of Law Secretary to the rationality of retaining original side jurisdiction of High Court

34
of Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Delhi and Himachal Pradesh was sought for.  The opinion of the Secretary was
also sought for on the possibility of assigning original side jurisdiction to all High Courts to decide high value
commercial suits as recommended by Law Commission of India in their 188th Report.  Doubts were expressed
about the implementation of the provision of the proposed legislation in right earnest.  In that context, non-
adherence of timelines stipulated in special enactments to decide election suits, recovery of bank loans, etc.,
was cited and delay have been observed in those cases due to practical reasons.  A view was expressed that
expeditious trial of criminal cases should given utmost priority as a large number of undertrials have been
languishing in various jails.
5. Law Secretary, while responding to queries of the Committee, submitted that Law Commission of
India is examining criminal justice reform.  He was of the view that Special Courts with separate procedure
for fast tracking of high value commercial suits would stand judicial scrutiny.  He sought time to send written
submission in report of other points raised.
(Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs then withdrew)
6. The Chairman welcomed Shri D. Sengupta, Registrar-cum-Additional Director, Indian Council of
Arbitration to the meeting. He requested the non-official witness to present his views on the Commercial
Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015.
7. Shri D. Sengupta submitted that timely adjudication of commercial disputes is the need of hour and
the business and industrial community is very optimistic about the present Bill. He opined that the establishment
of commercial courts will ease the burden on the judicial system. He also added that the Courts should have
adequately trained judges as the commercial cases are technical in nature. He added that there should be some
recognition of institutional arbitration in the Bill.
8. Members sought clarifications on certain issues arising out of the presentations. The witnesses
responded to some of the queries and the Chairman directed them to give written clarifications on issues not
responded to during the interaction.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 3.53 
P.M.

35
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 26th November, 2015 in Room no. 63, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shrimati Rajani Patil
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
7. Adv. Joice George
8. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Shri Vincent H. Pala
10. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
11. Shri Bharat Singh
12. Shri M. Udhayakumar
SECRETARIAT
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
A. Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Law Secretary;
2. Shri Dinesh Bhardwaj, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri M. Khandelwal, Additional Government Advocate; and
4. Shri Rajveer Singh Verma, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
B. Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri G . Naryana Raju, Secretary;
2. Ms. Reeta Vasistha, Additional Secretary;
35

36
3. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
C. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions (Department of Personnel and
Training)
1. Shri Sanjay Kothari, Secretary;
2. Shri T. Jacob, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri Jishnu Barua, Joint Secretary;
4. Ms. Meera Mohanty, Deputy Secretary; and
5. Shri A.K. Roy, Deputy Secretary.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. He then apprised the Committee
that ***, Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department have been invited to consult them on
certain major issues on  ***.  He added that Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs has been invited to
apprise the Committee of the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division
of High Courts Ordinance, 2015 vis-a-vis the Bill.
 (After the arrival of the witnesses)
A.  * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
4.1. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
B. The Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate Division of High
Courts Bill, 2015
7. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration of the Commercial Divisions and Commercial
Appellate Division High Courts Bill, 2015. The Chairman apprised that the Commercial Courts, Commercial
Divisions and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015 had been promulgated by
President of India on 23rd October, 2015 to replace the Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and
Commercial Appellate Division High Courts Bill, 2015. The Chairman apprised that the Draft Report on the
Bill had been under final stage of preparation which might be adopted by 30th November, 2015. He then
requested Secretary to apprise the Committee of the provisions of Commercial Courts, Commercial Division
and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015 vis-à-vis that of the Bill.
8. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs apprised that the the Commercial Courts, Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015 was brought to give effect to
Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act, 2015, wherein the Ordinary Original pecuniary Jurisdiction of Delhi
High Court had been enhanced from ` 20 lakhs to ` 2 crore, along with a provision to transfer pending cases
from Delhi High Court to District Courts. He added that in the event of bringing into force of the Act, all
disputes of Rupees Two crore and above would have to be transferred to District Courts. However, with the
*** Relate to other matters.

37
enactment of Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts
Bill, 2015 all commercial disputes of Rupees One crore and above would be taken back from District Courts
to Commercial Bench of High Court of Delhi due to change in pecuniary jurisdiction which was likely to
create confusion and delay in disposal of cases. He added that it was due to this contradiction that both the
Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act, 2015 and the establishment Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions
and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance into effect was brought simultaneously by the
Government.
9. The Secretary added that the views that emerged during the examination of the Bill by the Committee
had been incorporated in the Ordinance.  He added that a separate Clause for the constitution of a Commercial
Court at the District level and constitution of a Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division at the
High Court level has been provided in the Ordinance and the power to appoint judges to the Commercial
Courts has been given to the concerned State Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court. Clause 14 of the pending Bill which dealt with appeals or a writ petition filed in the
High Court against the orders of certain tribunals has also been omitted in the Ordinance.  He added that
Clauses 23 and 24 of the Bill had been omitted as they became redundant due to changes made in the Clause
5 of the Bill.
10. Members sought clarifications on certain issues arising out of the presentations. The witnesses
responded to some of the queries and the Chairman directed them to give written clarifications on issues not
responded to, during the interaction.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. V erbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
12. The meeting adjourned at 5.54 
P.M.

38
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law
and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8th December, 2015 in Room No. '67', First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shrimati Rajani Patil
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
11. Shri Vincent H. Pala
12. Dr. A. Sampath
13. Shri Bharat Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the consideration
and adoption of the draft report on the Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate
Division High Courts Bill, 2015. Members deliberated on the issues raised, and thereafter, the report was
adopted by the Committee.
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to both Houses of Parliament on the 10th December,
2015. It authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Majeed Memon to present the Report to Rajya
Sabha and Shri P.P. Chaudhary and in his absence, Adv. Joice George to lay the same in Lok Sabha.
4. The meeting adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.
38

39
ANNEXURES

41
ANNEXURE - I
As introduced in the Rajya Sabha
Bill No. XXV of 2015
THE COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISION AND
COMMERCIAL APPELLA TE DIVISION OF HIGH COURTS
BILL, 2015
———–——
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
———–——
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
2. Short title, extent and commencement.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION OF COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND
COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISIONS
3. Constitution of Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate Divisions.
4. Nomination of judges to the Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Divisions in High Courts.
5. Appointment, qualification, terms and conditions of judges to Commercial Courts.
6. Jurisdiction of Commercial Court.
7. Jurisdiction of Commercial Divisions of High Courts.
8. Bar against revision application or petition against an interlocutory order.
9. Transfer of suit if counter-claim in a commercial dispute is of Specified Value.
10. Jurisdiction in respect of arbitration matters.
11. Bar of jurisdiction of Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions.

42
CHAPTER III
SPECIFIED VALUE
12. Determination of Specified Value.
CHAPTER IV
APPEALS
13. Appeals from decrees of Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions.
14. Appeals or writ petitions in case of certain Tribunals.
15. Expeditious disposal of appeals.
CHAPTER V
T
RANSFER OF P ENDING S UITS
16. Transfer of pending cases.
CHAPTER VI
AMENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
17. Amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in its application to commercial disputes.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
18. Collection and disclosure of data by Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and Commercial
Appellate Divisions.
19. Power of High Court to issue directions.
20. Infrastructure facilities.
21. Training and continuous educations.
22. Act to have overriding effect.
23. Power of Central Government to make rules.
24. Laying of rules before Parliament.
25. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.

43
43
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
BiII No. XXV of 2015
THE COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISION AND
COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISION OF
HIGH COURTS BILL, 2015
A
Bill
to provide for the constitution of Commercial Courts, Commercial Division
and Commercial Appellate Division in the High Courts for adjudicating
commercial disputes and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Commercial Courts, Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Short title
extent and
commence-
ment

44
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different High Courts
and for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such
provision to the High Court or to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to that High Court or the commencement of that
provision:
Provided further that no notification under this sub-section shall be
issued in relation to a High Court unless the Central Government has consulted
the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court and the concerned State
Government or State Governments.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Commercial Appellate Division" means the Commercial Appellate
Division in a High Court constituted under sub-section (3) of section 3;
(b) "Commercial Court" means the Commercial Court constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 3;
(c) "commercial dispute" means a dispute arising out of-
(i) ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers, financiers and
traders such as those relating to mercantile documents, including
enforcement and interpretation of such documents;
(ii) export or import of merchandise or services;
(iii) issues relating to admiralty and maritime law;
(iv) transactions relating to aircraft, aircraft engines, aircraft
equipment and helicopters, including sales, leasing and financing
of the same;
(v) carriage of goods;
(vi) construction and infrastructure contracts, including
tenders;
(vii) agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively
in trade or commerce;
(viii) franchising agreements;
(ix) distribution and licensing agreements;
(x) management and consultancy agreements;
(xi) joint venture agreements;
(xii) shareholders agreements;
(xiii) subscription and investment agreements pertaining to the
services industry including outsourcing services and financial
services;
Definitions

45
(xiv) mercantile agency and mercantile usage;
(xv) partnership agreements;
(xvi) technology development agreements;
(xvii) intellectual property rights relating to registered and
unregistered trademarks, copyright, patent, design, domain names,
geographical indications and semiconductor integrated circuits;
(xviii) agreements for sale of goods or provision of services;
(xix) exploitation of oil and gas reserves or other natural
resources including electromagnetic spectrum;
(xx) insurance and re-insurance;
(xxi) contracts of agency relating to any of the above, or relating
to such other commercial disputes as may be prescribed; and
(xxii) such other commercial disputes as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— A commercial dispute shall not cease to be a commercial
dispute merely because—
(a) it also involves action for recovery of immovable property or
for realisation of monies out of immovable property given as security
or involves any other relief pertaining to immovable property;
(b) one of the contracting parties is the State or any of its agencies
or instrumentalities, or a private body carrying out public functions;
(d) "Commercial Division" means the Commercial Division in a
High Court constituted under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(e) "District Judge" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (a) of article 236 of the Constitution of India;
(f) "document" means any matter expressed or described upon any
substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or electronic means,
or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which
may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter;
(g) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the expression "notify" with its cognate meanings and grammatical
variations shall be construed accordingly;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made by the Central
Government;
(i) "Schedule" means the Schedule appended to the Act; and
(j) "Specified V alue", in relation to a commercial dispute, shall mean
the value of the subject matter in respect of a suit as determined in

46
accordance with section 12 which shall not be less than one crore
rupees or such higher value, as may be prescribed.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but
defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that
Code and the Act.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION OF COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND
COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISIONS
3. (l) (a) In all States or Union territories where the High Court does
not have ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State Government may,
after consultation with the concerned High Court, by notification, constitute
such number of Commercial Courts, as it may deem necessary, for the
purpose of exercising the jurisdiction conferred on those Courts by the
Act.
(b) In all States or Union territories where the High Court has ordinary
original civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, after consultation
with the concerned High Court, by notification, constitute such number
of Commercial Courts, as it may deem necessary, for the purpose of
exercising the jurisdiction conferred on those Courts by the Act.
(c) The Commercial Courts as referred to in clause (a) shall consist
of such number of judges as may be appointed in accordance with the
provisions of section 5.
(d) The Commercial Courts as referred to in clause (b) shall consist
of such number of judges as may be appointed in accordance with the
provisions of section 5.
(2)( a) In all High Courts having ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the
State Government may, after consultation with the concerned High Court,
by notification, constitute a "Commercial Division" of that High Court.
(b) The Commercial Division of High Court shall consist of such
number of judges as may be determined from time to time by the Chief
Justice of such High Court.
(3)( a) The State Government shall, immediately after issuing notification
under sub-sections (1) and (2), constitute a "Commercial Appellate Division"
of that High Court.
(b) The Commercial Appellate Division shall have one or more
Division Benches as 10 may be determined from time to time by the
Chief Justice of such High Court.
Constitution of
Commercial
Courts, Com-
mercial Divi-
sions and Com-
mercial Appel-
late Divisions.
5 of 1908
1 of 1872.

47
4. (1) The Chief Justice of the concerned High Court shall nominate
such number of Judges of the High Court as required to be Judges of the
Commercial Division or Commercial Appellate Division of such High Court.
(2) The Judges to be nominated for the Commercial Division or the
Commercial Appellate Division shall have experience in dealing with
commercial disputes and such nomination shall be for a period of two
years or such other period as may be determined by the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court.
5. ( 1) The Judge of a Commercial Court shall be appointed by the
concerned High Court in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where more than one judge is appointed to a Commercial Court,
the senior most judge shall be designated as "Principal Judge" and shall
have such powers and functions in relation to the Commercial Court, as
the Principal District Judge has for the purposes of the administration of
the District Court.
(3) No person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Judge of a Commercial
Court unless such person—
(a) is qualified to be appointed as a District Judge and has experience
in dealing the matters relating to commercial disputes; or
(b) has for at least seven years held a judicial office in the territory
of India or the office of a member of a tribunal or any post under the
Union or a State requiring special knowledge of law.
(4) The terms and other conditions of service of the judges of the
Commercial Court shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that such terms and conditions of service for judges of the
Commercial Court shall not be less than that of the post of the Principal
District Judge or any other post in the judicial service equivalent to the
Principal District Judge in that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
6. The Commercial Court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits and
applications relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value arising
out of the entire territory of the State over which it has been vested territorial
jurisdiction.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a commercial dispute
shall be considered to arise out of the entire territory of the State over
which a Commercial Court has been vested jurisdiction, if the suit or
application relating to such commercial dispute has been instituted as per
the provisions of sections 16 to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
7. All s uits and applications relating to commercial disputes of a
Specified Value filed in a High Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction
Nomination of
judges to Com-
mercial Divi-
sion and  Com-
mercial Appel-
late Divisions in
High Courts.
Appointment,
qualification,
terms and con-
ditions of judges
to Commercial
Courts.
Jurisdiction of
Commercial
Court.
Jurisdiction of
Commercial
5 of 1908.

48
shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division of that High
Court:
Provided that all suits and applications relating to commercial disputes,
stipulated by an Act to lie in a court not inferior to a District Court, and filed
on the original side of the High Court, shall be heard and disposed of by the
Commercial Division of the High Court:
Provided further that all suits and applications transferred to the High
Court by virtue of sub-section ( 4) of section 22 of the Designs Act, 2000
or section 104 of the Patents Act, 1970 shall be heard and disposed of by
the Commercial Division of the High Court in all the areas over which the
High Court exercises ordinary original civil jurisdiction.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, no civil revision application or petition shall be entertained
against any interlocutory order of a Commercial Court, including an order
on the issue of jurisdiction, and any such challenge, subject to the provisions
of section 13, shall be raised only in an appeal against the decree of the
Commercial Court.
9. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in the event that a counter-claim filed in a suit before a
civil court relating to a commercial dispute is of Specified Value, such suit
shall be transferred by the civil court to the Commercial Court or Commercial
Division, as the case may be, having territorial jurisdiction over such suit.
(2) In the event that such suit is not transferred in the manner
contemplated in sub-section (1), the Commercial Appellate Division of the
High Court exercising supervisory jurisdiction over the civil court in question
may, on the application of any of the parties to the suit, withdraw such suit
pending before the civil court and transfer the same for trial or disposal to
the Commercial Court or Commercial Division or, as the case may be,
having territorial jurisdiction over such suit, and such order of transfer
shall be final and binding.
10. Where the subject matter of an arbitration is a commercial dispute
of a Specified Value and—
(1) if such arbitration is an international commercial arbitration, all
applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions
of the  Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that have been filed in a High
Court, shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Appellate Division
where such Commercial Appellate Division has been constituted in such
High Court;
(2) if such arbitration is other than an international commercial
arbitration, all applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under
Divisions of
High Court.
16 of 2000.
39 of 1970.
5 of 1908.
26 of 1996.
Bar against
revision appli-
cation or peti-
tion against an
interlocutory
order.
Transfer of suit
if counter-claim
in a commercial
dispute is of
Specified Value.
Jurisdiction in
respect of arbi-
tration matters.

49
the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that have been
filed on the original side of the High Court, shall be heard and disposed of
by the Commercial Appellate Division where such Commercial Appellate
Division has been constituted in such High Court; and
(3) if such arbitration is other than an international commercial
arbitration, all applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under
the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that would
ordinarily lie before any principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a
district (not being a High Court) shall be filed, heard and disposed of by the
Commercial Court exercising territorial jurisdiction over such arbitration
where such Commercial Court has been constituted.
11.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a Commercial
Court or a Commercial Division shall not entertain or decide any suit,
application or proceedings relating to any commercial dispute in respect of
which the jurisdiction of the civil court is either expressly or impliedly
barred under any other law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER III
S
PECIFIED VALUE
12. ( 1) The specified value of the subject matter of the commercial
dispute in a suit, appeal or application shall be determined in the following
manner:-
(a) where the relief sought in a suit or application is for recovery of
money, the money sought to be recovered in the suit or application
inclusive of interest, if any, computed up to the date of filing of the suit
or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account for
determining such specified value;
(b) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to
movable property or to a right therein, the market value of the movable
property as on the date of filing of the suit, appeal or application, as the
case may be, shall be taken into account for determining such specified
value;
(c) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to
immovable property or to a right therein, the market value of the
immovable property, as on the date of filing of the suit, appeal or
application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account for
determining specified value;
(d) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to
any other intangible right, the market value of the said right as estimated
by the plaintiff shall be taken into account for determining specified
value; and
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
Bar of jurisdic-
tion of Com-
mercial Courts
and Commercial
Divisions.
Determination
of Specified
Value.

50
(e) where the counter-claim is raised in any suit, appeal or
application, the value of the subject matter of the commercial dispute
in such counter-claim as on the date of the counter-claim shall be taken
into acc ount.
(2) The aggregate value of the claim and counter-claim, if any, as set
out in the statement of claim and the counter-claim, if any, in an arbitration
of a commercial dispute shall be the basis for determining whether such
arbitration is subject to the jurisdiction of Commercial Court, Commercial
Division or Commercial Appellate Division, as the case may be.
(3) No appeal or civil revision application under section 115 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as the case may be, shall lie from an order
of a Commercial Court or Commercial Division finding that it has jurisdiction
to hear a commercial dispute under this Act.
CHAPTER IV
APPEAL
13. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commercial Court
or Commercial Division of a High Court may appeal to the Commercial
Appellate Division of that High Court within a period of sixty days from the
date of judgment or order, as the case may be:
Provided that an appeal shall lie from such orders passed by a Commercial
Court or Commercial Division that are specifically enumerated under Order
XLIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as amended by this Act and
section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force or Letters Patent of a High Court, no appeal shall lie from any
order or decree of a Commercial Court or Commercial Division otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
14. An appeal or a writ petition filed in a High Court against the orders
of the,—
(a) Competition Appellate Tribunal;
(b) Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal;
(c) Intellectual Property Appellate Board;
(d) Company Law Board or the National Company Law Tribunal;
(e) Securities Appellate Tribunal;
(f) Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal,
shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Appellate Division of
Appeals from
decrees of Com-
mercial Courts
and Commercial
Divisions.
Appeals or writ
petitions in case
of certain Tribu-
nals.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
26 of 1996.

51
such High Court, if the subject matter of such appeal or writ petition relates
to a commercial dispute.
15. The Commercial Appellate Division shall endeavour to dispose of
appeals filed before it within a period of six months from the date of filing
of such appeal.
CHAPTER V
TRANSFER OF P ENDING S UITS
16. ( 1) All suits and applications, including applications under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of
a Specified Value pending in a High Court where a Commercial Division has
been constituted, shall be transferred to the Commercial Division.
(2) All suits and applications, including applications under the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified
Value pending in any civil court in any district or area in respect of which a
Commercial Court has been constituted, shall be transferred to such
Commercial Court:
Provided that no suit or application where the final judgment has been
reserved by the Court prior to the constitution of the Commercial Division
or the Commercial Court shall be transferred either under sub-section ( 1)
or sub-section ( 2).
(3) Where any suit or application, including an application under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of
Specified Value shall stand transferred to the Commercial Division or
Commercial Court under sub-section (1) or section (2), the provisions of
this Act shall apply to those procedures that were not complete at the time
of transfer.
(4) The Commercial Division or Commercial Court, as the case may
be, may hold case management hearings in respect of such transferred suit
or application in order to prescribe new timelines or issue such further
directions as may be necessary for a speedy and efficacious disposal of
such suit or application in accordance with Order XIV A of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided that the proviso to sub-rule ( 1) of rule 1 of Order V of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall not apply to such transferred suit or
application and the court may, in its discretion, prescribe a new time period
within which the written statement shall be filed.
(5) In the event that such suit or application is not transferred in the
manner specified in sub-section ( 1), (2) or (3), the Commercial Appellate
Division of the High Court may, on the application of any of the parties to
Expeditious
disposal   of
appeals.
Transfer of
pending cases.26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

52
the suit, withdraw such suit or application from the court before which it is
pending and transfer the same for trial or disposal to the Commercial Division
or Commercial Court, as the case may be, having territorial jurisdiction
over such suit, and such order of transfer shall be final and binding.
CHAPTER VI
A
MENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
17. (1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall, in
their application to any suit in respect of a commercial dispute of a Specified
Value, stand amended in the manner as specified in the Schedule.
(2) The Commercial Division and Commercial Court shall follow the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as amended by this Act, in
the trial of a suit in respect of a commercial dispute of a Specified Value.
(3) Where any provision of any rule of the jurisdictional High Court or
any amendment to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, by the State
Government is in conflict with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, as amended by this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure
as amended by this Act shall prevail.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
18. The Statistical data regarding the number of suits, applications,
appeals or writ petitions filed before the Commercial Court, Commercial
Division, or Commercial Appellate Division, as the case may be, the
pendency of such cases, the status of each case, and the number of cases
disposed of, shall be maintained and updated every month by each
Commercial Court, Commercial Division, Commercial Appellate Division
and shall be published on the website of the relevant High Court.
19. The High Court may, by notification, issue practice directions to
supplement the provisions of Chapter II of this Act or the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 in so far as such provisions apply to the hearing of
commercial disputes of a Specified V alue.
20. The State Government shall provide necessary infrastructure to
facilitate the working of a Commercial Court or a Commercial Division of
a High Court.
21. The State Government may, in consultation with the High Court,
establish necessary facilities providing for training of Judges who may be
appointed to the Commercial Court, Commercial Division or the Commercial
Appellate Division in a High Court.
Amendments
to Code  of
Civil Procedure,
1908   in   its
application to
commercial
disputes.
5 of 1908.
Collection and
disclosure of
data by Com-
mercial Courts,
Commercial
Divisions and
Commercial
Appellate Divi-
sions.
Power of High
Court to issue
directions.
Infrastructure
facilities.
Training and
continuous
educations.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

53
22. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have
effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any
other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by
virtue of any law for the time being in force other than this Act.
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the provisions contained in
sub-section ( 1), such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of appointment of Judge of a Commercial Court
under sub-section ( 1) of section 5;
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Judges of the
Commercial Court under sub-section ( 4) of section 5; and
(c) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in
respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
24. Every rule made and every notification issued under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rules or notifications, as the
case may be, or both Houses agree that the rules or notifications, as the
case may be, should not be made or issued, the rule or notification, as
the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or notification, as the case
may be.
25. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power of Cen-
tral Government
to make rules.
Laying of rules
and notificia-
tions before
Parliament.
Power to
remove difficul-
ties.

54
TIIE SCHEDULE
(See section 17)
1. In section 26 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereafter referred
to as the Code), in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that such an affidavit shall be in the form and manner as
prescribed under Order VI, rule 15A".
2. For section 35 of the Code, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:-
"35. (1) In relation to any commercial dispute, the Court, notwithstanding
anything costs contained in any other law for the time being in force or
rule, has the discretion to determine:
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;
(b) the quantum of those costs; and
(c) when they are to be paid.
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause ( a), the expression "costs"
shall mean reasonable costs relating to—
(i) the fees and expenses of the witnesses incurred;
(ii) legal fees and expenses incurred; and
(iii) any other expenses incurred in connection with the proceedings.
(2) If the Court decides to make an order for payment of costs, the
general rule is that the unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay the costs
of the successful party:
Provided that the Court may make an order deviating from the general
rule for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Illustration
The Plaintiff, in his suit, seeks a money decree for breach of contract,
and damages. The Court holds that the Plaintiff is entitled to the money
decree. However, it returns a finding that the claim for damages is frivolous
and vexatious.
In such circumstances the Court may impose costs on the Plaintiff,
despite the Plaintiff being the successful party, for having raised frivolous
claims for damages.
(3) In making an order for the payment of costs, the Court shall have
regard to the following circumstances, including—
Amendment of
section 26.
Substitution of
new section for
section 35.
Costs.
5 of 1908.

55
(a) the conduct of the parties;
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that
party has not been wholly successful;
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counter claim leading
to delay in the disposal  of the case;
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle is made by a party and
unreasonably refused by the other party; and
(e) whether the party had made a frivolous claim and instituted a
vexatious proceeding wasting the time of the Court.
(4) The orders which the Court may make under this provision include
an order that a party must pay—
(a) a proportion of another party's costs;
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party's costs;
(c) costs from or until a certain date;
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;
(f) costs relating to a distinct part of the proceedings; and
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.
3. In section 35A of the Code, sub-section ( 2) shall be omitted.
4. In the First Schedule to the Code,—
(A) in the Order V , in rule 1, in sub-rule (1), for the second proviso,
the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:–
"Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the
written statement  within the said period of thirty days, he shall be
allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as may be
specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and
on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but which shall
not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of service
of summons. On expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date
of service of  summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file
the written statement and the Court shall not allow the written
statement to be taken on record.";
(B) in Order VI,–
(i) after rule 3, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:–
"3A. In a commercial dispute, where forms of pleadings
have been prescribed under the High Court rules or Practice
Amendment of
section 35A.
Amendment of
First Schedule.
Forms of plead-
ing in Commer-
cial Courts.

56
Directions made for the purposes of such commercial disputes,
pleadings shall be in such forms.";
(ii) after rule 15, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:–
"15A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 15,
every pleading in a Commercial Dispute shall be verified by an
affidavit in the  manner and form prescribed in the Appendix to
this Schedule.
(2) An affidavit under sub-rule (1) above shall be signed by
the party or by one of the parties to the proceedings, or by any
other person on behalf of such party or parties who is proved
to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts
of the case and who is duly authorised by such party or parties.
(3) Where a pleading is amended, the amendments must
be verified in the form and manner referred to in sub-rule ( 1)
unless the Court orders otherwise.
(4) Where a pleading is not verified in the manner provided
under sub-rule (1), the party shall not be permitted to rely on
such pleading as evidence or any of the matters set out therein.
(5) The Court may strike out a pleading which is not verified
by a Statement of Truth, namely, the affidavit set out in the
Appendix to this Schedule.";
(C) in Order VII, after rule 2, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely:–
"2A. (1) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall contain
a statement to that effect along with the details set out under sub-
rules (2) and ( 3).
(2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether
the plaintiff is seeking interest in relation to a commercial transaction
within the meaning of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 and, furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the terms
of a contract or under an Act, in which case the Act is to be specified
in the plaint; or on some other basis and shall state the basis of that.
(3) The pleadings shall also state —
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed;
(b) the date from which it is claimed;
(c) the date to which it is calculated;
(d) the total amount of interest claimed to the date of
calculation; and
V erification of
pleadings in a
commercial
dispute.
5 of 1908.
Where interest
is sought in the
suit.

57
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after that date.";
(D) in Order VIII,–
(i) in rule 1, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:–
"Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written
statement within the said period of thirty days, he shall be
allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as may
be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing
and on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but
which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from
the date of service of summons. On expiry of one hundred
twenty days from the date of service of summons, the defendant
shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and the Court
shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.";
(ii) after rule 3, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:–
"3A. (1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub-
rules (2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of this rule.
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state which
of the allegations in the particulars of plaint he denies, which
allegations he is unable to admit or deny, but which he requires
the plaintiff to prove, and which allegations he admits.
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a
plaint, he must state his reasons for doing so and if he intends
to put forward a different version of events from that given by
the plaintiff, he must state his own version.
(4) If the defendant disputes the jurisdiction of the Court
he must state the reasons for doing so, and if he is able, give
his own statement as to which Court ought to have jurisdiction.
(5) If the defendant disputes the plaintiff’s valuation of the
suit, he must state his reasons for doing so, and if he is able,
give his own statement of the value of the suit." ;
(iii) in rule 5, in sub-rule (1), after the first proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely: —
"Provided further, that every allegation of fact in the plaint,
if not denied in the manner provided under rule 3A of this Order,
shall be taken to be admitted except as against a person under
disability." ;
(iv) in rule 10, after the first proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely: —
Denial by the
defendant in
suits before the
Commercial
Division of the
High Court or
the Commercial
Court.

58
"Provided further that no Court shall make an order to
extend the time provided under rule 1 of this Order for filing of
the written statement.";
(E). for Order XI of the Code, the following Order shall be
substituted, namely:—
"ORDER XI
D
ISCLOSURE, DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS IN SUITS BEFORE
THE COMMERCIAL DIVISION OF S HIGH COURT OR A COMMERCIAL COURT
1. (1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all
documents, in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the
suit, along with the plaint, including:–
(a) The documents referred to and relied on by the plaintiff in the
plaint;
(b) The documents relating to any matter in question in the
proceedings, in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff,
as on the date of filing the plaint, irrespective of whether the same is in
support of or adverse to the plaintiffs case;
(c) Nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced by
plaintiffs and relevant only–
(i) for the cross-examination of the defendant's witnesses, or
(ii) in answer to any case setup by the defendant subsequent
to the filing of the plaint, or
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.
(2) The list of documents filed with the plaint shall specify whether the
documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are
originals, office copies or photocopies. The list shall also set out in brief,
details of parties to each document, mode of execution, issuance or receipt
and line of custody of each document.
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that
all documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff,
pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by
him have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and
that the plaintiff does not have any other documents in its power, possession,
control or custody.
Explanation.–A declaration on oath under this sub-rule shall be contained
in the Statement of Truth as set out in the Appendix.
(4) In case of urgent filings, the plaintiff may seek leave to rely on
additional documents, as part of the above declaration on oath and subject
Disclosure and
Discovery of
documents.

59
to grant of such leave by Court, the plaintiff shall file such additional
documents in Court, within thirty days of filing the suit, along with a
declaration on oath that the plaintiff has produced all documents in its power,
possession, control or custody, pertaining to the facts and circumstances
of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does not
have any other documents, in its power, possession, control or custody.
(5) The plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were
in the plaintiffs power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed
along with plaint or within the extended period set out above, save and
except by leave of Court. Such leave shall be granted only upon the plaintiff
establishing reasonable cause for non-disclosure along with the plaint.
(6) The plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff
believes to be in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant
and which the plaintiff wishes to rely upon and seek leave for production
thereof by the said defendant.
(7) The defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of
all documents, in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to
the suit, along with the written statement or with its counter claim if any,
including–
(a) the documents referred to and relied on by the defendant in the
written statement;
(b) the documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding
in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant,
irrespective of whether the same is in support of or adverse to the
defendant's defense;
(c) nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced by
defendants and relevant only–
(i) for the cross-examination of the plaintiff’s witnesses,
(ii) in answer to any case setup by the plaintiff subsequent to
the filing of the plaint, or
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counter
claim shall specify whether the documents, in the power, possession, control
or custody of the defendant, are originals, office copies or photocopies.
The list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document being
produced by the defendant, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line
of custody of each document;
(9) The written statement or counter claim shall contain a declaration
on oath made by the deponent that all documents in the power, possession,

60
control or custody of the defendant, save and except for those set out in
sub-rule ( 7) ( c)(iii), pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the
proceedings initiated by the plaintiff or in the counter claim, have been
disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the written statement or counter
claim and that the defendant does not have in its power, possession, control
or custody, any other documents;
(10) Save and except for sub-rule ( 7) (c)(iii), defendant shall not be
allowed to rely on documents, which were in the defendant's power,
possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with the written
statement or counter claim, save and except by leave of Court. Such leave
shall be granted only upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause for
non-disclosure along with the written statement or counter claim;
(11) The written statement or counter claim shall set out details of
documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff,
which the defendant wishes to rely upon and which have not been disclosed
with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce the same;
(12) Duty to disclose documents, which have come to the notice of a
party, shall continue till disposal of the suit.
2. (1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court may
deliver interrogatories in writing for the examination of the opposite parties
or anyone or more of such parties, and such interrogatories when delivered
shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such interrogatories
each of such persons is required to answer:
Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of
interrogatories to the same party without an order for that purpose:
Provided also that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in
question in the suit shall be deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that
they might be admissible on the oral cross examination of a witness.
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular
interrogatories proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the court, and
that court shall decide within seven days from the day of filing of the said
application, in deciding upon such application, the court shall take into
account any offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated
to deliver particulars, or to make admissions, or to produce documents
relating  to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be given
as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider
necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
(3) In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any
party be made into the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it
is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the court, either with or without an
application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have been exhibited
Discovery by
Interrogatories.

61
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by
the said interrogatories and the answers thereto shall be paid in any event
by the party in fault.
(4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No.2 in
Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with such variations as
circumstances may require.
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons,
whether incorporated or not, empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether
in its own name or in the name of any officer of other person, any opposite
party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any
member or officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made
accordingly.
(6) Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it
is scandalous or irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the
suit, or that the matters inquired into are not sufficiently material at that
stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground may be taken in the
affidavit in answer.
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have
been exhibited unreasonably or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground
that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous and any
application for this purpose may be made within seven days after service
of the interrogatories.
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten
days, or within such other time as the court may allow.
(9) An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in the form provided
in Form No. 3 in Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with
such variations as circumstances may require.
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the
sufficiency or otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient
shall be determined by the court.
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers
insufficiently, the party interrogating may apply to the court for an order
requiring him to answer, or to answer further, as the case may be. And an
order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer further, either
affidavit or by viva voce examination, as the court may direct.
3. (1) All parties shall complete inspection of all documents disclosed
within thirty days of the date of filing of the written statement or written
statement to the counter claim, whichever is later. The Court may extend
this time limit upon application at its discretion, but not beyond thirty days
in any event.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
Inspection.

62
(2) Any party to the proceedings may seek directions from the Court,
at any stage of the proceedings, for inspection or production of documents
by the other party, of which inspection has been refused by such party or
documents have not been produced despite issuance of a notice to produce;
(3) Order in such application shall be disposed off within thirty days of
filing such application, including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted
by Court) and hearing;
(4) If the above application is allowed, inspection and copies thereof
shall be furnished to the party seeking it, within five days of such order.
(5) No party shall be permitted to rely on a document, which it had
failed to disclose or of which inspection has not been given, save and
except with leave of Court.
(6) The Court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party,
who wilfully or negligently failed to disclose all documents pertaining to a
suit or essential for a decision therein and which are in their power,
possession, control or custody or where a Court holds that inspection or
copies of any documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld or
refused.
4. (1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or denials of
all documents disclosed and of which inspection has been completed, within
fifteen days of the completion of inspection or any later date as fixed by the
Court.
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly,
whether such party was admitting or denying:
(a) Correctness of contents of a document;
(b) Existence of a document;
(c) Execution of a document;
(d) Issuance or receipt of a document;
(e) Custody of a document;
Explanation.–A statement of admission or denial of the existence
of a document made in accordance with rule 4(2)( b) of the modified
Order XI will include the admission or denial of the contents of a
document.
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any
of the above grounds. Bare and unsupported denials shall not be deemed to
be denials of a document and proof of such documents may then be
dispensed with at the discretion of the Court.
Admission and
Denial of Docu-
ments.

63
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party
documents of which the party denying does not have any personal knowledge
of, and to which the party denying is not a party to in any manner
whatsoever;
(5) An Affidavit in support of the statement of admissions and denials
shall be filed confirming the correctness of the contents of the statement.
(6) In the event that the Court holds that any party has unduly refused
to admit a document under any of the above criteria, - costs (including
exemplary costs) for deciding on admissibility of a document may be
imposed by the Court on such party.
(7) The Court may pass orders with respect to admitted documents
including for waiver of further proof thereon or rejection of any documents.
5. (1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the Court may order, at
any time during the pendency of any suit, production by any party or person,
of such documents in the possession or power of such party or person,
relating to any matter in question in such suit.
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the form provided
in Form No.7 in Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall
be given not less than seven days and not more than fifteen days to produce
such document or to answer to their inability to produce such document.
(4) The Court may draw an adverse inference against a party refusing
to produce such document after issuance of a notice to produce and where
sufficient reasons for such non-production are not given and order costs.
6. (1) In case of disclosures and inspection of electronic records (as
defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000), furnishing of printouts
shall be sufficient compliance of the above provisions.
(2) At the discretion of the parties or where required (when parties
wish to rely on audio or video content), copies of electronic records may
be furnished in electronic form either in addition to or in lieu of printouts.
(3) Where Electronic Records form part of documents disclosed, the
declaration on oath to be filed by a party shall specify–
(a) the parties to such electronic record;
(b) the manner in which such electronic record was produced and
by whom;
(c) the dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or
receipt of each such electronic record;
5 of 1908.
21 of 2000.
Production of
documents.
Electronic
records.

64
(d) the source of such electronic record and date and time when
the electronic record was printed;
(e) in case of email ids, details of ownership, custody and access
to such email ids;
(j) in case of documents stored on a computer or computer resource
(including on external servers or cloud), details of ownership, custody
and access to such data on the computer or computer resource;
(g) deponent's knowledge of contents and correctness of contents;
(h) whether the computer or computer resource used for preparing
or receiving or storing such document or data was functioning properly
or in case of malfunction that such malfunction did not affect the
contents of the document stored;
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the original
computer or computer resource;
(4) The parties relying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any
electronic records, will not be required to give inspection of electronic
records, provided a declaration is made by such party that each such copy,
which has been produced, has been made from the original electronic record.
(5) The Court may give directions for admissibility of electronic records
at any stage of the proceedings.
(6) Any party may seek directions from the Court and the Court may
of its motion issue directions for submission of further proof of any
electronic record including metadata or logs before admission of such
electronic record.
7. For removal of doubt, it is hereby clarified that rule I of Order XIII,
rule 14 of Order VII and rule 1A of order VIII of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 shall not apply to suits or applications before the Commercial Divisions
of High Court or Commercial Courts.".
5. After Order XIII of the Code, the following Order shall be inserted,
namely:–
"ORDER XIII-A
S
UMMARY J UDGEMENT
1. (1) This Order sets out the procedure by which Courts may decide
a claim pertaining to any Commercial Dispute without recording oral
evidence.
(2) For the purposes of this Order, the word "claim" shall include–
(a) part of a claim;
Certain provi-
sions of the
Code of Civil
Procedure,
1908 not to ap-
ply.
Insertion of
Order XIII-A.
Scope of and
classes of suits
to which this
Order applies.
5 of 1908.

65
(b) any particular question on which the claim (whether in whole
or in part) depends; or
(c) a counter-claim, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an application for summary
judgment under this Order shall not be made in a suit in respect of any
Commercial Dispute that is originally filed as a summary suit under Order
XXXVII.
2. An applicant may apply for summary judgment at any time after
summons has been served on the defendant:
Provided that, no application for summary judgment may be made by
such applicant after the Court has framed the issues in respect of the suit.
3. The Court may give a summary judgment against a plaintiff or
defendant on a claim if it considers that–
(a) the plaintiff has no real prospect of succeeding on the claim or
the defendant has no real prospect of successfully defending the claim,
as the case may be; and
(b) there is no other compelling reason why the claim should not
be disposed of before recording of oral evidence.
4. (1) An application for summary judgment to a Court shall, in addition
to any other matters the applicant may deem relevant, include the matters
set forth in clauses ( a) to (e) mentioned hereunder:–
(a) the application must contain a statement that it is an application
for summary judgment made under this Order;
(b) the application must precisely:
(i) disclose all material facts; and
(ii) identify the point of law, if any;
(c) in the event the applicant seeks to rely upon any documentary
evidence, the applicant must:–
(i) include such documentary evidence in its application; and
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence
on which the applicant relies;
(d) the application must state the reason why there are no real
prospects of succeeding on the claim or defending the claim, as the
case may be;
(e) the application must state what relief the applicant is seeking
and briefly state the grounds for seeking such relief.
Stage for appli-
cation for sum-
mary judgment.
Grounds for
summary judg-
ment.
Procedure.

66
(2) Where a hearing for summary judgment is fixed, the respondent
must be given at least thirty days' notice of:–
(a) the date fixed for the hearing; and
(b) the claim that is proposed to be decided by the Court at such
hearing.
(3) The respondent may, within thirty days of the receipt of notice of
application of summary judgment or notice of hearing (whichever is earlier),
file a reply addressing the matters set forth in clauses ( a) to (f) mentioned
hereunder in addition to any other matters that the respondent may deem
relevant:–
(a) the reply must precisely–
(i) disclose all material facts;
(ii) identify the point of law, if any; and
(iii) state the reasons why the relief sought by the applicant
should not be granted;
(b) in the event the respondent seeks to rely upon any documentary
evidence in its reply, the respondent must-
(i) include such documentary evidence in its reply; and
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence
on which the respondent relies;
(c) the reply must state the reason why there are real prospects of
succeeding on the claim or defending the claim, as the case may be;
(d) the reply must concisely state the issues that should be framed
for trial;
(e) the reply must identify what further evidence shall be brought
on record at trial that could not be brought on record at the stage of
summary judgment; and
(f) the reply must state why, in light of the evidence or material on
record if any, the Court should not proceed to summary judgment.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the respondent in an
application for summary judgment wishes to rely on additional documentary
evidence during the hearing, the respondent must:–
(a) file such documentary evidence; and
(b) serve copies of such documentary evidence on every other
party to the application at least fifteen days prior to the date of the
hearing.
Evidence for
hearing of sum-
mary judgment.

67
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the applicant for summary
judgment wishes to rely on documentary evidence in reply to the defendant's
documentary evidence, the applicant must:–
(a) file such documentary evidence in reply; and
(b) serve a copy of such documentary evidence on the respondent
at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, sub-rules ( 1) and ( 2)
shall not require documentary evidence to be:–
(a) filed if such documentary evidence has already been filed; or
(b) served on a party on whom it has already been served.
6. (1) On an application made under this Order, the Court may make
such orders that it may deem fit in its discretion including the following:–
(a) judgment on the claim;
(b) conditional order in accordance with rule 7 mentioned hereunder;
(c) dismissing the application;
(d) dismissing part of the claim and a judgment on part of the claim
that is not dismissed;
(e) striking out the pleadings (whether in whole or in part); or
(f) further directions to proceed for case management under Order
XV A.
(2) Where the Court makes any of the orders as set forth in sub-rule
(1) (a) to ( f), the Court shall record its reasons for making such order.
7. (1) Where it appears to the Court that it is possible that a claim or
defence may succeed but it is improbable that it shall do so, the Court may
make a conditional order as set forth in rule 6 ( 1) (b).
(2) Where the Court makes a conditional order, it may:–
(a) make it subject to all or any of the following conditions:–
(i) require a party to deposit a sum of money in the Court;
(ii) require a party to take a specified step in relation to the
claim or defence, as the case may be;
(iii) require a party as the case may be to give such security or
provide such surety for restitution of costs as the Court deems fit
and proper;
(iv) impose such other conditions, including providing security
for restitution of losses that any party is likely to suffer during the
Orders that may
be made by the
Court.
Conditional
Order.

68
pendency of the suit, as the Court may deem fit in its discretion;
and
(b) specify the consequences of the failure to comply with the
conditional order, including passing a judgment against the party that
have not complied with the conditional order.
8. The Court may make an order for payment of costs in an application
for summary judgment in accordance with the provisions of section 35
and section 35A of the Code.".
6. Order XV of the Code shall be omitted.
7. After Order XV of the Code, the following Order shall be inserted,
namely:–
"ORDER XV-A CASE MANAGEMENT HEARING
1. The Court shall hold the first 'Case Management Hearing', no later
than four weeks from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial
of documents by all parties to the suit.
2. In a Case Management Hearing, after hearing the parties, and once it
finds that there are issues of fact and law which require to be tried, the
Court may pass an order:–
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order
XIV of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 after examining pleadings,
documents and documents produced before it, and on examination
conducted by the Court under rule 2 of Order X, if required;
(b) listing witnesses to be examined by the parties;
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of evidence to be filed by
parties;
(d) fixing the dates on which evidence of the witnesses of the
parties to be recorded;
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed before
the Court by the parties;
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the
Court; and
(g) setting time limits for parties or their advocates to address oral
arguments.
3. In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of rule 2 of this
Order, the Court shall ensure that the arguments are closed no later than six
months from the date of the first case management hearing.
Power to im-
pose costs.
Omission of
Order XV .
Insertion of
Order XV-A
First Case Man-
agement Hear-
ing.
Orders to be
passed in a Case
Management
Hearing.
Time limit for
the completion
of a trial.
5 of 1908.

69
4. The Court shall as far as possible ensure that the recording of evidence
shall be carried on, on a day-to-day basis until the cross examination of all
the witnesses is complete.
5. The Court may, if necessary, also hold case management hearings
anytime during the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence
by the parties to the dates fixed under rule 2 and facilitate speedy disposal
of the suit.
6. (1) In any case management hearing held under this Order, the Court
shall have the power to–
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decide any pending
application filed by the parties under Order XIIIA;
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings
relevant and necessary for framing issues;
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice
direction or Court order if it finds sufficient reason to do so;
(d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason
to do so;
(e) direct a party to attend the Court for the purposes of examination
under rule 2 of Order X;
(f) consolidate proceedings;
(g) strike off the name of any witness or evidence that it deems
irrelevant to the issues framed;
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue;
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried;
(j) exclude an issue from consideration;
(k) dismiss or give judgment on a claim after a decision on a
preliminary issue;
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a commission where
necessary in accordance with Order XXVI;
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing
irrelevant, inadmissible or argumentative material;
(n) strike off any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the
parties containing irrelevant, inadmissible or argumentative material;
(o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed
by the Court for this purpose;
Recording of
oral evidence on
a day-to-day
basis.
Case Manage-
ment Hearings
during a trial.
Powers of the
Court in a Case
Management
Hearing.

70
(p) pass any order relating to the monitoring of recording the
evidence by a commission or any other authority;
(q) order any party to file and exchange a costs budget;
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing
the case and furthering the overriding objective of ensuring the efficient
disposal of the suit.
(2) When the Court passes an order in exercise of its powers under
this Order, it may–
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a
sum of money into Court; and
(b) specify the consequence of failure to comply with the order or
a condition.
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the Court
may direct that the parties also be present for such case management hearing,
if it is of the view that there is a possibility of settlement between the
parties.
7. (1) The Court shall not adjourn the case management hearing for the
sole reason that the advocate appearing on behalf of a party is not present:
Provided that an adjournment of the hearing is sought in advance by
moving an application, the Court may adjourn the hearing to another date
upon the payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, by the party moving
such application.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, if the Court is
satisfied that there is a justified reason for the absence of the advocate, it
may adjourn the hearing to another date upon such terms and conditions it
deems fit.
8. Where any party fails to comply with the order of the Court passed
in a Case Management Hearing, the Court shall have the power to–
(a) condone such non-compliance by payment of costs to the Court;
(b) foreclose the non-compliant party's right to file affidavits, conduct
cross-examination of witnesses, file written submissions, address oral
arguments or make further arguments in the trial as the case may be, or
(c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non-compliance
is wilful, repeated and the imposition of costs is not adequate to ensure
compliance.".
8. In Order XVIII of the Code in rule 2, for sub-rules ( 3A), (3B), (3C)
and (3D), the following shall be substituted, namely:–
Adjournment of
Case Manage-
ment Hearing.
Consequences
of non-compli-
ance with or-
ders.
Amendment of
Order XVIII.

71
"(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior to commencing the
oral arguments, submit concisely and under distinct headings written
arguments in support of his case to the Court and such written
arguments shall form part of the record.
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions of
the laws being cited in support of the arguments and the citations of
judgments being relied upon by the party and include copies of such
judgments being relied upon by the party.
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished
simultaneously to the opposite party.
(3D) The Court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of
arguments, permit the parties to file revised written arguments within a
period of no more than one week after the date of conclusion of
arguments.
(3E) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the
written arguments unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.
(3F) It shall be open for the Court to limit the time for oral
submissions having regard to the nature and complexity of the
matter.".
9. In Order XVIII of the Code, in rule 4, after sub-rule (1), the following
sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
(1A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is
proposed to be led by a party shall be filed simultaneously by that party
at the time directed in the first case management hearing.
(1B) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of
any witness (including of a witness who has already filed an affidavit)
unless sufficient cause is made out in an application for that purpose
and an order, giving reasons, permitting such additional affidavit is
passed by the Court.
(1C ) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the
affidavits so filed at any time prior to commencement of cross-
examination of that witness, without any adverse inference being drawn
based on such withdrawal:
Provided that any other party shall be entitled to tender as evidence
and rely upon any admission made in such withdrawn affidavit.".
10. In Order XIX of the Code, after rule 3, the following rules shall be
inserted, namely:–
Amendment of
Order XVIII.
Amendment of
Order XIX.

72
4. (1) The Court may, by directions, regulate the evidence as to issues
on which it requires evidence and the manner in which such evidence may
be placed before the Court.
(2) The Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded
in writing, exclude evidence that would otherwise be produced by the
parties.
5. The Court may, in its direction, the reasons to be recorded in
writing–
(1) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit
of  examination-in-chief as do not, in its view, constitute evidence;
(2) return or reject an affidavit of examination-in-chief as not
constituting admissible evidence;
6. (1) An affidavit must comply with the form and requirements set
forth below:–
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the
chronological sequence of, the dates and events that are relevant for
proving any fact or any other matter dealt with;
(b) where the Court is of the view that an affidavit is a mere
reproduction of the pleadings, or contains the legal grounds of any
party's case, the Court may, by order, strike out the affidavit or such
parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper;
(c) each paragraph of an affidavit should, as far as possible, be
confined to a distinct portion of the subject;
(d) an affidavit shall state:–
(i) which of the statements in it are made from the deponent's
own knowledge and which are matters of information or belief;
and
(ii) the source for any matters of information or belief;
(e) an affidavit should:-
(i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate
document (or as one of several documents contained in a file);
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs;
(iii) have all numbers, including dates, expressed in figures;
and
(iv) if any of the documents referred to in the body of the
affidavit are annexed to the affidavit or any other pleadings, give
Court may con-
trol evidence.
Reacting or
rejecting evi-
dence.
Format and
guidelines of
affidavit of
evidence.

73
the annexures and page numbers of such documents that are relied
upon.
11. In Order XX of the Code, for rule 1, the following rule shall be
substituted, namely:–
"(1) The Commercial Court, Commercial Division, or Commercial
Appellate Division, as the case may be, shall, within ninety days of the
conclusion of arguments, pronounce judgment and copies thereof shall
be issued to all the parties to the dispute through electronic mail or
otherwise.".
APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF TRUTH
(Under First Schedule, Order VI- Rule 15A and Order X- Rule 1)
STATEMENT OF TRUTH BY [party position and name of party in
full] I, the deponent above-named, do hereby solemnly affirm and declare
as under:
1. I am [name of party and relevant details] in the above suit and
competent to swear this affidavit.
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also
examined all relevant documents and records in relation thereto.
3. I say that the statements made in [mention specific paragraph
numbers] paragraphs are true to my knowledge and statements made in
[mention specific paragraph numbers] paragraphs are based on information
received which I believe to be correct and statements made in [mention
specific paragraph numbers] are based on legal advice.
4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material
fact, document or record and I have included information that is according
to me, relevant for the present suit.
5. I say that all documents in my power, possession, control or custody,
pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by
me have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and
that I do not have any other documents in my power, possession, control
or custody.
6. I say that the above-mentioned pleading comprises of a total of
[number of pages] pages, each of which has been signed by me.
7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents
referred to and relied upon by me.
Amendment of
Order XX.

74
8. I say that I am aware that for any false statement or concealment, I
shall be liable for action taken against me under the law.
Place
Date
DEPONENT VERIFICATION
The statements made above are true to my knowledge.
Verified at [place] on this [date]
DEPONENT

75
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The proposal to provide for speedy disposal of high value commercial disputes has been under
consideration of the Government for quite some time. The high value commercial disputes involve complex
facts and question of law. Therefore, there is a need to provide for an independent mechanism for their early
resolution. Early resolution of commercial disputes shall create a positive image to the investor world about
the independent and responsive Indian legal system.
2. The Law Commission of India in its 188th Report had recommended the constitution of the
Commercial Division in each High Court. Accordingly, the Commercial Division of High Courts Bill, 2009
was introduced and passed by the Lok Sabha. However during the discussion of the aforesaid Bill in the Rajya
Sabha, some Members raised certain issues and in view thereof, the matter was again referred to the Law
Commission of India for its examination. The Law Commission of India, in its 253rd Report, has recommended
for the establishment of the Commercial Courts, the Commercial Divisions and the Commercial Appellate
Divisions in the High Courts for disposal of commercial disputes of specified value.
3. The Commercial Courts shall be constituted at District level except for the territory over which
any High Court is having ordinary original civil jurisdiction. The Commercial Divisions shall be set up in those
High Courts which are already exercising ordinary original civil jurisdiction and they shall have territorial
jurisdiction over such areas on which it has original jurisdiction. The minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of such
Commercial Courts and Commercial Division is proposed as one crore rupees.
4. The Commercial Appellate Division shall be set up in all the High Courts to hear the appeals against
the Orders of the Commercial Courts and the Orders of the Commercial Division of the High Court.
5. It is proposed to have a streamlined procedure which is to be adopted for the conduct of cases in
the Commercial Courts and in the Commercial Divisions by amending the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 so
as to improve the efficiency and reduce delays in disposal of commercial cases. The proposed case management
system and provisions for summary judgment will enable disposal of commercial disputes in a time bound
manner. The proposed amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as applicable to the Commercial
Courts and Commercial Divisions shall prevail over the existing High Court Rules and other provisions of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
6. The proposed Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of
High Courts Bill, 2015 shall ensure that the commercial cases are disposed of expeditiously, fairly and at
reasonable cost to the litigant. The proposal to establish the Commercial Courts and the Commercial Division
of the High Court shall,–
(i) accelerate economic growth;
(ii) improve the international image of the Indian justice delivery system; and
(iii) improve the faith of the investor world in the legal culture of the nation.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;
The 24th April, 2015. D.V. SADANANDA GOWDA.
75

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect
of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include (a) the manner of appointment of Judge
of a Commercial Court under sub-section (1) of section 5; (b) the terms and conditions of service of the
Judges of the Commercial Courts under sub-section (4) of section 5; and (c) any other matter which is to be,
or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. The rules made by the Central Government are required to be laid before each House of the
Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government are matters of
administrative details or of procedure and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
76

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
(5 of 1908)
** * * *
Costs
35. (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed,
and to the provisions of any law for the time being in force, the costs of
and incident to all suits shall be in the discretion of the Court, and the Court
shall have full power to determine by whom or out of what property and to
what extent such costs are to be paid, and to give all necessary directions
for the purposes aforesaid. The fact that the Court has no jurisdiction to try
the suit shall be no bar to the exercise of such powers.
(2) Where the Court directs that any costs shall not follow the event,
the Court shall state its reasons in wirting.
35A. (1) * * * * *
(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount
exceeding three thousand rupees or exceeding the limits of its pecuniary
jurisdiction, whichever amount is less:
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court
exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of small causes under the Provincial
Small Cause Courts Act, 1887, or under a corresponding law in force in
any part of India to which the said Act does not extend and not being a
Court constituted under such Act or law are less than two hundred and
fifty rupees, the High Court may empower such Court to award as costs
under this section any amount not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees
and not exceeding those limit by more than one hundred rupees:
Provided, further, that the High Court may limit the amount which any
Court or class of Courts is empowered to award as costs under this section.
** * * *
ORDER V
I
SSUE AND SERVICE OR SUMMONS
Issue of Summons
1. (1) When a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issued
to the defendant to appear and answer the claim and to file the written
77
Cost.
Compensatory
costs in respect
of false or vexa-
tious claims or
defences.
Summons.
9 of 1887.

78
statement of his defence, if any, within thirty days from the date of service
of summons on the defendant:
Provided that no such summons shall be issued when a defendant has
appeard at the presentation of plaint and admitted the plaintiffs claim:
Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written
statement within the said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file
the same on such other day as may be specified by the Court, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, but which shall not be later than ninety days from
the date of service of summons.
** * * *
ORDER VIII
WRITTEN S TATEMENT, SET-OFF AND COUNTER-CLAIM
1. The defendant shall, within thirty days from the date of service of
summons on him, present a written statement of his defence:
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement
within the said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to the file the same
on such other day, as may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, but which shall not be later than ninety days from the
date of service of summons.
** * * *
ORDER XI
DISCOVERY AND INSPECTIONS
1. In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the Court may
deliver interrogatories in writing for the examination of the opposite parties
or anyone or more of such parties, and such interrogatories when delivered
shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such interrogatories
each of such persons in required to answer:
Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of interrogatories
to the same party without an order for that purpose:
Provided also that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in
question in the suit shall be deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they
might be admissible on the oral cross-examination of a witness.
2. On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular
interrogatories proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the Court and
that Court shall decide within seven days from the date of filing of the said
application. In deciding upon such application, the Court shall take to account
Written state-
ment.
Discovery by
interrogatories.
Particular inter-
rogatories to be
submitted.

79
any offer, which may be made by the party sought to interrogated to deliver
particulars, or to make admissions, or to produce documents relating to the
matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be given as to such only
of the interrogatories submitted as the Court shall consider necessary either
for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
3. In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any
party be made into the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it
is the option of the taxing officer or of the Court, either with or without an
application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have been exhibited
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by
the said interrogatories and the answers thereto shall be paid in any event
by the party in fault.
4. Interrogatories shall be in Form No.2 in Appendix C, with such
variations as circumstances may require.
5. Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons,
whether incorporated or not, empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether
in its own name or in the name of any officer or other person, any opposite
party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any
member of officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made
accordingly.
6. Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it is
scandalous or irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the
suit, or that the matters inquired into are not sufficiently material at that
stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground, may be taken in
the affidavit in answer.
7. Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have
been exhibited unreasonably or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground
that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous; and any
application for this purpose may be made within seven days after service
of the interrogatories.
8. Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten
days, or within such other time as the Court may allow.
9. An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in Form No.3 in
Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require.
10. No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the
sufficiency or otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient
shall be determined by the Court.
11. Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers
insufficiently, the party interrogating may apply to the Court for an order
requiring him to answer, or to answer further, as the case may be. And an
Costs of inter-
rogatories.
Form of inter-
rogatories.
Corporations.
Objections to
interrogatories
by answer.
Setting aside and
striking   out
interrogatories.
Affidavit in
answer filling.
Form of affida-
vit in answer.
No exception to
be taken.
Order to answer
or answer
further.

80
order may be made requiring him to answer or answer further, either by
affidavit or by viva doce examination, as the Court may direct.
12. Any party may, without filing any affidavit, apply to the Court for
an order directing any other party to any suit to made discovery on oath of
the documents which are or have been in his possession or power, relating
to any matter in question therein. On the hearing of such application the
Court may either refuse or adjourn the same, if satisfied that such discovery
is not necessary, or not necessary at that stage of the suit, or make such
order, either generally or limited to certain classes of documents, as may, in
its discretion, be thougth fit :
Provided that discovery shall not be ordered when and so far as the
Court shall be of opinion that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly
of the suit or for saving costs.
13. The affidavit to be made may a party against whom such order as
is mentioned in the last proceding rule has been made, shall specify which
(if any) of the documents therein mentioned be objects to produce, and it
shall be in Form No.5 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances
may require.
14. It shall be lawful for the Court, at any time during the pendency of
any suit, to order the production by any party thereto, upon oath, of such
of the documents in his possession or power, relating to any matter in
question in such suit, as the Court shall think right; and the Court may deal
with such documents, when produced, in such manner as shall appear
just.
15. Every party to a suit shall be entitled at or before the settlement of
issues to give notice to any other party, in whose pleadings or affidavits
reference is made to any document, or who has entered any document in
any list annexed to his pleadings, to produce such document for the inspection
of the party giving such notice, or of his pleader, and to permit him or them
to take copies thereof; and any party not complying with such notice shall
not afterwards be at liberty to put any such document in evidence on his
behalf in such suit unless he shall satisfy the Court that such document
relates only to his own title, he being a defendant to the suit, or that he had
some other cause or excuse which the Court shall deem sufficient for not
complying with such notice, in which case the Court may allow the same
to be put in evidence on such terms as to costs and otherwise as the Court
shall think fit.
16. Notice to any party to produce any documents referred to in his
pleading or affidavits shall be in Form No.7 in Appendix C, with such
variations as circumstances may require.
Application for
discovery of
documents.
Affidavit of
documents.
Production of
documents.
Inspection of
documents re-
ferred to in
pleadings or af-
fidavits.
Notice to pro-
duce.

81
17. The party to whom such notice is given shall, within ten days from
the receipt of such notice, deliver to the party giving the same a notice
stating a time within three days from the delivery thereof at which the
documents, or such of them as he does not object to produce, may be
inspected at the office of his pleader, or in the case of bankers' books or
other books of account or books in constant use for the purposes of any
trade or business, at their usual place of custody, and stating which (in
any) of the documents he objects to produce, and on what ground. Such
notice shall be in Form No.8 in Appendix C, with such variations as
circumstances may require.
18. (1) Where the party served with notice under rule 15 omits to give
such notice of a time for inspection or objects to give inspection, or offers
inspection elsewhere than at the office of his pleader, the Court may, on the
application of the party desiring it, make an order for inspection in such
place and in such manner as it may think fit: Provided that the order shall
not be made when and so far as the Court shall be of opinion that it is not
necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
(2) Any application to inspect documents, except such as are referred
to in the pleadings, particulars or affidavits of the party against whom the
application is made or disclosed in his affidavit of documents, shall be
founded upon an affidavit showing of what documents inspection is sought,
that the party applying is entitled to inspect them, and that they are in the
possesion or power of the other party. The Court shall not make such
order for inspection of such documents when and so far as the Court shall
be of opinion that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or
for saving costs.
19. ( 1) Where inspection of any business books is applied for, the
Court may, if it thinks fit, instead of ordering inspection of the original
books, order a copy of any entries therein to be furnished and verified by
the affidavit of some person who has examined the copy with the original
entries, and such affidavit shall state whether or not there are in the original
book any and what erasures, inter- lineations or alterations:
Provided that, notwithstanding that such copy has been supplied, the
Court may order inspection of the book from which the copy was made.
(2) Where on an application for an order for inspection privilege is
claimed for any document, it shall be lawful for the Court to inspect the
document for the purpose of deciding as to the validity of the claim of
privilege, unless the document relates to matters of State.
(3) The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit at any time,
and whether an affidavit of documents shall or shall not have already been
ordered or made, make an order requiring any other party to state by affidavit
Time for in-
spection when
notice given.
Order for
inspection.
Verified copies.

82
whether anyone or more specific documents, to be specified in the
application, is or are, or has or have at any time been, in his possession
or power; and, if not then in his possession, when he parted with the
same and what has become thereof such application shall be made on
an affidavit stating that in the belief of the deponent the party against
whom the application is made has, or has at some time had, in his
possession or power the document or documents specified in the
application, and that they relate to the matters in question in the suit, or to
some of them.
20. Where the party from whom discovery of any kind or inspection is
sought objects to the same, or any part thereof, the Court may, if satisfied
that the right to the discovery or inspection sought depends on the
determination of any issue or question in dispute in the suit, or that for any
other reason it is desirable that any issue or question in dispute in the suit
should be determined before deciding upon the right to the discovery or
inspection, order that such issue or question be determined first, and reserve
the question as to the discovery or inspection.
21. ( 1) Where any party fails to comply with any order to answer
interrogatories, or for discovery or inspection of documents, he shall, if a
plaintiff, be liable to have his suit dismissed for want of prosecution, and, if
a defendant, to have his defence, if any, struck out, and to be placed in the
same position as if he had not defended, and the party interrogating or
seeking discovery or inspection may apply to the Court for an order to that
effect, and an order may be made on such application accordingly, after
notice to the parties and after giving them a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
(2) Where an order is made under sub-rule (l) dismissing any suit, the
plaintiff shall be precluded from bringing a fresh suit on the same cause of
action.
22. Any party may, at the trial of a suit, use in evidence anyone or more
of the answers or any part of an answer of the opposite party to
interrogatories without putting in the others or the whole of such
answer:
Provided always that in such case the Court may look at the whole of
the answers, and if it shall be of opinion that any others of them are so
connected with those put in that the last-mentioned answers ought not to
be used without them, it may direct them to be put in.
23. This order shall apply to minor plaintiffs and defendants, and to the
next friends and guardians for the suit of persons under disability.
** * * *
Premature dis-
covery.
Non - comp
liance  with
order for
discovery.
Using answers
to inter-
rogatories at
trial.
Order to apply
to minors.

83
ORDER XV
DISPOSAL OF THE SUIT AT THE FIRST HEARING
1. Where at the first hearing of a suit it appears that the parties are not
at issue on any question of law or of fact, the Court may at once pronounce
judgement.
2. (1) Where there are more defendants than one, and anyone of the
defendants is not at issue with the plaintiff on any question of law or of
fact, the Court may at once pronounce judgement for or against such
defendant and the suit shall proceed only against the other defendants.
(2) Whenever a judgement is pronounced under this rule, a decree shall
be drawn up in accordance with such judgement and the decree shall bear
the date on which the judgement was pronounced.
3. (1) Where the parties are at issue on some question of law or of fact,
and issue have been framed by the Court as herein before provided, if the
Court is satisfied that no further argument or evidence than the parties can
at once adduce is required upon such of the issues as may be sufficient for
the decision of the suit, and that no injustice will result from proceeding
with the suit forthwith, the Court may proceed to determine such issues,
and if, if the finding thereon is sufficient for the decision, may pronounce
judgement accordingly, whether the summons has been issued for the
settlement of issues only or for the final disposal of the suit:
Provided that, where the summons has been issued for the settlement
of issues only, the parties or their pleaders are present and none of them
objects.
(2) Where the finding is not sufficient for the decision, the Court
shall postpone the further hearing of the suit, and shall fix a day for the
production of such further evidence, or for such further argument as the
case requires.
4. Where the summons has been issued for the final disposal of the suit
and either party fails without sufficient cause to produce the evidence on
which he relies, the Court may at once pronounce judgement, or may, if it
thinks fit, after framing and recording issues, adjourn the suit for the
production of such evidence as may be necessary for its decision upon
such issues.
** * * *
ORDER XVIII
H
EARING OF THE SUIT AND EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
** * * *
Parties not at
issue.
One of several
defendants not
at issue.
Parties at issue.
Failure to pro-
duce evidence.

84
2. (1) On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit or on any other day
to which the hearing is adjourned, the party having the right to begin shall
state his case and produce his evidence in support of the issues which he is
bound to prove.
** * * *
(3A) Any party may address oral arguments in a case, and shall, before
he concludes the oral arguments, if any, submit if the Court so permits
concisely and under distinct headings written arguments in support of his
case to the Court and such written arguments shall form part of the record.
(3B) A copy of such written arguments shall be simultaneously furnished
to the opposite party.
(3C) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the
written arguments unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.
(3D) The Court shall fix such time-limits for the oral arguments by
either of the parties in a case, as it thinks fit.
** * * *
ORDER XX
JUDGEMENT AND DECREE
1. (1) The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce
judgement in an open Court, either at once, or as soon thereafter as may be
practicable and when the judgement is to be pronounced on some future
day, the Court shall fix a day for that purpose, of which due notice shall be
given to the parties or their pleaders:
Provided that where the judgement is not pronounced at once, every
endeavour shall be made by the Court to pronounce the judgement within
thirty days from the date on which the hearing of the case was concluded
but, where it is not practicable so to do on the ground of the exceptional
and extraordinary circumstances of the case, the Court shall fix a future
day for the pronouncement of the judgement, and such day shall not
ordinarily be a day beyond sixty days from the date on which the hearing of
the case was concluded, and due notice of the day so fixed shall be given to
the parties or their pleaders.
** * * *
Statement and
production of
evidence.
Judgement when
pronounced.

85
RAJYA SABHA
_____________
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
Division in the High Courts for adjudicating commercial disputes and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
_____________
(Shri D. V . Sadananda Gowda, Minister of Law and Justice)
85

86
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—15
†ÃÖÖ¬ÖÖ¸üÞÖ
EXTRAORDINARY
³ÖÖÝÖ II - ÜÖÞ›ü 1
PART II — Section 1
¯ÖÏÖ×¬ÖÛúÖ¸ü ÃÖê ¯ÖÏÛúÖ×¿ÖŸÖ
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
ÃÖÓ. 36] ®Ö‡Ô ×¤ü»»Öß, ¿ÖãÛÎú¾ÖÖ¸ü, †Œ™æü²Ö¸ü 23, 2015/ÛúÖÙŸÖÛúÖ 1, 1937 (¿ÖÛú)
No. 36] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, OCTOBER 23, 2015/KARTIKA 1,1937 (SAKA)
‡ÃÖ ³ÖÖÝÖ ´Öë ×³Ö®®Ö ¯ÖéÂšü ÃÖÓÜµÖÖ ¤üß •ÖÖŸÖß Æîü ×•ÖÃÖÃÖê ×Ûú µÖÆü †»ÖÝÖ ÃÖÓÛú»Ö®Ö Ûêú ºþ¯Ö ´Öë ¸üÜÖÖ •ÖÖ ÃÖÛêú…
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 23rd October, 2015/Kartika 1, 1937 (Saka)
THE COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISION AND
COMMERCIAL APPELLA TE DIVISION OF HIGH COURTS
ORDINANCE, 2015
No.8 OF 2015
Promulgated by the President in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of
India.
An Ordinance to provide for the constitution of Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division in the High Courts
for adjudicating commercial disputes of specified value and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
86
ANNEXURE - II
¸ü×•ÖÃ™Òüß ÃÖÓ.›üß.‹»Ö. — (‹®Ö)04/0007/2003—15

87
WHEREAS a Bill to provide for the Constitution of Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division in the High Courts
for adjudicating commercial disputes of specified value was introduced in
the Council of States and referred to the Department Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice for
examination and report which is pending;
A
ND WHEREAS, Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied
that circumstances exist which render it necesary for him to take immediate
action;
NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of
article 123 of the Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the
following Ordinance:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Commercial Courts, Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance,
2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. (1) In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Commercial Appellate Division" means the Commercial
Appellate Division in a High Court constituted under sub-section (1)
of section 5;
(b) "Commercial Court" means the Commercial Court constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 3;
(c) "commercial dispute" means a dispute arising out of—
(i) ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers, financiers and
traders such as those relating to mercantile documents, including
enforcement and interpretation of such documents;
(ii) export or import of merchandise or services;
(iii) issues relating to admiralty and maritime law;
(iv) transactions relating to aircraft, aircraft engines, aircraft
equipment and helicopters, including sales, leasing and financing
of the same;
(v) carriage of goods;
Short title,
extension and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.

88
(vi) construction and infrastructure contracts, including
tenders;
(vii) agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively
in trade or commerce;
(viii) franchising agreements;
(ix) distribution and licensing agreements;
(x) management and consultancy agreements;
(xi) joint venture agreements;
(xii) shareholders agreements;
(xiii) Subscription and investment agreements pertaining to the
services industry including outsourcing services and financial
services;
(xiv) mercantile agency and mercantile usage;
(xv) partnership agreements;
(xvi) technology development agreements;
(xvii) intellectual property rights relating to registered and
unregistered trademarks, copyright, patent, design, domain names,
geographical indications and semiconductor integrated circuits;
(xviii) agreements for sale of goods or provision of services;
(xix) exploitation of oil and gas reserves or other natural
resources including electromagnetic spectrum;
(xx) insurance and re-insurance;
(xxi) contracts of agency relating to any of the above; and
(xxii) such other commercial disputes as may be notified by
the Central Government.
Explanation .—A commercial dispute shall not cease to be a
commercial dispute merely because—
(a) it also involves action for recovery of immovable property
or for realisation of monies out of immovable property given as
security or involves any other relief pertaining to immovable
property;
(b) one of the contracting parties is the State or any of its
agencies or instrumentalities, or a private body carrying out public
functions;

89
(d) "Commercial Division" means the Commercial Division in a
High Court constituted under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(e) "District Judge" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (a) of article 236 of the Constitution of India;
(f) "document" means any matter expressed or described upon any
substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or electronic means,
or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which
may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter;
(g) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the expression "notify" with its cognate meanings and grammatical
variations shall be construed accordingly;
(h) "Schedule" means the Schedule appended to the Ordinance;
and
(i) "Specified Value", in relation to a commercial dispute, shall mean
the value of the subject matter in respect of a suit as determined in
accordance with section 12 which shall not be less than one crore
rupees or such higher value, as may be notified by the Central
Government.".
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Ordinance
but defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the Evidence Act,
1872, shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that
Code and the Act.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION OF C OMMERCIAL C OURTS, C OMMERCIAL
DIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISIONS
3. (1) The State Government, may after consultation with the concerned
High Court, by notification, constitute such number of Commercial Courts
at District level, as it may deem necessary for the purpose of exercising the
jurisdiction and powers conferred on those Courts under this Ordinance:
Provided that no Commercial Court shall be constituted for the territory
over which the High Court has ordinary original civil jurisdiction.
(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with the concerned
High Court specify, by notification, the local limits of the area to which the
jurisdiction of a Commercial Court shall extend and may, from time to
time, increase, reduce or alter such limits.
(3) The State Government shall, with the concurrence of the Chief
Justice of the High Court appoint one or more persons having experience in
dealing with commercial disputes to be the Judge or Judges, of a Commercial
Court, from amongst the cadre of Higher Judicial Service in the State.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.
Constitution of
Commercial
Courts.

90
4. (1) In all High Courts, having ordinary civil jurisdiction, the Chief
Justice of the High Court may, by order, constitute Commercial Division
having one or more Benches consisting of a single Judge for the purpose of
exercising the jurisdiction and powers conferred on it under this Ordinance.
(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall nominate such judges of
the High Court who have experience in dealing with commercial disputes
to be judges of the Commercial Division.
5. (1) After issuing notification under sub-section (1) of section 3 or
order under sub-section (1) of section 4, the Chief Justice of the concerned
High Court shall, by order, constitute Commercial Appellate Division having
one or more Division Benches for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction
and powers conferred on it by the Ordinance.
(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall nominate such judges of
the High Court who have experience in dealing with commercial disputes
to be judges of the Commercial Appellate Division.
6. The Commercial Court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits and
applications relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified V alue arising
out of the entire territory of the State over which it has been vested territorial
jurisdiction.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a commercial dispute
shall be considered to arise out of the entire territory of the State over
which a Commercial Court has been vested jurisdiction, if the suit or
application relating to such commercial dispute has been instituted as per
the provisions of sections 16 to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
7. All suits and applications relating to commercial disputes of a Specified
Value filed in a High Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction shall be
heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division of that High Court:
Provided that all suits and applications relating to commercial disputes,
stipulated by an Act to lie in a court not inferior to a District Court, and filed
on the original side of the High Court, shall be heard and disposed of by the
Commercial Division of the High Court:
Provided further that all suits and applications transferred to the High
Court by virtue of sub-section (4) of section 22 of the Designs Act, 2000
or section 104 of the Patents Act, 1970 shall be heard and disposed of by
the Commercial Division of the High Court in all the areas over which the
High Court exercises ordinary original civil jurisdiction.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, no civil revision application or petition shall be entertained
against any interlocutory order of a Commercial Court, including an order
on the issue of jurisdiction, and any such challenge, subject to the provisions
of section 13, shall be raised only in an appeal against the decree of the
Commercial Court.
Constitution of
Commercial
Division of
High Court.
Constitution of
Commercial
Appellate Divi-
sion.
Jurisdiction of
Commercial
Court.
Jurisdiction of
Commercial Di-
visions of High
Courts.
5 of 1908.
16 of 2000.
39 of 1970.
Bar against revi-
sion application
or  petition
against an inter-
locutory order.

91
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in the event that a counter-claim filed in a suit before a
civil court relating to a commercial dispute is of Specified Value, such suit
shall be transferred by the civil court to the Commercial Division or
Commercial Court, as the case may be, having territorial jurisdiction over
such suit.
(2) In the event that such suit is not transferred in the manner
contemplated in sub-section (1), the Commercial Appellate Division of the
High Court exercising supervisory jurisdiction over the civil court in question
may, on the application of any of the parties to the suit, withdraw such suit
pending before the civil court and transfer the same for trial or disposal to
the Commercial Court or Commercial Division or, as the case may be,
having territorial jurisdiction over such suit, and such order of transfer
shall be final and binding.
10. Where the subject matter of an arbitration is a commercial dispute
of a Specified Value and—
(1) If such arbitration is an international commercial arbitration, all
applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that have been filed in a High
Court, shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Appellate Division
where such Commercial Appellate Division has been constituted in such
High Court.
(2) If such arbitration is other than an international commercial
arbitration, all applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under
the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that have been
filed on the original side of the High Court, shall be heard and disposed of
by the Commercial Appellate Division where such Commercial Appellate
Division has been constituted in such High Court.
(3) If such arbitration is other than an international commercial
arbitration, all applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under
the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that would
ordinarily lie before any principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a
district (not being a High Court) shall be filed in, and heard and disposed of
by the Commercial Court exercising territorial jurisdiction over such
arbitration where such Commercial Court has been constituted.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, a Commercial
Court or a Commercial Division shall not entertain or decide any suit,
application or proceedings relating to any commercial dispute in respect of
which the jurisdiction of the civil court is either expressly or impliedly
barred under any other law for the time being in force.
5 of 1908.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
Transfer of suit
if counter-claim
in a commercial
dispute is of
Specified Value.
Jurisdiction in
respect of arbi-
tration matters.
Bar of jurisdic-
tion of Com-
mercial Courts
and Commer-
cial Divisions.
26 of 1996.

92
CHAPTER III
SPECIFIED VALUE
12. (1) The Specified Value of the subject matter of the commercial
dispute in a suit, appeal or application shall be determined in the following
manner:—
(a) where the relief sought in a suit or application is for recovery of
money, the money sought to be recovered in the suit or application
inclusive of interest, if any, computed up to the date of filing of the suit
or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account, for
determining such Specified Value;
(b) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to
movable property or to a right therein, the market value of the movable
property as on the date of filing of the suit, appeal or application, as the case
may be, shall be taken into account for determining such Specified Value;
(c) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to
immovable property or to a right therein, the market value of the
immovable property, as on the date of filing of the suit, appeal or
application, as the case may be, shall be taken into account for
determining Specified Value;
(d) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to
any other intangible right, the market value of the said rights as estimated
by the plaintiff shall be taken into account for determining Specified
Value; and
(e) where the counter-claim is raised in any suit, appeal or
application, the value of the subject matter of the commercial dispute
in such counter-claim as on the date of the counter-claim shall be taken
into account.
(2) The aggregate value of the claim and counter-claim, if any, as set
out in the statement of claim and the counter-claim, if any, in an arbitration
of a commercial dispute shall be the basis for determining whether such
arbitration is subject to the jurisdiction of a Commercial Division,
Commercial Appellate Division or Commercial Court, as the case may be.
(3) No appeal or civil revision application under section 115 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as the case may be, shall lie from an order
of a Commercial Division or Commercial Court finding that it has jurisdiction
to hear a commercial dispute under this Ordinance.
CHAPTER IV
A
PPEALS
13. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commercial Court
or Commercial Division of a High Court may appeal to the Commercial
Determination
of Specified
V alue.
5 of 1908.
Appeals from
decrees of Com-
mercial Courts

93
Appellate Division of that High Court within a period of sixty days from the
date of judgment or order, as the case may be:
Provided that an appeal shall lie from such orders passed by a
Commercial Division or a Commercial Court that are specifically
enumerated under Order XLIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as
amended by this Ordinance and section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force or Letters Patent of a High Court, no appeal shall lie from any
order or decree of a Commercial Division or Commercial Court otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
14. The Commercial Appellate Division shall endeavour to dispose of
appeals filed before it within a period of six months from the date of filing
of such appeal.
CHAPTER V
T
RANSFER OF PENDING SUITS
15. (1) All suits and applications, including applications under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of
Specified Value pending in a High Court where a Commercial Division has
been constituted, shall be transferred to the Commercial Division.
(2) All suits and applications, including applications under the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of Specified
Value pending in any civil court in any district or area in respect of which a
Commercial Court has been constituted, shall be transferred to such
Commercial Court:
Provided that no suit or application where the final judgment has been
reserved by the Court prior to the constitution of the Commercial Division
or the Commercial Court shall be transferred either under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2).
(3) Where any suit or application, including an application under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of
Specified Value shall stand transferred to the Commercial Division or
Commercial Court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the provisions
of this Ordinance shall apply to those procedures that were not complete at
the time of transfer.
(4) The Commercial Division or Commercial Court, as the case may
be, may hold case management hearings in respect of such transferred suit
or application in order to prescribe new timelines or issue such further
directions as may be necessary for a speedy and efficacious disposal of
and Commer-
cial Divisions.
Expeditious
disposal of
appeals.
Transfer of
pending cases.
5 of 1908.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.

94
such suit or application in accordance with Order XIV-A of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided that the proviso to sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of Order V of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall not apply to such transferred suit or
application and the court may, in its discretion, prescribe a new time period
within which the written statement must be filed.
(5) In the event that such suit or application is not transferred in the
manner specified in sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), the
Commercial Appellate Division of the High Court may, on the application of
any of the parties to the suit, withdraw such suit or application from the
court before which it is pending and transfer the same for trial or disposal
to the Commercial Division or Commercial Court, as the case may be,
having territorial jurisdiction over such suit, and such order of transfer
shall be final and binding.
CHAPTER VI
A
MENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF CIVIL
PROCEDURE, 1908
16. (1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall, in
their application to any suit in respect of a commercial dispute of a Specified
Value, stand amended in the manner as specified in the Schedule.
(2) The Commercial Division and Commercial Court shall follow the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as amended by this
Ordinance, in the trial of a suit in respect of a commercial dispute of a
Specified Value.
(3) Where any provision of any Rule of the jurisdictional High Court
or any amendment to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, by the State
Government is in conflict with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, as amended by this Ordinance, the provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure as amended by this Ordinance shall prevail.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
17. The statistical data regarding the number of suits, applications,
appeals or writ petitions filed before the Commercial Court, Commercial
Division, or Commercial Appellate Division, as the case may be, the pendency
of such cases, the status of each case, and the number of cases disposed
of, shall be maintained and updated every month by each Commercial Court,
Commercial Division, Commercial Appellate Division and shall be published
on the website of the relevant High Court.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.Amendments
to Code of Civil
Procedure,
1908 in its
application to
Commercial dis-
putes.
Collection and
disclosure of
data by Com-
mercial Courts,
Commercial
Divisions and
Commercial
Appellate Divi-
sions.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

95
18. The High Court may, by notification, issue practice directions to
supplement the provisions of Chapter II or the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 in so far as such provisions apply to the hearing of commercial disputes
of a Specified V alue.
19. The State Government shall provide necessary infrastructure to
facilitate the working of a Commercial Court or a Commercial Division of
a High Court.
20. The State Government may, in consultation with the High Court,
establish necessary facilities providing for training of Judges who may be
appointed to the Commercial Court, Commercial Division or the Commercial
Appellate Division in a High Court.
21. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in
any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect
by virtue of any law for the time being in force other than this Ordinance.
22. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Ordinance, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this
Ordinance.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power of High
Court to issue
directions.
Infrastructure
facilities.
Training and
continuous edu-
cation.
Act to have
overriding ef-
fect.
Power to re-
move difficul-
ties.
5 of 1908.

96
SCHEDULE
(SEE SECTION 17)
1. In section 26 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereafter referred
to as the Code), in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:-
"Provided that such an affidavit shall be in the form and manner as
prescribed under Order VI Rule 15A.".
2. For section 35 of the Code, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"35.(1) In relation to any commercial dispute, the Court,
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force or Rule, has the discretion to determine:
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;
(b) the quantum of those costs; and
(c) when they are to be paid.
Explanation.— For the purpose of clause (a), the expression "costs"
shall mean reasonable costs relating to—
(i) the fees and expenses of the witnesses incurred;
(ii) legal fees and expenses incurred;
(iii) any other expenses incurred in connection with the proceedings.
(2) If the Court decides to make an order for payment of costs, the
general rule is that the unsuccessful party will be ordered to pay the costs
of the successful party:
Provided that the Court may make an order deviating from the general
rule for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Illustration: The Plaintiff, in his suit, seeks a money decree for breach
of contract, and damages. The Court holds that the Plaintiff is entitled to
the money decree. However, it returns a finding that the claim for damages
is frivolous and vexatious.
In such circumstances the Court may impose costs on the Plaintiff,
despite the Plaintiff being the successful party, for having raised frivolous
claims for damages.
(3) In making an order for the payment of costs, the Court shall have
regard to the following circumstances, including —
(a) the conduct of the parties;
5 of 1908. Amendment of
section 26.
Substitution of
new section for
section 35.

97
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that
party has not been wholly successful;
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counter-claim leading
to delay in the disposal of the case;
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle is made by a party and
unreasonably refused by the other party; and
(e) whether the party had made a frivolous claim and instituted a
vexatious proceeding wasting the time of the Court.
(4) The orders which the Court may make under this provision include
an order that a party must pay —
(a) a proportion of another party's costs;
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party's costs;
(c) costs from or until a certain date;
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;
(f) costs relating to a distinct part of the proceedings; and
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.
3. In section 35A of the Code, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
4. In the First Schedule to the Code,—
(A) in the Order V , in Rule 1, in sub-rule (1), for the second proviso,
the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written
statement within the said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file
the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the Court,
for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the
Court deems fit, but which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days
from the date of service of summons. On expiry of one hundred twenty
days from the date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the
right to file the written statement and the Court shall not allow the written
statement to be taken on record.";
(B) in Order VI,—
(i) after Rule 3, the following Rule shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. Forms of pleading in Commercial Courts — In a
Commercial Dispute, where forms of pleadings have been prescribed
under the High Court Rules or Practice Directions made for the
Amendment of
section 35A.
Amendment of
First Schedule.

98
purposes of such commercial disputes, pleadings shall be in such
forms.";
(ii) after Rule 15, the following Rule shall be inserted; namely:—
"15A. Verification of pleadings in a Commercial Dispute.—
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 15, every
pleading in a Commercial Dispute shall be verified by an affidavit
in the manner and form prescribed in the Appendix to this
Schedule.
(2) An affidavit under sub-rule (1) above shall be signed by
the party or by one of the parties to the proceedings, or by any
other person on behalf of such party or parties who is proved
to the s atisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the
facts of the case and who is duly authorised by such party
or parties.
(3) Where a pleading is amended, the amendments must
be verified in the form and manner referred to in sub-rule (1)
unless the Court orders otherwise.
(4) Where a pleading is not verified in the manner provided
under sub-rule (1), the party shall not be permitted to rely
on such pleading as evidence or any of the matters set out
therein.
(5) The Court may strike out a pleading which is not verified
by a Statement of Truth, namely, the affidavit set out in the
Appendix to this Schedule.";
(C) in Order VII, after Rule 2, the following Rule shall be inserted,
namely: —
"2A. Where interest is sought in the suit.—
(1) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall contain a statement
to that effect along with the details set out under sub-rules (2) and (3).
(2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether the
plaintiff is seeking interest in relation to a commercial transaction within
the meaning of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and,
furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the terms of a contract or
under an Act, in which case the Act is to be specified in the plaint; or on
some other basis and shall state the basis of that.
(3) Pleadings shall also state—
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed;
5 of 1908.

99
(b) the date from which it is claimed;
(c) the date to which it is calculated;
(d) the total amount of interest claimed to the date of calculation;
and
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after that date.";
(D) in Order VIII,—
(i) in Rule 1, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written
statement within the said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed
to file the written statement on such other day, as may be specified
by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment
of such costs as the Court deems fit, but which shall not be later
than one hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons.
On expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date of service of
summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written
statement and the Court shall not allow the written statement to be
taken on record.";
(ii) after Rule 3, the following Rule shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. Denial by the defendant in suits before the Commercial
Division of the High Court or the Commercial Court.
(1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub-rules (2), (3), (4) and
(5) of this Rule.
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state which of the
allegations in the particulars of plaint he denies, which allegations he is
unable to admit or deny, but which he requires the plaintiff to prove, and
which allegations he admits.
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a plaint, he must
state his reasons for doing so and if he intends to put forward a different
version of events from that given by the plaintiff, he must state his own
version.
(4) If the defendant disputes the jurisdiction of the Court he must state
the reasons for doing so, and if he is able, give his own statement as to
which Court ought to have jurisdiction.
(5) If the defendant disputes the plaintiff's valuation of the suit, he
must state his reasons for doing so, and if he is able, give his own statement
of the value of the suit." ;

100
(iii) in Rule 5, in sub-rule (1), after the first proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely: –
"Provided further, that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if
not denied in the manner provided under Rule 3A of this Order,
shall be taken to be admitted except as against a person under
disability." ;
(iv) in Rule 10, after the first proviso, the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely: —
"Provided further that no Court shall make an order to extend
the time provided under Rule 1 of this Order for filing of the written
statement.";
(E) for Order XI of the Code, the following Order shall be substituted,
namely:–
"ORDER XI
DISCLOSURE, DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS IN
SUITS BEFORE THE COMMERCIAL DIVISION OF A HIGH COURT OR
A COMMERCIAL COURT
1. (1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all
documents, in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the
suit, along with the plaint, including:
(a) Documents referred to and relied on by the plaintiff in the plaint;
(b) Documents relating to any matter in question in the proceedings,
in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, as on the
date of filing the plaint, irrespective of whether the same is in support
of or adverse to the plaintiff's case;
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by
plaintiffs and relevant only—
(i) for the cross-examination of the defendant's witnesses, or
(ii) in answer to any case setup by the defendant subsequent to
the filing of the plaint, or
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.
(2) The list of documents filed with the plaint shall specify whether the
documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are
originals, office copies or photocopies. The list shall also set out in brief,
details of parties to each document, mode of execution, issuance or receipt
and line of custody of each document.
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that
all documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff,
Disclosure and
discovery of
documents.

101
pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by
him have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and
that the plaintiff does not have any other documents in its power, possession,
control or custody.
Explanation .—A declaration on oath under this sub-rule shall be
contained in the Statement of Truth as set out in the Appendix.
(4) In case of urgent filings, plaintiff may seek leave to rely on additional
documents, as part of the above declaration on oath and subject to grant of
such leave by Court, the plaintiff shall file such additional documents in
Court, within thirty days of filing the suit, along with a declaration on oath
that the plaintiff has produced all documents in its power, possession, control
or custody, pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings
initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does not have any other
documents, in its power, possession, control or custody.
(5) Plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were in
the plaintiffs power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed along
with plaint or within the extended period set out above, save and except by
leave of Court. Such leave shall be granted only upon the plaintiff establishing
reasonable cause for non-disclosure along with the plaint.
(6) the plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff
believes to be in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant
and which the plaintiff wishes to rely upon and seek leave for production
thereof by the said defendant.
(7) Defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all
documents, in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the
suit, along with the written statement or with its counter-claim if any,
including—
(a) documents referred to and relied on by the defendant in the
written statement;
(b) documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding
in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant,
irrespective of whether the same is in support of or adverse to the
defendant's defense;
(c) nothing in this Rule shall apply to documents produced by
defendants and relevant only—
(i) for the cross-examination of the plaintiffs witnesses,
(ii) in answer to any case setup by the plaintiff subsequent to
the filing of the plaint, or
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.

102
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counter-
claim shall specify whether the documents, in the power, possession, control
or custody of the defendant, are originals, office copies or photocopies.
The list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document being
produced by the defendant, mode of execution, issuance or receipt and line
of custody of each document;
(9) The written statement or counter-claim shall contain a declaration
on oath made by the deponent that all documents in the power, possession,
control or custody of the defendant, save and except for those set out in
sub-rule 7 (c)(iii) above, pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the
proceedings initiated by the plaintiff or in the counter-claim, have been
disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the written statement or counter-
claim and that the defendant does not have in its power, possession, control
or custody, any other documents;
(10) Save and except for sub-rule 7 (c)(iii), defendant shall not be
allowed to rely on documents, which were in the defendant's power,
possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with the written
statement or counter claim, save and except by leave of Court. Such leave
shall be granted only upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause for
non-disclosure along with the written statement or counter-claim;
(11) The written statement or counter-claim shall set out details of
documents in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff,
which the defendant wishes to rely upon and which have not been disclosed
with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce the same;
(12) Duty to disclose documents, which have come to the notice of a
party, shall continue till disposal of the suit.
2. (1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court may
deliver interrogatories in writing for the examination of the opposite parties
or anyone or more of such parties, and such interrogatories when delivered
shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such interrogatories
each of such persons is required to answer:
Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of interrogatories
to the same party without an order for that purpose:
Provided further that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters
in question in the suit shall be deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they
might be admissible on the oral cross-examination of a witness.
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular
interrogatories proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the court, and
that court shall decide within seven days from the day of filing of the said
application, in deciding upon such application, the court shall take into
Discovery by
Interrogatories.

103
account any offer, which may be made by the party sought to be interrogated
to deliver particulars, or to make admissions, or to produce documents
relating to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be given
as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider
necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
(3) In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any
party be made into the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it
is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the court, either with or without an
application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have been exhibited
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned by
the said interrogatories and the answers thereto shall be paid in any event
by the party in fault.
(4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No.2 in
Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with such variations as
circumstances may require.
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons,
whether incorporated or not, empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether
in its own name or in the name of any officer of other person, any opposite
party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any
member or officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made
accordingly.
(6) Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it
is scandalous or irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the
suit, or that the matters inquired into are not sufficiently material at that
stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other ground may be taken in the
affidavit in answer.
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have
been exhibited unreasonably or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground
that they are prolix, oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous and any
application for this purpose may be made within seven days after service
of the interrogatories.
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten
days, or within such other time as the court may allow.
(9) An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in the form provided
in Form No. 3 in Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with
such variations as circumstances may require.
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the
sufficiency or otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient
shall be determined by the court.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

104
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers
insufficiently, the party interrogating may apply to the court for an order
requiring him to answer, or to answer further, as the case may be, and an
order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer further, either
affidavit or by viva voce examination, as the court may direct.
3. (1) All parties shall complete inspection of all documents disclosed
within thirty days of the date of filing of the written statement or written
statement to the counter-claim, whichever is later. The Court may extend
this time limit upon application at its discretion, but not beyond thirty days
in any event.
(2) Any party to the proceedings may seek directions from the Court,
at any stage of the proceedings, for inspection or production of documents
by the other party, of which inspection has been refused by such party or
documents have not been produced  despite issuance of a notice to produce.
(3) Order in such application shall be disposed of within thirty days of
filing such application, including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted
by Court) and hearing.
(4) If the above application is allowed, inspection and copies thereof
shall be furnished to the party seeking it, within five days of such order.
(5) No party will be permitted to rely on a document, which it had
failed to disclose or of which inspection has not been given, save and
except with leave of Court.
(6) Court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party, who
wilfully or negligently failed to disclose all. documents pertaining to a suit
or essential for a decision therein and which are in their power, possession,
control or custody or where a Court holds that inspection or copies of any
documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld or refused.
4. (1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or denials of
all documents disclosed and of which inspection has been completed, within
fifteen days of the completion of inspection or any later date as fixed by the
Court.
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly,
whether such party was admitting or denying:
(a) Correctness of contents of a document;
(b) Existence of a document;
(c) Execution of a document;
(d) Issuance or receipt of a document;
(e) Custody of a document.
Admission and
denial of docu-
ments.
Inspection.

105
Explanation.—A statement of admission or denial of the existence of a
document made in accordance with sub-rule 3(2)(b) of the modified order
XI will include the admission or denial of the contents of a document.
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any
of the above grounds. Bare and unsupported denials shall not be deemed to
be denials of a document and proof of such documents may then be
dispensed with at the discretion of the Court.
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party
documents of which the party denying does not have any personal
knowledge of, and to which the party denying is not a party to in any
manner whatsoever.
(5) An Affidavit in support of the statement of admissions and
denials shall be filed confirming the correctness of the contents of
the statement.
(6) In the event that the Court holds that any party has unduly refused
to admit a document under any of the above criteria, costs (including
exemplary costs) for deciding on admissibility of a document may be
imposed by the Court on such party.
(7) Court may pass orders with respect to admitted documents including
for waiver of further proof thereon or rejection of any documents.
5. (1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the Court may order, at
any time during the pendency of any suit, production by any party or person,
of such documents in the possession or power of such party or person,
relating to any matter in question in such suit.
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the Form provided
in Form No.7 in Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall
be given not less than seven days and not more than fifteen days to produce
such document or to answer to their inability to produce such document.
(4) The Court may draw an adverse inference against a party refusing
to produce such document after issuance of a notice to produce and where
sufficient reasons for such non-production are not given and order costs.
6. (1) In case of disclosures and inspection of Electronic Records (as
defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000), furnishing of printouts
shall be sufficient compliance of the above provisions.
(2) At the discretion of the parties or where required (when parties
wish to rely on audio or video content), copies of electronic records may
be furnished in electronic form either in addition to or in lieu of printouts.
5 of 1908.
21 of 2000.
Production of
documents.
Electronic
Records.

106
(3) Where Electronic Records form part of documents disclosed, the
declaration on oath to be filed by a party shall specify—
(a) parties to such Electronic Record;
(b) manner in which such electronic record was produced and by
whom;
(c) dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or receipt
of each such electronic record;
(d) source of such electronic record and date and time when the
electronic record was printed;
(e) in case of email ids, details of ownership, custody and access
to such email ids;
(f) in case of documents stored on a computer or computer resource
(including on external servers or cloud), details of ownership, custody
and access to such data on the computer or computer resource;
(g) deponent's knowledge of contents and correctness of contents;
(h) whether the computer or computer resource used for preparing
or receiving or storing such document or data was functioning properly
or in case of malfunction that such malfunction did not affect the
contents of the document stored;
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the original
computer or computer resource.
(4) The parties relying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any
electronic records, will not be required to give inspection of electronic
records, provided a declaration is made by such party that each such copy,
which has been produced, has been made from the original Electronic
Record.
(5) The Court may give directions for admissibility of Electronic Records
at any stage of the proceedings.
(6) Any party may seek directions from the Court and the Court may
of its motion issue directions for submission of further proof of any
electronic record including metadata or logs before admission of such
electronic record.
7. For avoidance of doubt, it is hereby clarified that Order XIII Rule 1,
Order VII Rule 14 and Order VIII Rule 1 A the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 shall not apply to suits or applications before the Commercial Divisions
of High Court or Commercial Courts.".
5. After Order XIII of the Code, the following Order shall be inserted,
namely:—
5 of 1908.
Certain provi-
sions of the
Code of Civil
Procedure,
1908 not to
apply.
Insertion of
new Order
XIII-A.

107
ORDER XIII-A
1. (1)  This Order sets out the procedure by which Courts may decide
a claim pertaining to any Commercial Dispute without recording oral
evidence.
(2) For the purposes of this Order, the word "claim" shall include—
(a) part of a claim;
(b) any particular question on which the claim (whether in whole
or in part) depends; or
(c) a counter-claim, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an application for summary
judgment under this Order shall not be made in a suit in respect of any
Commercial Dispute that is originally filed as a summary suit under Order
XXXVII.
2. An applicant may apply for summary judgment at any time after
summons has been served on the defendant:
Provided that, no application for summary judgment may be made by
such applicant after the Court has framed the issues in respect of the suit.
3. Grounds for summary judgment.- The Court may give a summary
judgment against a plaintiff or defendant on a claim if it considers that—
(a) the plaintiff has no real prospect of succeeding on the claim or
the defendant has no real prospect of successfully defending the claim,
as the case may be; and
(b) there is no other compelling reason why the claim should not
be disposed of before recording of oral evidence.
4. (1) An application for summary judgment to a Court shall, in addition
to any other matters the applicant may deem relevant, include the matters
set forth in sub-rules (a) to (f) mentioned hereunder:
(a) the application must contain a statement that it is an application
for summary judgment made under this Order;
(b) the application must preciselydisclose all material facts and
identify the point of law, if any;
(c) in the event the applicant seeks to rely upon any documentary
evidence, the applicant must,—
(i) include such documentary evidence in its application, and
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence
on which the applicant relies;
Stage for appli-
cation for sum-
mary judgment.
Procedure.
Scope of and
classes of suits
to which this
Order applies.

108
(d) the application must state the reason why there are no real
prospects of succeeding on the claim or defending the claim, as the
case may be;
(e) the application must state what relief the applicant is seeking
and briefly state the grounds for seeking such relief.
(2) Where a hearing for summary judgment is fixed, the respondent
must be given at least thirty days' notice of:
(a) the date fixed for the hearing; and
(b) the claim that is proposed to be decided by the Court at such
hearing.
(3) The respondent may, within thirty days of the receipt of notice of
application of summary judgment or notice of hearing (whichever is earlier),
file a reply addressing the matters set forth in sub-rules (a) to (f) mentioned
hereunder in addition to any other matters that the respondent may deem
relevant:
(a) The reply must precisely—
(i) disclose all material facts;
(ii) identify the point of law, if any; and
(iii) state the reasons why the relief sought by the applicant
should not be granted;
(b) in the event the respondent seeks to rely upon any documentary
evidence in its reply, the respondent must-
(i) include such documentary evidence in its reply; and
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence
on which the respondent relies;
(c) the reply must state the reason why there are real prospects of
succeeding on the claim or defending the claim, as the case may be;
(d) the reply must concisely state the issues that should be framed
for trial;
(e) the reply must identify what further evidence will be brought
on record at trial that could not be brought on record at the stage of
summary judgment; and
(f) the reply must state why, in light of the evidence or material on
record if any, the Court should not proceed to summary judgment.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the respondent in an
application for summary judgment wishes to rely on additional documentary
evidence during the hearing, the respondent must:
Evidence for
hearing of sum-
mary judgment.

109
(a) file such documentary evidence; and
(b) serve copies of such documentary evidence on every other
party to the application at least fifteen days prior to the date of the
hearing.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the applicant for summary
judgment wishes to rely on documentary evidence in reply to the defendant's
documentary evidence, the applicant must:
(a) file such documentary evidence in reply; and
(b) serve a copy of such documentary evidence on the respondent
at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, sub-rules (1) and (2)
above shall not require documentary evidence to be:
(a) filed if such documentary evidence has already been filed; or
(b) served on a party on whom it has already been served.
6. (1) On an application made under this Order, the Court may make
such orders that it may deem fit in its discretion including the following:
(a) judgment on the claim;
(b) conditional order in accordance with Rule 7 mentioned
hereunder;
(c) dismissing the application;
(d) dismissing part of the claim and a judgment on part of the claim
that is not dismissed;
(e) striking out the pleadings (whether in whole or in part); or
(f) further directions to proceed for case management under Order
XV A.
(2) Where the Court makes any of the orders as set forth in sub-rule
(l)(a) to (f) above, the Court shall record its reasons for making such
order.
7. (1) Where it appears to the Court that it is possible that a claim or
defence may succeed but it is improbable that it will do so, the Court may
make a conditional order as set forth in Rule 6(b) above.
(2) Where the Court makes a conditional order, it may:
(a) make it subject to all or any of the following conditions:
(i) require a party to deposit a sum of money in the Court;
Orders that may
be made by the
Court.
Conditional
order.

110
(ii) require a party to take a specified step in relation to the
claim or defence, as the case may be;
(iii) require a party, as the case may be, to give such security
or provide such surety for restitution of costs as the Court deems
fit and proper;
(iv) impose such other conditions, including providing security
for restitution of losses that any party is likely to suffer during the
pendency of the suit, as the Court may deem fit in its discretion;
and
(b) specify the consequences of the failure to comply with the
conditional order, including passing a judgment against the party that
have not complied with the conditional order.
8. The Court may make an order for payment of costs in an application
for summary judgment in accordance with the provisions of sections 35
and 35A of the Code.".
6. Order XV of the Code shall be omitted.
7. After Order XV of the Code, the following Order shall be Insertion
of inserted, namely:—
"O
RDER XV-A
1. The Court shall hold the first Case Management Hearing, not later
than four weeks from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial
of documents by all parties to the suit.
2. In a Case Management Hearing, after hearing the parties, and once it
finds that there are issues of fact and law which require to be tried, the
Court may pass an order—
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order
XIV of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 after examining pleadings,
documents and documents produced before it, and on examination
conducted by the Court under Rule 2 of Order X, if required;
(b) listing witnesses to be examined by the parties;
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of evidence to be filed by
parties;
(d) fixing the dates on which evidence of the witnesses of the
parties to be recorded;
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed before
the Court by the parties;
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the
Court; and
Omission of
Order XV .
Inssertion of
Order XV-A
First  Case
Management
Hearing.
5 of 1908.
Orders to be
passed in a Case
Management
Hearing.
Power to im-
pose costs.

111
(g) setting time limits for parties and/or their advocates to address
oral arguments.
3. In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of Rule 2 of
this Order, the Court shall ensure that the arguments are closed not later
than six months from the date of the first case management hearing.
4. The Court shall, as far as possible, ensure that the recording of
evidence shall be carried on, on a day-to-day basis until the cross-
examination of all the witnesses is complete.
5. The Court may, if necessary, also hold Case Management Hearings
anytime during the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence
by the parties to the dates fixed under Rule 2 and facilitate speedy disposal
of the suit.
6. ( 1) In any Case Management Hearing held under this Order, the
Court shall have the power to -
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decide any pending
application filed by the parties under Order XIIIA;
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings
relevant and necessary for framing issues;
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice,
direction or Court order if it finds sufficient reason to do so;
(d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason
to do so;
(e) direct a party to attend the Court for the purposes of examination
under Rule 2 of Order X;
(f) consolidate proceedings;
(g) strike off the name of any witness or evidence that it deems
irrelevant to the issues framed;
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue;
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried;
(j) exclude an issue from consideration;
(k) dismiss or give judgment on a claim after a decision on a
preliminary issue;
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a Commission where
necessary in accordance with Order XXVI;
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing
irrelevant, inadmissible or argumentative material;
Time limit for
the completion
of a trial.
Recording of
oral evidence on
a day-to-day
basis.
Case Manage-
ment Hearings
during a trial.
Powers of the
Court in a Case
Management
Hearing.

112
(n) strike off any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the
parties containing irrelevant, inadmissible or argumentative material;
(o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed
by the Court for this purpose;
(p) pass any order relating to the monitoring of recording the
evidence by a commission or any other authority;
(q) order any party to file and exchange a costs budget;
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing
the case and furthering the overriding objective of ensuring the efficient
disposal of the suit.
(2) When the Court passes an order in exercise of its powers under
this Order, it may—
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a
sum of money into Court; and
(b) specify the consequence of failure to comply with the order or
a condition.
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the Court
may direct that the parties also be present for such case management hearing,
if it is of the view that there is a possibility of settlement between the
parties.
7. (1) The Court shall not adjourn the Case Management Hearing for
the sale reason that the advocate appearing on behalf of a party is not
present:
Provided that an adjournment of the hearing is sought in advance by
moving an application, the Court may adjourn the hearing to another date
upon the payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, by the party moving
such application.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Rule, if the Court is
satisfied that there is a justified reason for the absence of the advocate, it
may adjourn the hearing to another date upon such terms and conditions it
deems fit.
8. Where any party fails to comply with the order of the Court passed
in a Case Management Hearing, the Court shall have the power to-
(a) condone such non-compliance by payment of costs to the Court;
(b) foreclose the non-compliant party's right to file affidavits, conduct
cross-examination of witnesses, file written submissions, address oral
arguments or make further arguments in the trial, as the case may be,
or
Adjournment of
Case Manage-
ment Hearing.
Consequences
of non-compli-
ance with or-
ders.

113
(c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non-compliance
is wilful, repeated and the imposition of costs is not adequate to ensure
compliance.".
8. In Order XVIII of the Code, in Rule 2, for sub-rules (3A), (3B),
(3C), (3D), (3E) and (3F), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior to commencing the
oral arguments, submit concisely and under distinct headings written
arguments in support of his case to the Court and such written
arguments shall form part of the record.
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions of
the laws being cited in support of the arguments and the citations of
judgments being relied upon by the party and include copies of such
judgments being relied upon by the party.
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished
simultaneously to the opposite party.
(3D) The Court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of
arguments, permit the parties to file revised written arguments within a
period of not more than one week after the date of, conclusion of
arguments.
(3E) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the
written arguments unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment.
(3F) It will be open for the Court to limit the time for oral
submissions having regard to the nature and complexity of the matter.".
9. In Order XVIII of the Code, in Rule 4, after sub-rule (1), the following
sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
(I A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is
proposed to be led by a party shall be filed simultaneously by that party
at the time directed in the first case management hearing.
(IB) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of
any witness (including of a witness who has already filed an affidavit)
unless sufficient cause is made out in an application for that purpose
and an order, giving reasons, permitting such additional affidavit is
passed by the Court.
(1C) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the
affidavits so filed at any time prior to commencement of cross-
examination of that witness, without any adverse inference being drawn
based on such withdrawal:
Amendment of
Order XVIII.
Amendment of
Order XVIII.

114
Provided that any other party will be entitled to tender as evidence
and rely upon any admission made in such withdrawn affidavit.".
10. In Order XIX of the Code, after Rule 3, the following Rules shall
be inserted, namely:—
"4. (1) The Court may, by directions, regulate the evidence as to
issues on which it requires evidence and the manner in which such
evidence may be placed before the Court.
(2) The Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded
in writing, exclude evidence that would otherwise be produced by the
parties.".
5. A Court may, in its discretion, for reasons to be recorded in writing—
(i) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit of
examination-in-chief as do not, in its view, constitute evidence.
(ii) return or reject an affidavit of examination-in-chief as not
constituting admissible evidence.
6. An affidavit must comply with the form and requirements set forth
below:
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the
chronological sequence of, the dates and events that are relevant for
proving any fact or any other matter dealt with;
(b) where the Court is of the view that an affidavit is a mere
reproduction of the pleadings, or contains the legal grounds of any
party's case, the Court may, by order, strike out the affidavit or such
parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper;
(c) each paragraph of an affidavit should, as far as possible, be
confined to a distinct portion of the subject;
(d) an affidavit shall state—
(i) which of the statements in it are made from the deponent's
own knowledge and which are matters of information or belief;
and
(ii) the source for any matters of information or belief.
(e) an affidavit should-
(i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate
document (or as one of several documents contained in a file);
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs;
(iii) have all numbers, including dates, expressed in figures;
and
Format and
guidelines of af-
fidavit of evi-
dence.
Amendment of
Order XIX.
Court may con-
trol evidence.
Redacting or
rejecting evi-
dence.

115
Amendment of
Order XX.
(iv) if any of the documents referred to in the body of the
affidavit are annexed to the affidavit or any other pleadings, give
the annexures and page numbers of such documents that are relied
upon.".
11. In Order XX of the Code, for Rule 1, the following Rule shall be
substituted, namely:—
"( 1) The Commercial Court, Commercial Division, or Commercial
Appellate Division, as the case may be, shall, within ninety days of the
conclusion of arguments, pronounce judgment and copies thereof shall
be issued to all the parties to the dispute through electronic mail or
otherwise.",

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF  TRUTH
(Under First Schedule, Order VI- Rule 15A and Order X- Rule 1)
STATEMENT OF TRUTH BY [party position and name of party in full] I,
the deponent above-named, do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. I am [name of party and relevant details] in the above suit and
competent to swear this affidavit.
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also
examined all relevant documents and records in relation thereto.
3. I say that the statements made in [mention specific paragraph
numbers] paragraphs are true to my knowledge and statements made in
[mention specific paragraph numbers] paragraphs are based on information
received which I believe to be correct and statements made in [mention
specific paragraph numbers] are based on legal advice.
4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material
fact, document or record and I have included information that is according
to me, relevant for the present suit.
5. I say that that all documents in my power, possession, control or
custody, pertaining to the facts and circumstances of the proceedings
initiated by me have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the
plaint, and that I do not have any other documents in my power, possession,
control or custody.
6. I say that the above-mentioned pleading comprises of a total of
[number of pages] pages, each of which has been signed by me.
7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents
referred to and relied upon by me.
8. I say that I am aware that for any false statement or concealment, I
shall be liable for action taken against me under the law.
Place:
Date:
116

VERIFICA TION
The statements made above are true to my knowledge.
Verified at [place] on this [date]
DEPONENT
PRANAB MUKHERJEE,
President.
____________
DR. G . NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
117

118
ANNEXURE - III
Pendency of cases in High Court as on 31.3.2014
Sl. No. Name of the High Pendency of civil Total % increase or
Court cases at the end of decrease in pendency
the quarter since 01.01.2014
(negative indicates
decrease)
12 3 4
1. Allahabad 695431 1.10
2. Andhra Pradesh 201425 1.43
3. Bombay 299931 1.06
4. Calcutta 230317 -8.47
5. Chhattisgarh 29420 -4.26
6. Delhi 49000 0.77
7. Gujarat 51384 0.73
8. Gauhati 33534 2.09
9. Tripura 4743 -0.55
10. Meghalaya 1114 0.42
11. Manipur 3761 5.10
12. Himachal Pradesh 54015 1.77
13. Jammu & Kashmir 87794 3.14
14. Jharkhand 38001 1.93
15. Karnataka 179379 3.03
16. Kerala 99573 1.20
17. Madhya Pradesh 174665 0.30
18. Madras 490383 3.00
19. Orissa 168794 -43.50
20. Patna 79896 0.13
21. Punjab & Haryana 200549 2.50
118

119
22. Rajasthan 244020 -1.25
23. Sikkim 95 36.36
24. Uttarakhand 15269 3.10
TOTAL 3432493 -2.91
Note: Although the figures for Chandigarh and Punjab & Haryana relate to the same High Court, they are
presented separately in the "Court News" publication and the same is reflected here.
Therefore, at present, we find that 34,32,493 civil cases are pending across the 24 High Courts in India.
12 3 4

120
ANNEXURE - IV
A Comparative Statement of the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of
High Courts Bill 2015 and in the Ordinance
Clause Provisions in the Bill Provision in the Ordinance
No. in
the Bill
120
3. 3. Constitution of Commercial Courts,
Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate
Divisions.
(I )(a) In all States or Union territories where the
High Court does not have ordinary original civil
jurisdiction, the State Government may, after
consultation with the concerned High Court, by
notification, constitute such number of Commercial
Courts, as it may deem necessary. for the purpose
of exercising the jurisdiction conferred on those
Courts by the Act.
(b) In all States or Union territories where the High
Court has ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the
State Government may, after consultation with the
concerned High Court, by notification, constitute
such number of Commercial Courts, as it may deem
necessary, for the purpose or exercising the
jurisdiction conferred on those Courts the Act.
(c) The Commercial Courts as referred to in clause
(a) shall consist of such number or judges as may
be appointed in accordance with the provisions of
section 5.
(d) The Commercial Courts as referred to in clause
(b) shall consist of such number of judges as may
be appointed in accordance with the provisions of
section 5.
(2)(a) In all High Courts having ordinary original
civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, after
consultation with the concerned High Court, by
3.  Constitution of Commercial Courts.
(1) The State Government, may after
consultation with the concerned High Court,
by notification, constitute such number of
Commercial Courts at District level, as it may
deem necessary for the purpose of exercising
the jurisdiction and powers conferred on
those Courts under this Ordinance:
     Provided that no Commercial Court shall
be constituted for the territory over which
the High Court has ordinary original civil
jurisdiction.
(2) The State Government shall, after
consultation with the concerned High Court,
specify, by notification. the local limits of
the area to which the jurisdiction of a
Commercial Court shall extend and may, from
time to time, increase, reduce or alter such
limits.
(3) The State Government shall, with the
concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High
Court appoint one or more persons having
experience in dealing with commercial
disputes to be the Judge or Judges, of a
Commercial Court from amougst the cadre
of Higher Judicial Service in the State.

121
notification, constitute a "Commercial Division" of
that High Court.
(b) The Commercial Division of High Court shall
consist of such number of judges as may be
determined from time to time by the Chief  Justice
of the High Court.
(3)(a) The State Government shall, immediately
after assuing notification under sub-sections (1)
and (2), constitute a "Commercial Appellate
Division" of that High Court.
(b) The Commercial Appellate Division shall have
one or more Division Benches as may be determined
from time to time by the Chief Justice of such
High Court.
4. Nomination of judges to the Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Divisions
in High Courts.
(1) The Chief Justice of the concerned High Court
shall nominate such number of Judges of the High
Court as required to be Judges of the Commercial
Division or Commercial Appellate Division of such
High Court.
(2) The Judges to be nominated for the Commercial
Division or the Commercial Appellate Division shall
have experience in dealing with commercial
disputes and such nomination shall be for a period
of two years or such other period as may be
determined by the Chief Justice of the concerned
High Court.
5 Appointment, qualification, terms and
conditions of judges to Commercial Courts.
(1) The Judge of a Commercial Court shall be
appointed by the concerned High Court in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where more than one judge is appointed to a
Commercial Court, the senior most judge shall be
Clause Provisions in the Bill Provision in the Ordinance
No. in
the Bill
The Commercial Division of High Court.
(1) In all High Courts, having ordinary civil
Jurisdiction, the Chief Justice of the High
Court may, by order, constitute Commercial
Division having one or more benches
consisting of a single Judge for the purpose
of exercising the jurisdiction and powers
conferred on it under this Ordinance.
(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall
nominate such judges of the High Court who
have experience in dealing with commercial
disputes to be judges of the commercial
Division.
Commercial Appellate Division.
(1) After issuing notification under sub-
section (1) of section 3 or order under sub-
section (1) of section 4, the Chief Justice of
the concerned High Court shall, by Order.
constitute Commercial Appellate Division
having one or more Division Benches for the

122
designated as "Principal Judge" and shall have such
powers and functions in relation to the Commercial
Court. as the Principal District Judge has for the
purposes of the administration of the District Court.
(3) No person shall be eligible to be appointed a
Judge of a Commercial Court unless such person
(a) is qualified to be appointed as a District Judge
and  has experience in dealing the matters relating
to commercial disputes: or
(b) has for at least seven years held a judicial office
in the territory or India or the office of a member
of a tribunal or any post under the Union or a State
requiring special knowledge of law.
(4) The terms and other conditions of service of
the judges of the Commercial Court shall be such
as may be prescribed:
Provided that such terms and conditions of service
for judge’s of the Commercial Court shall not be
less than that of the post of the Principal District
Judge or any other post in the judicial service
equivalent to the Principal District Judge in that
State or Union territory, as the case may be.
14 Appeals or writ petitions in case of certain
Tribunals.
An appeal or a writ petition filed in a High Court
against the orders of the, –
(a) Competition Appellate Tribunal:
(b) Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal:
(c) Intellectual Property Appellate Board:
(d) Company Law Board or the National Company
Law Tribunal:
(e) Securities Appellate Tribunal:
(f) Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
Tribunal.
Clause Provisions in the Bill Provision in the Ordinance
No. in
the Bill
purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and
powers conferred on it by the Act.
(2)  The Chief Justice of the High Court shall
nominate such judges or the High Court who
have experience in dealing with commercial
disputes to be judges of the Commercial
Appellate Division.
Omitted

123
shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial
Appellate Division of such High Court, if the subject
matter of such appeal or writ petition relates to a
commercial dispute.
23 Power of Central Government to make rules.
(1) The Central Government may, by notification.
make rules for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the
provisions contained in sub-section (1), such rules
may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the manner of appointment of Judge of a
Commercial Court under sub-section (1) of section
5;
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the
Judges of the Commercial Court under sub-section
(4) of section 5; and
(c) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to
be made by rules.
24 Laying of rules before Parliament.
Every rule made and every notification issued under
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made or issued, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rules or notifications, as the case may be, or
both Houses agree that the rule or notifications, as
the case may be, should not be made or issued,
the rule or notification, as the case may be, shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form
Clause Provisions in the Bill Provision in the Ordinance
No. in
the Bill
Omitted
Omitted

124
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or
notification, as the case may be.
Clause Provisions in the Bill Provision in the Ordinance
No. in
the Bill

125
ANNEXURE - V
List of Extant Statutes
Sl. Provisions of Section 2 (c) of the Relevant Acts
No. Commercial Courts, Commercial
Division And Commercial Appellate
Division Of High Courts Bill, 2015
1 (i) ordinary transactions of merchants,
bankers, financiers and traders such as
those relating to mercantile documents,
including enforcement and interpretation
of such documents;
2 (iv) transactions relating to aircraft, aircraft
engines, aircraft equipment and
helicopters, including sales, leasing and
financing of the same;
3 (vi) construction and infrastructure
contracts, including tenders;
The Indian Carriage of Goods By Sea Act, 1925,
The Multimodal Transportation of Goods Act, 1993,
The Merchant Shipping (Carriage of Cargo) Rules, 1995,
The Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993,
The Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
and Enforcement of Security Interests (SARFAESI) Act,
2002,
The Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881,
The Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision
Act, 1955,
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949,
The Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
Act, 1961,
The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970,
Life Insurance Act, 1956,
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act,
1999,
The Actuaries Act, 2006,
The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992,
The Companies Act, 2013,
The Foreign Aircraft Exemption from Taxes and Duties
on Fuel and Lubricants Act, 2002,
The Carriage by Air Act and Amendment, 2009,
The Aircraft Act 1934,
The Air Corporations Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal
Act 1994,
The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act,
2008,
The Indian Contract Act, 1872,
The Building And Other Construction Workers (Regulation
of Employment And Conditions Of Service) Act, 1996,
125

126
The Patents Act, 1970,
Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958,
Trade Marks Act, 1999,
Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and
Protection) Act, 1999,
The Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout Design
Act 2000,
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997,
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal
Procedures, 2005,
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948,
The Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive.
Economic Zone and Other
Maritime Zones Act, 1976,
The Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974,
The Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959,
The Marine Insurance Act 1963,
4 (xvii) intellectual property rights relating
to registered and unregistered trademarks,
copyright, patent, design, domain names,
geographical indications and semicon-
ductor integrated circuits;
5 (xix) exploitation of oil and gas reserves
or other natural resources including
electromagnetic spectrum;