PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                       17 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 5TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in 

CS (P – L) – 33 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 5TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE...................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv) 
3. R EPORT ....................................................................................................................... 1-27 
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE .................................................... 29-40 
5. A NNEXURE .................................................................................................................... 41-109 
 A. The Administrative Tribunals Bill, 2006 ................................................................... 41-47 
 B.  Reply Received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
 (Department of Personnel and Training) to Ques tionnaire on the Bill ........................... 48-51 
 C.  Comments of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
 (Department of Personnel and Training) on the views/suggestions contained  
 in Memoranda Submitted by Individuals/Organisations/Experts on the  
 Provisions of the Bill. ............................................................................................ 52-109 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06) 
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsan a Natchiappan     -----  Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA   
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 4. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 5. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 6. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 7. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
 8. Shri Ram Jethmalani  
 9. Vacant 
 10. Vacant 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
 12. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
 13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar 
 14. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 15. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 16. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 17. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  
 18. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 19. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
 20. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
 21. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 22. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
 23. Shri Harin Pathak 
 24. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan  
 25. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
 26. Shri Vishvendra Singh 
 27. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 28. Vacant 
 29. Vacant 
 30. Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07) 
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsan a Natchiappan     -----  Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 5. Shri Virendra Bhatia 
 6. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 7. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 8. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 9. Shri Tarlochan Singh  
 10. Vacant 
  LOK SABHA 
 11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 12. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar 
 13. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 14. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 15. Dr. C. Krishnan 
 16. Shri Harin Pathak 
 17. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
 18. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan  
 19. Prof. M. Ramadass 
 20. Shri Vishvendra Singh 
 21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki  
 22. Shri Raj Babbar 
 23. Vacant 
 24. Vacant 
 25. Vacant 
 26. Vacant 
 27. Vacant 
 28. Vacant 
 29. Vacant 
 30. Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present its Seventeenth Report on the Administrative Tribunals 
(Amendment) Bill, 2006*. The Bill seeks to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 by 
incorporating an enabling provision for abolition of Central Administrative Tribunal and State 
Administrative Tribunals and for transfer of pending cases to some other authority after the Tribunal is 
abolished. It also seeks to take away contempt pow ers from Administrative Tribunals and to provide for 
appeal against the orders of Administrative Tribunals to the respective High Courts. 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee, Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 18
th March, 2006 and 
pending therein, to the Committee on the 27th March, 2006, for examination and report. 
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue Press Communique to 
solicit views/suggestions from interested individuals/organisations/institutions on various provisions of the 
Bill. Accordingly, a Press Communique was issued in response to which memoranda containing 
suggestions were received by the Committee. 
4. The Committee considered the Bill and heard a presentation by the Se cretary, Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions in its meeting held on the 5th June, 2006. 
5. The Committee heard oral evidence of nine individuals /organisations/ institutions/ experts. 
6. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information placed 
before it:  
(i) Background Note on the Bill; 
(ii) Reply received from the Ministry of Personnel,  Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of 
Personnel and Training) to the Questionnaire on the Bill; and 
(iii) The comments of the Department of Pers onnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the 
views/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various 
organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill. 
7. The Committee held clause- by- clause consider ation of the Bill on the 3rd October, 2006. 
8. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 9th November,2006. 
9. The Committee held six sittings to deliberate upon the various provisions of the Bill. 
 
 
*Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 18th March, 2006.  
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 42996) dated the 28th March, 2006. 
 
 

10. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
F. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN, 
NEW DELHI ;                                                                                                                               Chairman, 
November 9, 2006 Committee on Personnal,   
 Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006 (Annexure-A) seeks to amend the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 in order to provide for an enabling provision for abolition of the 
Tribunal and also for transfer of pending cases to some other authority after the Tribunal is abolished since 
the parent Act does not contain any specific provision for abolition of a Tribunal. The Bill also seeks to 
provide for appeal against the orders of an Administrati ve Tribunal to the respective High Courts to bring 
the Act in line with the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar delivered in March, 
1997. The withdrawal of the power to punish for contempt from the Administrative Tribunals has also 
been sought through the Bill since they have become subject to the jurisdiction of the High Courts. 
2. In the light of the above, the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was introduced* in 
the Rajya Sabha on 18
th March, 2006. It was referred @ to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on 27 th March, 2006 for examination and 
report. 
3. The Committee decided to invite views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the 
Bill. It, accordingly, authorised the Secretariat to  issue a press release inviting views/suggestions. In 
response to the press release published in major English and Hindi dailies and vernacular newspapers. all 
over India on 29
th April, 2006, a number of representati ons/memoranda were received. The list of 
individuals and organisations from whom memoranda were received is provided at Annexure B. 
3.1 The major points raised in the me moranda are summarised as follows: 
(i) The administrative authorities and persons adversely affected by orders of Administrative 
Tribunals will not take seriously the orders of the Tribunal if power to punish for contempt is 
withdrawn. To ensure speedy justice, Section 17 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 
should not be deleted. 
(ii) The Hon’ble Supreme Court has not given any direction that the powers of Administrative 
Tribunals be withdrawn. The Supreme Court had merely upheld the writ jurisdiction of the 
High Courts under the Constitution and had made it clear that Administrative Tribunals are to 
be subject to such jurisdiction of the High Courts. 
(iii)  The abolition of Administrative Tribunals in the States will defeat the very purpose for which 
the Administrative Tribunals Act was enacted. A large number of citizens will be deprived of 
the right of speedy justice wherever Administrative Tribunal is abolished. 
(iv)  The record of disposal of cases of Administrative Tribunals has been excellent as compared to 
that of the subordinate Courts and High Courts. The abolition of the Administrative Tribunals 
will increase the pendency of cases in the High Courts whereby speedy justice will be denied to 
the citizens by putting additional burden on the High Courts. 
3.2 The Committee forwarded the memoranda so received from the individuals and organisations to the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) for their 
comments thereon. The comments (Annexure-E) of the Ministry were received in batches. 

3.3  A Questionnaire on the Bill was also forwarded to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions, the reply (Annexure-D) to which was received on 14th July, 2006. 
3.4 The Ministry in their written reply/comments on the memoranda mainly focused on the following 
points: 
(a) Since all State Governments do not favour abolition of Administrative Tribunals, there is no 
need for repeal of the Administrative Tribunals Act. However, the necessary provisions are 
incorporated in the proposal for transfer of  pending cases etc., and service conditions of 
Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members and other employees of Administrative Tribunals 
proposed for abolition; 
(b)  Deletion of Section 17 does not in any way take away the power of an Administrative Tribunal 
to punish for contempt of itself. On the other hand it does away with the duplication between 
the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 and Section 17 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17, the Administrative Tribunals Act would come within the ambit of 
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 and the Tribunal s can exercise their prerogative to punish for 
contempt within the provisions of Contempt of  Courts Act, 1971. This is also in accordance 
with the recommendations of the National Commission to Review the Working of the 
Constitution (NCRWC); 
(c) It is not intended to do away with the institution of Administrative Tribunals altogether. Only 
an enabling provision is being inserted to take care of the exigencies where such considerations 
could become necessary. There have been proposals from State Governments seeking abolition 
of Administrative Tribunals. This provision is inserted to facilitate such consideration. 
Therefore, it is deemed necessary; and 
(d)  Since High Courts have been deemed as part of the basic structure of the Constitution and their 
appellate jurisdiction cannot be done away with, creation of an appellate Tribunal may only 
further clog the judicial process. 
3.5 The highlights of the replies/comments of the Ministry on the Questionnaire are as follows:- 
(a) The Madhya Pradesh Government had indicated that the Tribunal had not performed upto the 
expectations and proved to be expensive and their effectiveness had been reduced as a 
perceived specialized agency and a substitute of High Court. Government of Tamil Nadu 
proposed abolition of Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal as they felt that it had merely 
become an additional tier in the judicial process and as such needed to be abolished. Karnataka 
Government felt that Karnataka Administrative Tribunal, after Supreme Court’s orders in the 
case of L. Chandrakumar had become an additional tier in the judicial system and as such 
proposed for abolition of the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal; 
(b)  The issue regarding making the Ministry of Law and Justice as the nodal Ministry for all 
Tribunals was recommended by the Supreme Court in L. Chandrakumar ‘s case. This issue was 
considered by a Committee of Secretaries in 1997 which decided that for all Administrative 
Tribunals i.e.  Administrative Tribunals under Article 323-A of the Constitution of India, the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions shall continue to be the nodal Ministry. 

For other Tribunals, the Ministry of Law and Justice was to take a well considered decision. 
These views were conveyed to the Ministry of Law and Justice who are already processing 
further action on the recommendations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions as well as the Ministry of Law and Justice do not 
interfere with the judicial functioning of such bodies, and such an insinuation about their 
independence is unfounded; 
(c)  The proposal to give powers to abolish Tr ibunals emanate from the General Clauses Act, 1897 
which permits that an authority competent to create an institution is competent to abolish it also. 
Under the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, the Central Government is 
competent to set up the Tribunals. As such th e Central Government should be competent to 
abolish them under the provisions of the Act. The proposed Bill is to make an enabling 
provision in the Act for the purpose; 
(d)  The Government does not interfere with the judicial functioning of the Tribunals, therefore the 
presumption that the Members of the Tribunals are hesitant to deliver orders against the 
executive, is not correct. 
4. The Committee took up the consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on 5th June, 2006. The 
Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances  and Pensions made a presentation on the Bill during 
the meeting. He briefly traced the background of the proposed Bill and narrated the reasons for the 
proposed amendments in the principal Act. 
4.1 The Committee further heard the views of Shri  A.K. Behera, President, CAT Bar Association 
(Principal Bench) and Shri D.N. Sahoo, Convenor, Cent ral Secretariat Services Officers Association in its 
meeting held on 12
th July, 2006. It also heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions along with the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms, 
Government of Tamil Nadu on the abolition of the Tamil Nadu State Administrative Tribunal in its 
meeting held on 2
nd August, 2006. 
4.2  The Committee heard Mr. Justice V.S. Malimath (Bangalore), Mr. Justice Ashok Agarwal (Mumbai), 
Advocate Dilip Sharma (Shimla) and Shri M.P. Singh (N ew Delhi) on the various provisions of the Bill in 
its meeting held on the 21st September, 2006. 
4.3  Mr. Justice V.S. Malimath deposed before the Committee as under: 
“……………Because Supreme Court can always interfere  with any decision of the Tribunal and 
High Court can also do it, therefore, High Court jurisdiction will continue to be operative. But, if you 
provide an appeal against an order of the Tribunal, technically, you may say that Article 226 and 227 
can still be exercised, but no judge will exercise ju risdiction. If you say that an appeal to the High 
Court, I mean, you are burdening the High Court wi th another set of cases and thereby delaying the 
disposal of the service matters………” 
4.3.1 He opined that since there is no express provision to enforce the order of the Tribunal, the need is 
either to make a provision for executing the order of the Tribunal or to provide a machinery for executing 
it and that if that cannot be done, the contempt jurisdiction should be allowed to continue. 

4.3.2  He also stated that the aggrieved persons would like to use appeal if it is available and that the High 
Court will then be flooded with a number of cases. If th ere are more cases, there will be more delay and it 
will defeat the entire purpose of the enactment under the Constitutional provisions. 
4.3.3  Another pertinent point raised by him was that the way the Act is being implemented now, it is 
weakening the Tribunal. Firstly, it is making the Tribunal subordinate to the High Court and its stature is 
lowered. Secondly, earlier, the retired Chief Justice used to be the Chairman of the Tribunal and now, this 
practice seems to have been given up. Now a retired  Judge of the High Court can be appointed as 
Chairman since the statute does not provide that the Chairman of the Tribunal should be former Chief 
Justice. Thus the stature of the Tribunal is lowered. 
4.4 Speaking on the issue of abolition of Administrative Tribunals, Mr. Justice Ashok Agarwal deposed 
that the proposal for abolition was not legal and that what the Government could do by legislation should 
be done by that method only. He opined that the legislature should not delegate that power to the 
executive. 
4.4.1 He deposed as under: 
“... If a particular Tribunal is not  working satisfactorily, steps can be taken against that particular 
Tribunal. But, on that account we cannot abolish all the Tribunals across the country in one stroke 
because different States are governed by different conditions of service ...” 
4.5  The Committee took up in-house discussion and clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its 
meeting held on the 3rd October, 2006. The Committee adopted the draft Report on the Bill in its meeting 
held on the 9th November, 2006. 
Background of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 
5. The framers of the Constitution of India in their wisdom invested the Supreme Court and the various 
High Courts with the power of judicial review by specifically enacting Articles 32, 136, 226 and 227 of 
the Constitution. With the enactment of Articles 12,14,15,16,309 and 311 in the Constitution, a large 
number of service matters calling for the adjudication of disputes relating to the recruitment and conditions 
of service of Government servants and also of em ployees in other fields of public employment started 
coming up before the various High Courts whose power of judicial review was invoked for the said 
purpose by the aggrieved employees. 
5.1  The High Courts played a definite and signific ant role in evolving the service jurisprudence in the 
exercise of their power of judicial review. The positive contribution by the High Courts made as aforesaid, 
coupled with the growth in the number of employees in the public field and the manifold problems arising 
in the context of their recruitment and conditions of service and their implicit faith and confidence in the 
High Courts as the unfailing protector of their rights and honour, led to a gradual increase in the institution 
and pendency of service matters in the High Courts. This, in its turn, focused the attention of the Union 
Government on the problem of finding an effective alternative institutional mechanism for the disposal of 
such specialised matters. 
5.2 A Committee set up by the Union Government in 1969 under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice J.C. 
Shah recommended for setting up of an independent Trib unal to handle service matters pending before the 

High Courts and the Supreme Court. In the 124th Report of the Law Commission of India, it was cited that 
in Australia, Tribunals outside the established courts have been created –– Administrative Appeal 
Tribunals, Arbitration Tribunals, Workers’ Compensation Tribunals, Pension Tribunals, Planning Appeal 
Tribunal, Equal Opportunity Tribunals, to name a few. This activity of creating Tribunals is founded on a 
belief that the established Courts are too remote, too legalistic, too expensive and, above all too slow. 
5.3 The Law Commission of India had recommended for the establishment at the Centre and the State of 
an appellate Tribunal or Tribunals presided over by a legally qualified Chairman and with experienced 
civil servants as Members to hear ap peals preferred by Government servants in respect of disciplinary and 
other action against them. The First Administrative Reforms Commission had also recommended for the 
setting up of Civil Services Tribunals to deal with the appeals of Government servants against disciplinary 
actions. Some of the State Legislatures thereupon enacted laws setting up Tribunals to decide such cases. 
Part XIV A comprising Articles 323-A and 323-B was also inserted in the Constitution of India by the 
42nd Constitutional Amendment Bill, 1976 with effect from 3rd January, 1977. Article 323-A inter alia 
authorized Parliament to provide by law for setting up of Administrative Tribunals for the adjudication of 
disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of certain categories of 
employees in the field of public employment including Government servants and also to provide for the 
exclusion of the jurisdiction of all courts, except that of the Supreme Court under Article 136, with respect 
to disputes or complaints of such nature. No immediate step was, however, taken in the direction of 
enacting a law for the setting up of Administrative Tribunals as contemplated by the said Article. 
5.4  Ultimately, Parliament enacted the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 which received the assent of 
the President on the 27th February, 1985. In pursuance of the provisions contained in the Act, the 
Administrative Tribunals set up under it exercise original jurisdiction in respect of service matters of 
employees covered under the Act.  
Objective of the Act 
5.5 The Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying the Constitutional Amendment Bill by which 
Article 323-A was sought to be inserted in the Constitution states the following words: 
“To reduce the mounting arrears in High Courts and to secure the speedy disposal of service 
matters... 
it is considered expedient to provide for administrative tribunals for dealing with such matters while 
preserving the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to such matters under Article 136 of the 
Constitution.” 
5.6 The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the introduced version of the Administrative 
Tribunals Bill, which on being passed and approved became the Act of 1985, also contained similar 
recitals: 
“...The establishment of Administrative Tribunals under the aforesaid provisi on of the Constitution 
has become necessary since a large number of cases relating to service matters are pending before the 
various Courts. It is expected that the setting up of such Administrative Tribunals to deal exclusively 
with service matters would go a long way in not only reducing the burden of the various Courts and 
thereby giving them more time to deal with other cases expeditiously but would also provide to the 
persons covered by the Administrative Tribunals speedy relief in respect of their grievances.” 

5.7 In pursuance of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, the Central Administrative Tribunal was set 
up on 1.11.1985. At present, it has 17 regular Benches, 15 of which operate at the principal seats of High 
Courts and the remaining two at Jaipur and Lucknow. These Benches also hold circuit sittings at other 
seats of High Courts. The Tribunal consists of a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman and Members. The Vice-
Chairman and Members are drawn both from judicial and administrative spheres. State Administrative 
Tribunals were set up by the Governments of the Stat es of Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Orissa, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pr adesh and West Bengal under the Administrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985. 
5.8  The appointment of the Chairman, Central Administrative Tribunal, as per practice, is initiated by the 
Chief Justice of India on a reference made to this effect by the Union Government. The appointment of 
Vice-Chairman and Members in Central Administ rative Tribunal are made on the basis of 
recommendations of a Selection Committee chaired by a nominee of the Chief Justice of India, who is a 
sitting judge of the Supreme Court. The appointmen ts are made with the ap proval of Appointments 
Committee of the Cabinet after obtaining the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India. 
5.9 The appointments to the vacancies in State Administrative Tribunals ar e made on the basis of 
proposals sent by the State Governments, with the approval of the Governors. Thereafter, their 
appointments undergo the same process as the one in respect of Central Administrative Tribunal. 
Significance of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 
6. The enactment of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 opened a new chapter in the sphere of 
administering justice to the aggrieved Government servants in service matters. The Act provides for 
establishment of Central Administrative Tribunal and the State Administrative Tribunals. The setting up of 
these Tribunals is founded on the premise that specialist bodies comprising both trained administrators and 
those with judicial experience would, by virtue of their specialized knowledge, be better equipped to 
dispense speedy and efficient justice. It was expected that a judicious mix of judicial members and those 
with grassroot experience would best serve this purpose. 
6.1 The Administrative Tribunals are distinguishable from the ordinary courts with regard to their 
jurisdiction and procedure. They exercise jurisdiction only in relation to the service matters of the litigants 
covered by the Act. They are also free from the shac kles of many of the technicalities of the ordinary 
Courts. The procedural simplicity of the Act can be appreciated from the fact that the aggrieved person can 
also appear before it personally. The Government can also present its case through its Departmental 
officers or legal practitioners. Further, only a nominal fee of Rs. 50/- is to be paid by the litigant for filing 
an application before the Tribunal [Section 7 of the Central Administrative Tribunal (Procedure) Rules, 
1987]. Thus, the objective of the Tribunal is to provide speedy and inexpensive justice to the litigants. 
6.2  The establishment of Administrative Tribunals was a right step in the direction of providing an 
effective alternative authority to Government empl oyees who feel aggrieved by the decisions of the 
Government, inspite of the elaborate system of rules and regulations which govern personnel management, 
for judicial review over service matters to the exclus ion of all courts including High Courts other than the 
Supreme Court, with the end in view of reducing the burden of such Courts and of securing expeditious 
disposal of such matters.  

The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006  
7.  The background note on the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006 furnished by the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions states as follows: 
“ ...Initially it was envisaged that litigation relating to service matte rs should be adjudicated upon by 
Administrative Tribunals and should not increase the burden of the High Courts. Thus, the appellate 
jurisdiction was only with the Supreme Cour t of India. However, the Supreme Court in L.Chandra 
Kumar Vs UOI (AIR 1997 SC 1125) has held that the writ jurisdiction of the High Court under 
Article 226/227 of the Constitution cannot be extinguished by any Act since it is a part of the basic 
structure of the Constitution. Thus, appeals from judgements of the Administrative Tribunals now lie 
to the Division Bench of the corresponding High Court. 
 A number of State Governments have proposed for the abolishing of SATs essentially on the ground 
that since the orders of the SAT have been made appealable before the Division Bench of the High Court, 
it has merely added one more tier in the judicial hier archy. The State Governments have also stated that 
the SATs have become very expensive to administer. At the Central level too, it has been found that some 
Benches of the CAT have now become unnecessary (or will become unnecessary in the near future) since 
the cases pending before them have diminished in number. 
 The State of Madhya Pradesh after consulting th e State of Chhattisgarh has even issued orders 
winding up the MP Administrative Tribunal using the provisions of Section 74 of the Madhya Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2000. The Supreme Court of India has upheld this action of the State Government. 
 Currently, the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 does not provide for either the abolishing of an 
Administrative Tribunal or for the transfer of cases to any Court outside the Tribunal. 
 According to the opinion received from the Attorney General, although an Administrative Tribunal 
can be abolished by invoking powers conferred by Section 21 of the General Clauses Act, amendment to 
the Administrative Tribunals Act is essential to pr ovide for transfer of pending cases. The Attorney 
General has also opined that by way of abundant caution, the amending Act may also expressly confer the 
power to abolish the CAT/SAT upon the Central Government. 
* *
 * 
 In L. Chandra Kumar Vs. Union of India {JT 1997 (3) S.C. 589}, the Supreme Court has also held 
that no individual may directly approach the Supreme Court in any matter decided by the Administrative 
Tribunal. He must first approach the High Court (Division Bench) and only thereafter he may approach the 
Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. 
 In the case of Shri T. Sudhakar Prasad Vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court had observed that ‘while holding the proceedings  under Section 17 of the Act the tribunal remains a 
tribunal and so would be amenable to the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226/227 of the 
Constitution s ubject to the well-established ru les of self-restraint governing  the discretion of the High 
Court to interfere with the pendin g proceedings and upset the interim or interlocutory orders of the 
tribunals’. They, however, al so clarified that any other order or decision of the tribunal punishing for 

contempt shall be appealable only to the Supreme Co urt in view of the specific provision contained in 
Section 19 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 read with Section 17 of the Administrative Tribunals Act. 
 As a result of the Supreme Court judgement in L. Chandra Kumar, orders of the Central 
Administrative Tribunal have now routinely been appealed against in High Courts whereas this was not 
the position earlier. Across the board, the interpretation given by High Courts to the L. Chandra Kumar / 
T. Sudhakar Prasad judgement is that High Courts function as Courts of Appeal to the Central 
Administrative Tribunal. It should be observed that though the Chandra Kumar/ Sudhakar Prasad 
judgements only reaffirmed the existing legal and constitutional provisions, the interpretation has been 
such as to place the Tribunal in a position subordinate  to the High Courts in the matter of appellate 
jurisdiction. 
 The Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs have opined that the question of giving powers to 
punish for contempt to the Tribunals was considered by the National Commission to Review the Working 
of the Constitution and that the Commission has not favoured the conferring of such powers on the 
Tribunals. There are certain tribunals like Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Customs, Excise and Service 
Tax Appellate Tribunals etc. which have not been given power to punish for contempt and the power to 
punish for contempt of such tribunals are exercised by the High Court as also the Supreme Court. 
 As the Tribunals have become subject to jurisdiction of High Courts, it is no longer necessary to 
retain the power to punish for contempt with them.” 
Clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill  
Clause 2 
8.0 Clause 2 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.  
Clause 3 
9.0  Clause 3 of the proposed Bill provides for omissi on of Section 17 of the principal Act pertaining to 
contempt powers. 
9.1  Section 17 of the principal Act provides as follows: 
 “Power to punish for contempt  –– A Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction, 
powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may exercise and, for this 
purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (70 of 1971), shall have effect subject to the 
modifications that : ––  
(a) the references therei n to a High Court shall be construed as including a reference to such 
Tribunal; 
(b) the references to the Advocate -General in section 15 of the said Act, shall be construed,– 
(i) in relation to the Central Administrative Tr ibunal, as a reference to the Attorney-General 
or the SolicitorGeneral or the Additional Solicitor-General; and 

(ii) in relation to an Administrative Tribunal for a State or a Joint Administrative Tribunal for 
two or more States, as a reference to the Advocate-General of the State or any of the States 
for which such Tribunal has been established.” 
9.2 It is noteworthy that Article 323-A of the Constitution of India provides as follows: 
“(1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of 
disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to 
public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or 
other authority within the territory of India or under  the control of the Government of India or of any 
corporation owned or controlled by the Government. 
(2)  A law made under clause (1) may ––  
* *
 * 
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority which 
may be exercised by each of the said tribunals; 
* *
 * 
(3)  The provisions of this Article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other provision 
of this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.” 
9.3  While replying to the queries of the Members in the Lok Sabha on the Administrative Tribunals Bill 
on the 1st November, 1976, the then Minister of Law and Justice stated that: 
“... We have referred to many matters among the functions of the tribunal. One is to punish for 
contempt. It cannot be given by a statute unless the Constitution authorizes it. You know under the 
Constitution, subject to the supreme power of the Supreme Court in respect of contempt, power to 
punish for contempt is being exercised by courts, which is the normal hierarchy of courts and not 
tribunals. So, a specific provision to enable comp laints of contempt of tribunals being tried is 
necessary. ... When the law is made, it will be subject to the restrictions laid down here and the 
tribunal will not be anything more or less than what is contemplated under article 323A and 323B...” 
9.4 In the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the pr oposed Bill, the Government has stated that as the 
Tribunals have become subject to the jurisdiction of the High Courts as per the decision of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar case, it is no longer necessary to retain the power to punish for 
contempt with them. 
9.5  In this regard, the Committee notes that in T. Sudhakar Prasad Vs. Govt. of A.P., the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court observed as follows: 
“... However, with a view to preser ving the flow of the stream of ju stice in its unsullied form and in 
unstinted purity willful defiance with the mandate of the court is treated to be contemptuous. 
Availability of jurisdiction to punish for contempt  provides efficacy to functioning of the judicial 
forum and enables the enforcement of  the orders on account of its deterrent effect on avoidance and 

that viewed from this angle, the validity of Section 17 of the Act is protected not only by sub-clause 
(b) of clause (2) of Article 323-A but also by sub-clause (g) thereof.” 
9.6 It was further held that: 
“...The Supreme Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar has nowhere said that orders of the Tribunal 
holding the contemner guilty and punishing for contempt shall also be subject to judicial scrutiny of 
the High Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution in spite of remedy of statutory appeal 
provided by Section 19 of the Contempt of Courts Act being available. The distinction between 
orders passed by the Administrative Tribunal on matters covered by Section 14(1) of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act and orders punishing for contempt under Section 19 of the Contempt of 
Courts Act read with Section 17 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, is this: as against the former, 
there is no remedy of appeal statutorily provided, but as against the latter statutory remedy of appeal 
is provided by Section 19 of the Contempt of Courts Act itself.” 
9.7 The Apex Court also observed as under: 
“... .. .. Vide para 96 of L. Chandra Kumar case the Constitution Bench did not agree with the 
suggestion that the Tribunals be made subject to the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Courts 
within whose territorial jurisdiction they fall, as our Constitutional scheme does not require that all 
adjudicatory bodies which fall within the territorial jurisdiction of any High Court should be subject 
to its supervisory jurisdiction. Obviously, the supervisory jurisdiction referred to by Constitution 
Bench in para 96 of the judgment is the supervision of the administrative functioning of the Tribunals 
as is spelt out by discussion made in paras 96 and 97 of the judgment.” 
9.8  In the light of the further interpretation by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Sudhakar Prasad case, the 
Committee is of the opinion that Section 27 of the Administrative Tribunals Act has to be read along with 
Section 20 of the Act. 
9.9 Section 27 of the Act provides as follows: 
“Execution of orders of a Tribunal - Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules the order 
of a Tribunal finally disposing of an application or an appeal shall be final and shall not be called in 
question in any court (including a High Court) and such order shall be executed in the same manner 
in which any final order of the nature referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 20 
(whether or not such final order had actually been made) in respect of the grievance to which the 
application relates would have been executed.” 
9.10 The Committee notes that Section 27 has to be read along with Section 20 of the Act. Section 20 
(2) (a) gives finality to the order made by the Government or oth er authority or officer or other 
person competent to pass such or der. In view thereof the Committ ee opined that this Section is 
sufficient for implementing the or der concurring with the authorit y/officer/Government. But if the 
Tribunal’s order led to the reversal  of such an order, there should  be some force for the Tribunal’s 
order so that it can be executed by the same auth ority within a definite ti meframe failing which the 
authority/officer should be accountable for the delay, laches or indifference or non-implementation. 
Then only the authority of the Tribunal which is in all parity as additional/substitutional to the High 
Court will be ensured. 

9.11 In this context, the Committee takes cognizance of Section (2)(b) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 
1971 which defines “civil contempt” as wilful disobedience to any judgment, decree, direction, order, writ 
or other process of a court or wilful br each of an undertaking given to a court. Therefore, the Committee 
is of the opinion that inorder to ensure implementation of the orders of the Tribunals, “civil 
contempt” powers of the Administrative Tribunals should be retained. 
9.12  Article 323A(g) of the Constitution provides that the law made under Article 323A may contain such 
supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (i ncluding provisions as to fees) as Parliament may 
deem necessary for the effective functioning of, an d for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the 
enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.  
9.13  Retracing the essence of Article 323 A, the Committee notes that speedy redressal of grievances 
of Government employees should be ensured. In order to achieve this objective, the speedy execution 
of orders/judgements is mandatory. Since there a re no separate execution rules for enforcing 
implementation of the judgments/ orders of the Administrative Tribunals, exercising contempt 
jurisdiction is the sole method open to them to ensure execution of their orders/ judgements. The 
Committee is of the considered opinion that if the Tribunals are not armed with contempt powers, it 
would be a major stumbling block in the execution process and would make the Tribunal a toothless 
tiger. Since contempt power is a paramount need in the matter of  enforcement of orders of the 
Administrative Tribunals, the Commi ttee strongly feels that contempt  powers in the modified form 
should be retained with the Administrative Tribunals. 
9.14  The Committee notes that since Section 22 of the parent Act pr ovides that a Tribunal shall not 
be bound by the procedure laid down  in the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908 if the contempt power is 
withdrawn from the Administrative  Tribunals, in case of non-execu tion of its orders/judgments, 
contempt petitions will have to be filed in the High  Courts. This has to be viewed in reference to the 
present situation that extr aordinary resort to writ jurisdiction  of the High Court, investment of 
special jurisdiction in the High Court such as tr ial of election petitions und er the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951, with its concomitant that it should be disposed of within six months from the 
date of institution have led to clogging of the High Courts. 
9.15  Thus the Committee feels that the filing of contem pt petitions in High Courts in case of non-
implementation of the orders/ judgments of Administrative Tribunals, would add further burden to 
the already overburdened High Courts. This would delay the process of redressing the grievances of 
Government employees. This woul d defeat the very purpose for which Constitutional provision 
under Article 323 A and the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 were enacted. 
9.16  The Committee further notes that the withdrawal of contempt powers from the Administrative 
Tribunals would also lead to an anomalous situat ion i.e. High Court would become the execution 
Court for the implementation of th e judgments of the Administrative  Tribunals as there is no other 
provision for execution of the orders/judgements of the Admini strative Tribunals. Then, the 
Committee is constrained to note that it would be the only in stance wherein a higher Court would 
become the execution Court for the judgments/orders of the subordinate Courts. 
9.17  In Advocate General, Bihar v. MP.Khair Industries A.I.R.1980 S.C. 946, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court observed as follows: 

“.............The public have an interest, an abiding and a real interest, and a vita l stake in the effective 
and orderly administration of justice, because, unless justice is so administered, there is the peril of 
all rights and liberties perishing. The Court has the duty of protecting the interest of the public in the 
due administration of justice and so, it is entrusted with the power to commit for Contempt of Court, 
not in order to protect the dignity of the Court agai nst insult or injury as the expression “Contempt of 
Court” may seem to suggest, but, to protect and to vindicate the right of the public that the 
administration of justice shall not be prevented, prejudiced, obstructed or interfered with.” 
9.18 The following view was expressed during the deliberations of the Committee: 
“...........in 1976, every civil Court was given this powe r to put some kind of a compulsive process in 
their hands so that they should be able to carry out their duties and seek obedience of their own order. 
Therefore, civil contempt is all that is necessary. And “civil contempt” is defined in the Contempt of 
Courts Act, which serves the purpose.............This is more than enough, and this will put these 
administrative tribunals under the same footing as even the District Court is. We, therefore, agree 
that this limited contempt power must be given to  them.........The tribunal has a constitutional status. 
It is good enough. But if the tribunal is not entrusted with the power of contempt, I find it anomalous 
and contradictory.............But, I believe that once you create a tribuna l, you must give proper powers 
to it. At the minimum, it should have civil contempt power. Otherwise, it will not be able to 
work..........” 
9.19  The Committee takes note of the fact that whenever the direction of a Court is not carried out 
to its logical conclusion, it is the rule of law th at suffers. Carrying out th e order of a Court is an 
enforcement of rule of law. In order to ensure execution of the orders  of the tribunals, the powers to 
punish for civil contempt should be vested in them. 
9.20  In view of the foregoing, the Committee feels th at there is no necessity to retain Section 17 of 
the Administrative Tribunals Act as  rightly proposed in the Bill. But for execut ion of the tribunal’s 
order, the present procedure invar iably followed by the tribunal is  to resort to the powers under 
Section 17 of the Act. To ensure that the tribunal’s orders are executed, the Committee is of the view 
that the tribunal should be vest ed with contempt of court powers  as mandated in Article 323A(2)(b) 
of the Constitution. Moreover, in  absence of any specific provisio n like Order 39 Rule 2-A of the 
Code of Civil Procedure in the Ac t, the tribunal should be vested with the authority to ensure that 
its order is properly implemented within a stipulated time frame. 
9.21 Therefore, taking into account the various st atutory provisions, the Committee is of the 
considered view that Section 17 of the Administrative Tribunals Act sh ould be suitably replaced by 
reflecting the “civil contempt” as defined in the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971. 
9.22  Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the Clause was adopted.  
Clause 4 
10.0  Clause 4 was adopted without suggesting any change.  
Clause 5 

11.0 Clause 5 of the Bill proposes for conferment of power of abolition of Administrative Tribunals by 
inserting Chapter IV A in the principal Act. Section 27 A of Chapter IV A provides as follows: 
 “(1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the continued existence of the Central 
Administrative Tribunal or any of its Benches is not necessary, it may, by notification, abolish the 
Tribunal or any of its Benches. 
 (2) The Central Government may abolish, by notification,– 
 (a) an Administrative Tribunal established for a State under sub-section (2) of section  
4 after the receipt of a proposal from the State in this behalf; 
 (b) a Joint Administrative Tribunal established under sub-section (3) of section 4 on 
receipt of an agreement entered into by the concerned States for the abolition of such 
Administrative Tribunal: 
 Provided that the abolition of the Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal and the transfer of 
the pending cases and records of the said Tribunal to the High Court of Judicature at Madras, by 
the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions No. G..S.R. 71(E), dated the 17th February, 2006 issued under sub-section (2) of 
section 4, shall be deemed to have been done under this section as if the provisions of this 
section were in force on and from the 17th day of February, 2006. 
 (3) If a proposal or agreement under clause (a) or clause (b) of subsection (2), is forwarded to 
the Central Government, the concerned State shall also forward along with it a proposal for the 
transfer and disposal of cases pending before any State Administrative Tribunal or any Joint 
Administrative Tribunal in consultation with the concerned High Court. 
 (4) The Central Government may provide in the notification under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) for the transfer and disposal of the cases pending before the Tribunal or any of its 
Benches immediately before its abolition.” 
11.1  During the deliberations of the Committee, it emerged that the Parliament was motivated to create 
new adjudicatory fora to provide new, cheap and fast-track adjudicatory systems and permitting them to 
function by tearing off the conventional shackles of the strict rule of pleadings, strict rule of evidence, 
tardy trials, three/four-tier appeals: endless revisions and reviews which create hurdles in the fast flow of 
the stream of justice. The Administrative Tribunals as established under Article 323-A of the Constitution 
and the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 are an  alternative institutional mechanism or authority, 
designed to be not less effective than the High Courts, consistent with the amended Constitutional scheme 
but at the same time not to negate judicial review jurisdiction of Constitutional Courts. 
11.2  While replying to the queries of the Members in the Lok Sabha on the Administrative Tribunals Bill 
on the 1st November, 1976, the then Minister of Law and Justice stated that: 
“.........Now, one other thing which has been mentioned is that here for example in one part, that is 
323A, there is a reference to only  tribunal meaning thereby that there would be one tribunal and in 
the other part, that is 323 B, there is a reference to hierarchy of tribunals. Now it is not a drafting 
error and it is deliberate and the reason is that wh en we are talking of the tribunals in respect of the 

grievances and complaints of employees of the Stat es or the Union, there are rules framed under the 
existing provisions of the Constitution governing the conditions of service of these employees. These 
rules are provided for va rious forums for hearing the complaints and grievances of the employees, 
with regard to the service conditions and other matters and it was thought that when all these 
remedies are there, there should be one tribunal  which will sit for hearing appeals or for hearing 
original complaints in respect of these matters and adjudicate or otherwise in the various other 
forums. In fact, there is a hierarchy; they are prov ided under the various rules and that hierarchy is 
enough, you go to one tribunal which is the highest tribunal which will be adjudicated on all 
matters..........” 
11.3 The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has cited the decision of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in the L. Chandrakumar case as the core reason for their proposal to abolish 
Administrative Tribunals. 
11.4  But in the L. Chandrakumar case, the Hon’ble Court had held as follows: 
“.........The Tribunals are competent to hear matters where the vires of statutory provisions are 
questioned. However, in discharging this duty, they cannot act as substitutes for the High Courts and 
the Supreme Court which have, under our constitutional set-up been specifically entrusted with such 
an obligation. Their function in this respect is only supplementary and all such decisions of the 
Tribunals will be subject to scrutiny before a Division Bench of the respective High Courts. The 
Tribunals will consequently also have the power to test the vires of subordinate legislations and rules. 
However, this power of the Tribunals will be subject to one important exception. The Tribunals shall 
not entertain any question regarding the vires of their parent statutes following the settled principle 
that a Tribunal which is a creature of an Act canno t declare that very Act to be unconstitutional .In 
such cases alone the concerned High Court may be ap proached directly. All other decisions of these 
Tribunals, rendered in cases that they are specif ically empowered to adjudicate upon by virtue of 
their parent statutes, will also be subject to scrutiny before a Division Bench of their respective High 
Courts. We may add that the Tribunals will however , continue to act as the only courts of first 
instance in respect of the areas of law for which they have been constituted. By this, we mean that it 
will not be open for litigants to directly approach the High Courts even in cases where they question 
the vires of statutory legislations (except, as mentio ned, where the legislation which creates the 
particular Tribunal is challenged) by overlooking the jurisdiction of the concerned Tribunal.” 
11.5 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has thus made it amply 
clear that the Tribunals will continue to act as the only courts of first instance in respect of the areas 
of law for which they have been constituted and th at it will not be open, for litigants to directly 
approach the High Courts even in cases where they question the vires of statutory legislations. The 
Committee/is of the considered op inion that since the Apex Cour t has upheld the necessity of 
Administrative Tribunals in such clear terms, th ere is no iota of doubt as to the fact that 
Administrative Tribunals are ab solutely essential for the speed y redressal of grievances of 
Government employees. 
11.6  Further, in L. Chandrakumar case it was held: 
“.. .. . .. ... So long as the jurisdiction of the High Courts under Articles 226/227 and that of this Court 
under Article 32 is retained there is no reason why the power to test the validity of legislation against 

the provisions of the Constitution cannot be conferred upon Administrative Tribunals created under 
the Act or upon Tribunals created under Article 323B of the Constitution. It is to be remembered that 
apart from the authorisation that flows from Articles 323A and 323B, both Parliament and the State 
Legislatures possess legislative competence to eff ect changes in the original jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court and the High Court.  This power is available to Parliament under Entries 77, 78, 79 
and 95 of List I and to the State Legislatures under Entry 65 of List II; Entry 46 of List III can also be 
availed of both by Parliament and the State Legislatures for this purpose.” 
11.7  Moreover, in the Sudhakar Prasad case, it was observed: 
“. . . . . . We are therefore clearly  of the opinion that there is no anathema to the Tribunal exercising 
jurisdiction of the High Court and in that sense being supplemental or additional to the High Court 
but at the same time not enjoying status equivalent to the High Court and also being subject to 
judicial review and judicial superintendence of the High Court.” 
11.8 The following observation of the Apex Court in the abovementioned case is also pertinent: 
“.............That the various Tribunals have not perfo rmed upto expectations is a self-evident and 
widely acknowledged truth. However, to draw an inference that their unsatisfactory performance 
points to their being founded on a fundamentally unsound principle would not be correct. The 
reasons for which the Tribunals were constituted still persist; indeed, those reasons have become 
even more pronounced in our times. We have already indicated that our Constitutional scheme 
permits the setting up of such Tribunals. However, drastic measures may have to be resorted to in 
order to elevate their standards to ensure that they stand up to Constitutional scrutiny in the discharge 
of the power of judicial review conferred upon them.” 
11.9 The Committee fully subscribes to the obser vation of the Hon ‘ble Court and as such 
recommends that proactive steps should be taken to ensure better functioning of Administrative 
Tribunals.  
11.10  As a remedial step, the Committee expressed the following view: 
“............Maybe, a retired judge of the Supreme C ourt can preside over. And, maybe, the other 
member could be from the judiciary; not from the district judges, but from the level of High Courts, 
we can keep one. And, then, the third and the four th members can be from the administration so that 
the dignity and strength of the tribunal is enhanced to that extent.” 
11.11 The Committee also takes into account the view e xpressed by Mr. Justice V.S. Malimath that as of 
now, since the statute does not provide that the Chainnan of the Tribunal should be fonner Chief Justice, a 
retired Judge of the High Court is currently being ap pointed as Chairman whereas earlier, the retired Chief 
Justice used to be the Chairman of the Tribunal. He had opined that this lowers the stature of the Tribunal.  
11.12 In view of the discussion, even though the Committee is not considering the parent Act 
exhaustively, in order to enhance the status of  Administrative Tribunals  and to improve their 
functioning, the Committee finds that it is high time to recommend to incorporate in Section 6 of the 
principal Act which deals with the qualification for appointment of Chairman, Vice Chairman and 
other Members, the appropriate provisions to the effect that: 

(i) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he 
(a)  has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court; or  
(b)  has been, the Chief Justice of a High Court. 
The Committee feels that such an amendment shall ensure finality to the orders of Tribunals. 
(ii)  A person shall not be qualified for appo intment as the Vice-Chairman unless he has been 
a Judge of a High Court. 
(iii)  A person shall not be qualified for appo intment as a Administrative Member unless he- 
(a)  has held the post of a Secretary to the Government of India or any other post under 
the Central or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that 
of a Secretary to the Government of India; or 
(b)  has, for at least two years, held th e post of an Additional Secretary to the 
Government of India or an y other post under the Cent ral or a State Government 
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than  that of an Additional Secretary to the 
Government of India. 
11.13  The Committee, while deliberati ng upon the issue, took account  of the fact that when the 
parent Act was enacted, the retirement age for a Se cretary to the Government of India was 58 years 
whereas now, it is 60 or in some cases 60+2 years.  Keeping this in view, th e Committee felt that for 
appointment as Administrative Member, Secret aries should also be given an opportunity 
irrespective of their term in office as Secretary. This will also do away with the anomaly which exists 
now which is that an aggrieved Secretary/reti red Secretary who approaches the Administrative 
Tribunal finds that an officer j unior in rank is adjudicating upon, his case. Moreover, the 
Committee feels that a premier institution like CAT/S AT should be benefited by the vast knowledge 
and experience which a Secretary to the Government has gained throughout his career. 
11.14  Another pertinent point is that Section 5(6) of the Administrative Tribunals Act provides as follows: 
“Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions to this section, it shall be competent 
for the Chairman or any other Member authorized by  the Chairman in this behalf to function as a 
Bench consisting of a single Member and exerci se the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the 
Tribunal in respect of such cases or such matters pe rtaining to such classes of cases as the Chairman 
may by general or special order specify: 
 Provided that if any stage of the hearing of an y such case or matter it appears to the Chairman 
or such Member that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench 
consisting of [two Members], the case or matter may be transferred by the Chairman or, as the case 
may be, referred to him transfer to, such Bench as the Chairman may deem fit.” 
11.15 In this context, the Committee takes note of the opinion raised in the memoranda received that 
the Tribunals should be presided  over by a judicial member only . The Committee feels that this 
suggestion is justified because the ju dicial members will be able to a ppreciate legal aspects of a case 
better. Therefore, the Committee recommends that requisite amendment should be made in the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 to the effect  that the presiding j udge of Administrative 

Tribunals should be a judicial me mber and in case of a single Be nch, the sole Member should be a 
judicial member. 
11.16 Further, in the Chandrakumar case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed as follows: 
“. . . . . . There are pressing reasons why we are a nxious to preserve the conferment of such a power 
on these Tribunals. When the framers of our Constitu tion bestowed the powers of judicial review of 
legislative action upon the High Courts and the Supreme Court, they ensured that other 
Constitutional safeguards were created to assist them in effectively discharging this onerous burden. 
The expectation was that this power  would be required to be used only occasionally- However in the 
five decades that have ensued since independence, the quantity of litigation before the High Courts 
has exploded in an unprecedented manner...........when a Constitution Bench of this Court in Sampath 
Kumar’s case adopted the theory of alternative institutional mechanisms, it was attempting to remedy 
an alarming practical situation and the approach sel ected by it appeared to be most appropriate to 
meet the exigencies of the time.” 
11.17  As per the statistics furnished by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, from 
the period 1.11.85 to 28.02.06, the total cases instituted in Central Administrative Tribunal were 470365, 
those disposed were 446369 and those pending are 23996. Taking into account the excellent rate of 
disposal of the cases, the Committee finds no  coherent reason to fa vour the abolition of 
Administrative Tribunals. If it is felt that the f unctioning of Administrative  Tribunals need to be 
improved, proactive steps should be taken in this regard rather than proposing to abolish them. 
However, if it is felt that a Tr ibunal is not still functioning upto it s expected level and needs to be 
abolished, it should be abolis hed only after invoking the Legisl ative process. If the power of 
abolition is vested with the Executive, then the Tribunal is bound to lose its seat of importance. 
11.18 The Committee notes that the State Government of Himachal Pradesh recommended the abolition of 
the Himachal Pradesh State Administrative Tribunal under the following circumstances: 
 In the letter dated 20.8.2001, the Chief Minister, Himachal Pradesh had written as follows: 
“After carefully looking at the working of the HPAT, the then Council of Ministers in its meeting 
held on 7.3.1990 decided to abolish the Tribunal and accordingly the matter was referred to 
Government of India requesting them to approve abolishing the H.P. Administrative Tribunal. A 
letter in this regard was also written by the then Chief Minister of H.P. to then Hon’ble Prime 
Minister of India. However, I find there is no outcome of this request and after sometime perhaps the 
matter was also not followed up regularly by our Government. 
I have given a lot of thought to the matter and also wide ranging discussions were held with the 
employees, both of the Government and the public sector/ other Government bodies. The matter has 
also been agitating the employees a ssociations who have been representing from time to time that 
constitution of the Tribunal has blocked the normally easier and more convenient judicial avenues for 
redressal of their grievances. Unfortunately I tend to  agree with the perception that the Tribunal has 
not been able to effectively achieve the objectives for which it was constituted in the first place i.e. 
speedier and inexpensive justice to aggrieved Government employees. As per the data available with 
the Government as many as 20439 cases were reported to be pending with the Tribunal on 31.3.2001 
despite the fact that there has not been even a single vacancy of members in the Tribunal. 

 In my view, this is the right time to abolis h the Tribunal since its present Chairman Justice 
(Retd.) A.L. Vaidya is retiring in 10/2001 and 2 of the other 3 members will also be retiring within 
less than one year. The staff rendered surplus from the abolition of this Tribunal will be suitably 
adjusted in other courts/offices against available vacancies. Even otherwise, the present financial 
position of the State demands that the Government take a close look at all its administrative 
infrastructure so that only the essential ones are retained and strengthened. Ours being a very small 
State, financially dependent to a large extent on Government of India, can ill afford both the High 
Court and the Administrative Tribunal. 
 I would request you therefore, to please give the matter the urgent attention that it merits and to 
approve that the H.P. Administrative Tribunal is abolished at the earliest.” 
 Later on, the State Government vide letter dated 4.7.2003 stated as follows:- 
 The State Government has reviewed its decision and decided not to abolish the State 
Administrative Tribunal. Therefore, the above mentioned communication in the State 
Government may be treated as withdrawn.” 
11.19 The Committee discussed the subject at length and expressed the following view: 
“...........One is appropriating to the Executive the power to abolish the Tribunal. In my opinion, it 
goes against the very spirit which prompted the creation of a Tribunal through the Constitution itself. 
If this power is to be vested with the Executive wi ng of the Government, then the Tribunal will lose 
the seat of importance and people will consider the Tribunal as something easily dispensable. 
Therefore, I would strongly plead for giving the power of abolition only to Parliament. In other 
words, the legislative process should be invoked if a Tribunal is to be abolished; otherwise, you will 
find a spate of letters and proposals for abolition of Tribunals.” 
11.20 In the case of Karnataka State Administrative Tribunal, the State Government had proposed to 
abolish it which was reconsidered by the new Government. The new Government later withdrew the 
proposal. In the opinion of the Committee, these inst ances unequivocally prove that the continued 
existence of State Administrative  Tribunals will be left to the whims and fancies of the State 
Governments if the power of abolit ion is granted to the Executive. This will hang like the Damocle’s 
sword over the Administrative Tri bunals which would hamper the fair  delivery of justice to the 
Government employees. 
11.21 The Committee takes note that in the 99th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04 )of the Ministry 
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions by  the Department Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs, the Committee while examining the matter relating to the abolition of a few 
State Administrative Tribunals, noticed that no reasons for such proposal for abolition of State 
Administrative Tribunals had been given by the State Government and that the Central Government had 
also not given any reasons for forwarding such requ est of such, State Govern ments. Therefore, that 
Parliamentary Standing Committee asked the Central Government to intimate the Committee the reasons 
given by few State Governments for the abolition of State Tribunals and the considered opinion of Central 
Government on such reasons given by the State Government. 

11.22 Furthermore, having noted the views expres sed by the Department Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affair s in the preceding paragraph, this Committee feels that since 
the Government is an interested party in the cases filed in Admi nistrative Tribunals, granting 
unfettered powers to the same Government to ab olish Administrative Tribunals will be shocking 
and is clearly subversive of the principles of ju stice. It would make a mockery of the entire 
adjudicative process. There is every chance that this power can be abused or misused. 
11.23 The Committee is also confronted with the following deposition before it by a witness: 
“............on 6 th December, 2005 we had held a Lawyers-Litigants meet in which about 38 Service 
Organisations and Federations and the Lawyers’ Body together deliberated on this issue. They passed 
a resolution opposing this move. After the Cabinet passed it and before its introduction in Rajya 
Sabha, all the Employees Associations came forward and said that it is an institution which ,is 
adjudicating disputes relating to service, their grievances and give the decisions in six to eight 
months time whereas on the other hand, Courts take 12-15 years to adjudicate on these matters. 
Moreover, it is not only the present employees but also the pensioners who are covered by the 
tribunal. In Courts, they have a category of sr. c itizens and the cases of pensioners are listed under 
that category. These cases are taken up once in a week and that too after 2 p.m. Only one or two 
cases come up and the rest are not” even taken up. In contrast to that, whether you are a senior or 
junior, your case is decided in the Tribunal within six to eight months.........”  
11.24 The Committee is constrained to observe that the delegation of power to the Executive to 
abolish the Administrative Tribuna ls will make the Tribunals vulnera ble to the arbitrary action of 
the bureaucracy, seriously undermin ing the independence and impartia lity of the Judiciary. This 
would be violative of “basic structure of the Cons titution” and would result in death knell of Rule of 
Law. This is bound to defeat no t only the very purpose of esta blishment of the Administrative 
Tribunals, but also the objective of Article 323-A of Constitution of India. 
11.25 The Committee is of the strong vi ew that the creation of an in stitution is a very serious, 
consistent and rigorous work for the Government. At  the same time, abolition of such an institution 
is very simple and also very grievous in nature a nd more so when no alternative efficient system has 
been envisaged. Therefore, the endeavour should be to protect and reinforce the same, rather than 
destructing it, unless it is counter productive. Admi nistrative Tribunal is a specialised institution 
created on the mandate of the Constitu tion of India. So it is the legi slative duty to make it healthy, 
robust and dynamic. Moreo ver, the Committee felt that Admini strative Tribunals are of great 
benefit to persons in public service, who are unfairly treated by their bosses and by their 
Departments, and therefore nothing should be done to whittle down  the effect of Administrative 
Tribunals. 
11.26 The Committee specifically questioned the representative of the Government of Tamil Nadu as to 
what was the alternative mechanism in the place of the Tamil Nadu State Administrative Tribunal which 
was abolished in February, 2006. They replied that the cases were transferred to the High Court. In such an 
event, if Section 27 D is approved, it will create an  anomaly. There would be no forum to replace the 
tribunal, But there will be a provision to hear the appeal by Division Bench as is proposed by Section 27D. 
This is one of the reasons which makes this Commi ttee to recommend that the power of abolition of 
Administrative Tribunals should not be given to the Executive. On  the other hand, the Executive 

should be accountable to the Parliament for su ch decisions, failing which the Constitutional 
mandate will not be acted upon. 
11.27  Therefore, the Committee wishes to place on r ecord its unanimous opposition to granting the 
power of abolition of Administ rative Tribunals to the Executi ve, which would extinguish the 
Constitutional right of Governme nt employees, who are an integral part of a sound Governmental 
system. The Committee notes that the statistics have unequivocally proved  that the tribunals 
function excellently except in stray cases due to  absence of accountability. The Committee strongly 
feels that grievances of the G overnment employees should be redressed without undue delay in 
order to create job security which in turn imparts dynamism and vi brancy to governance. 
Aggrieved Government servants cannot reflect excellency in governance. 
11.28  The Committee notes that the Constitution of India under Article 323A(2)(a) gives the power 
to the Parliament to enact a law to provide for the establishment of  an Administrative Tribunal for 
the Union and a separate Administ rative Tribunal for each State or  for two or more States. The 
Committee feels that this is one additional and vi tal security granted to Government employees in 
Part XIV A of the Constitution. This service security  is fully explained in Article 323A(1). Hence the 
framers of the Constitution have it in mind that the right of establishment of such an Administrative 
Tribunal which is exclusive in natu re is to be exercised only by the Parliament. This is further 
strengthened by vesting the po wer of establishment of an  Administrative Tribunal for States also. 
Hence delegating the power to abolish such a Tribunal merely by a noti fication of the Executive will 
not reflect the sense of Article 323A. 
11.29 The Committee takes note of the fa ct that Section 4 (1) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 
1985 provides that the Central Government shall establish the Central Administ rative Tribunal 
whereas it may establish State Administrative Trib unals on request made by the respective State 
Government. The Committee is of the view that the establishmen t of Central Administrative 
Tribunal is a mandatory provision in the parent Act and that abolishing  it would amount to 
repealing the parent Act. 
11.30  The Committee is also of the co nsidered opinion that the esta blishment of SAT should be 
made mandatory which wo uld ensure the quick redressal of grievances of State Government 
employees which in turn would enhance thei r work efficiency. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that Section 4(2) of th e parent Act should be amended to the effect that the State 
Governments shall request the Cent ral Government, to establish by notification, an Administrative 
Tribunal, for the State and that the Central Government shall abide by the request. 
11.31 In the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, it is stated that there is a need for amendment of 
the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 in order to provide for an enabling provision for abolition of the 
Tribunal and also for transfer of pending cases to so me other authority after the Tribunal is abolished and 
that it is considered necessary for taking care of th e service conditions of its functionaries in case the 
Tribunal is abolished. 
11.32  The Committee fails to appreciate the exact inte ntion of the Government. On one hand, it 
proposes the abolition of Administ rative Tribunals and on the oth er, it foresees the transfer of 
pending cases to some other authority. 

11.33  The Committee further notes that in the Bill, it is  provided that if a proposal is forwarded by 
a State Government to the Central Government, the concerned State shall also forward alongwith it 
a proposal for the transfer of pending cases in co nsultation with the con cerned High Court. When 
this clause in the Bill is read with the Statem ent of Objects and Reasons, it appears that the 
Government proposes that the pending cases be referred to some other authority. 
11.34  Then the Committee is confronted with the prominent question as to why a Tribunal whose 
Constitutional validity and necessity have been uphe ld by the Apex Court, and the utility of which 
has been established by the statistics of its disp osal of cases, should be abolished and the cases 
pending before it be transferred to some other authority. 
11.35  The Committee wishes to place on record it s vehement objection to such a step. The 
Committee strongly recommends that if it is felt  that the functioning of the Administrative 
Tribunals has to be improved, proactive steps sh ould be taken in this direction rather than 
recommending its abolition and creating some other authority. 
11.36  Further, the Committee takes it as disturbing phenomenon to note that the reason cited in the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons for providing an  enabling provision for tr ansfer of pending cases 
to some other authority is ‘for taking care of th e service conditions of its functionaries’. It is 
pertinent to note that the primary concern whic h led to the enactment of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act was the welfare of the Governme nt employees and they should be its real 
beneficiaries. Therefore, emphasis should be given to their welf are, rather than that of the 
functionaries. 
11.37  Hence the Committee recommends that proposed S ection 27 A(1) under clause 5 the Bill may 
be modified so that the proposal for such ab olition invariably gets the concurrence of the 
Parliament. 
11.38  Proviso to Section 27 A 
  The proviso to Section 27 A proposes to grant retrospective effect to the notification of the 
Government of India abolishing the Tamil Nadu State Administrative Tribunal. 
11.39  The Committee does not approve of granting ret rospective effect to the notification which 
abolished the Tamil Nadu State Admi nistrative Tribunal since it wo uld not be proper to validitate 
the Notification till the judgemen t is given by the Apex Court in the Special Leave Petition which 
was filed challenging the abolition. 
Abolition of Tamil Nadu State Administrative Tribunal 
12.0  The Background Note on the abolition of the Tamil Nadu State Administrative Tribunal furnished by 
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions states as follows: 
 “The Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal was constituted by the Central Government in 
exercise of powers under sub-section(2) of Section 4 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 w.e.f. 
the 5th December, 1986 on receipt of a request from the State Government in this regard. 

* *
 * 
 The decision of the Tamil Nadu Government to abolish the Tamil Nadu Administrative 
Tribunal was challenged before the High Court of  Madras. The Madras High Court held that even 
though there is no specific provision in the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 such abolition can be 
made in exercise of the powers under Section 21 of the General clauses Act, 1897 and in view of the 
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Madhya Pradesh High Court Bar Association Vs. Union 
of India [JT 2004 (7) SC 548]. 
* *
 * 
 The order of the Madras High Court was examined in the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievanced and & Pensions and the Ministry of Law and Justice was consulted for their advice 
whether the Government should accept the order of the Hon’ble High Court and pass such orders as 
directed by them or to file a Special Leave Petition in the Supreme Court. The Solicitor General of 
India observed that the judgement of the Madras High Court raises important issues relating to 
establishment and abolishing of tribunals and seem s to proceed on a misunderstanding of the correct 
position and opined that it was a fit case for filing Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court. 
Accordingly, the order of the High Court of Madras was challenged by filing Special Leave Petition 
before the Supreme Court. Although the Supreme Court has admitted the Special leave Petition it 
declined to grant a stay on the operation of the said order of the High Court. 
 Hence, in order to avoid contempt proceedin gs in the matter, a Notification abolishing the 
Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal and also transferring the pending cases and records to the High 
Court of judicature of Madras, was issued on 17.02.2006 [GSR 71 (E)].” 
12.1  In the proviso to Section 27(2)(b), the Government has proposed that the abolition of the Tamil Nadu 
Administrative Tribunal made by the Notification of the Government of India shall be given retrospective 
effect. 
12.2  The Committee has taken note of the fact that th e High Court of Tamil Nadu, in its judgment 
in Tamil Nadu Government All Department Watchman  and Basic Servants Association and others vs. 
Union of India, had directed the Central Government to i ssue notification abo lishing the Tribunal 
and to send back all the pending  cases and records in the Tribuna l to the High Court and that 
though the Supreme Court admitted the Special Leav e Petition against the order, it declined to 
grant a stay on the operation of the said order of the High Court. 
12.3 The Committee further notes that the Tamil Nadu Administrative Tr ibunal was abolished 
under such circumstances. But the Co mmittee is of the view that this High Court order cannot be 
applied generally to all Administrative Tribunals. Since the Special Leave Petition against the order 
of the High Court is pending before the Hon’bl e Supreme Court, the Committee is of the considered 
opinion that it cannot be conclu sively said that an Administra tive Tribunal can be abolished 
through a Government Notification, without invoking the legislative process. 
Appeal to High Court 

13.0  Section 27 D(l) as proposed in the Bill provides as follows: 
 “Any person aggrieved by .any decision or order of  the Tribunal may file an appeal to the High 
Court.” 
13.1  The Committee deliberated upon the proposed amendment in the backdrop of Article 323 A (d) of 
the Constitution which excludes the jurisdiction of a ll Courts except that of the Supreme Court under  
Article 136. 
13.2 The Committee takes note of the facts submitted in the Chandrakumar case that the essence of the 
power of judicial review is that it must always rema in with the Judiciary and must not be surrendered to 
the Executive or the Legislature. The Constitutional bar is against the conferment of judicial power on 
agencies outside the Judiciary. However, if within the judicial set-up, arrangements are made in the 
interests of better administration of justice to limit the jurisdiction under Articles 32 and 226 of the 
Constitution, there can be no grievance. In fact it is in  the interest of better administration of justice that 
the Supreme Court has developed a practice even in the case of violation of Fundamental Rights, of 
requiring parties to approach the concerned High Co urt under Article 226 instead of directly approaching 
the Apex Court under Article 32 of the Constitution . This, undoubtedly, has the effect of limiting the 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 but, being necessary for proper administration of 
justice, cannot be challenged as unconstitutional. Service matters, which are essentially in the nature of in-
house disputes, being of lesser significance than those involving Fundamental Rights, can also be 
adjudicated upon by Tribunals on the same reasoning. 
13.3  During the discussion, the Committee observed as under: 
“. . . . . . ..as far as an appeal is concerned, after making the provision for an appeal to the High Court, 
the very purpose for which this Central Administrative Tribunal was constituted, will be defeated 
because these were constituted for a specific purpose that employees should get the speedy remedy 
and the High Courts should not be over-burdened. And, on account of this, provisions were made that 
it will be presided over by a retired High Court judge or a Chief Justice because he should not be 
subordinate to the High Court. When a tribunal is presided over by a High Court judge, its status is 
different and when it is presided over by a district judge, it has got a different status. Now, the High 
Court judge who has served for so many years and who has been senior to so many judges sitting in 
the Division Bench will be subordinate to them. That will lead to a situation where several High 
Court Judges may not prefer to preside as the member of the Central Administrative Tribunal.” 
13.4  The Committee feels that Article 136 is a wide power given to the Supreme Court to entertain 
appeal from any judgment made by  any Court/Tribunal in the territory  of India. But it is at the 
discretion of the Court to grant special leave to an appeal or not. The present clause 27D in the Bill 
gives a new right to the Government employees to en joy a statutory appeal to the High Court in the 
event of any person being aggrieved  by any order/decision  of the Tribunal. This statutory appeal 
provision will lead to protracted  litigation and will simu ltaneously reduce the status of the Tribunal 
to the level of a District Court or a subordinate Court. 
13.5  After a detailed discussion, the Committee unanimously opined as under: 

“.............if an appeal is to be provided, it shou ld be provided/to, the S upreme Court only. ... ..Under 
POTA and TADA, similar provisions  were there and appeal is provided to the Supreme Court only. 
In that case, the constitutional validity has been upheld by the Supreme Court, …………...” 
13.6. The following view was also expressed by one Hon’ble Member of the Committee during the 
deliberations of the Committee: 
“............Keeping in view the pendency in the High Courts and the Supreme Court, and the factual 
aspect that how much time is spent in this process, if we want to give speedy remedy, my view is that 
this appellate provision should not be there. That should not lie with the High Court. If it has to be 
there, it should lie with the Supreme Court.” 
13.7 The Committee further notes that the original conception was of declogging all the service 
matters of Government em ployees and take them to a Tribunal with one appeal. But to bring the 
Act in line with the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar, the 
Government has felt the necessity for an amendment to provide for appeal against the orders of an 
Administrative Tribunal to the respective High Courts. But the Committee is of the considered view 
that the original conception of the Administrative Tribunal should be restored and that provision of 
appeal to the High Court is unnecessary and that Chapter IV-B ought not be there. 
13.8 The Committee, therefore, notes with grave concern that the High Courts are already 
overburdened with huge number of pe nding cases. According to the statistics available as on 2005, 
there are approximately 34 lakh cases pending before High Courts. There is no proposal from the 
Government to increase the number of judges in the High Courts. This Committee has already 
drawn the attention of the Government to  see that the Supreme Court makes proper 
recommendations to fill up the vacancies in the High Courts. In such a situat ion, overburdening the 
High Courts and opening the floodgate of appeals against any order or decision of the Tribunals will 
make any person aggr ieved by any decision/order  of the Tribunal to prefer frivolous appeals. This 
will not give finality to the decision of the Tribuna l, thereby defeating the objective of speedy justice 
as enshrined in Article 323A of the Constitution of India. 
13.9  Furthermore, the Committee is of the firm view that when a legislation is made, the Judicial 
Impact Statement and the fina ncial commitment are to be anticipated and measured. The 
Committee could gather from the available statistics  that the State Governments are not ready to 
bear the financial commitment of the State Admini strative Tribunals. Natura lly the costs of these 
litigations and adjudications are shifted to the ex penditure of the High Courts as there is no proper 
study about the cost of handling the adjudication. For every sing le litigation, the Courts are 
overburdened with insufficient infrastructure. The Committee had,  in its Sixth Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Minist ry of Law and Justice recommended that the 
Government should explore the po ssibility of enclosing Judicial Im pact Statement alongwith every 
Bill as is done in the United St ates. The Committee reiterates its recommendation in this regard and 
would like to impress upon the Government to ensu re that the Departments who are initiating the 
Bills should come out with clear and transparen t calculations on its financial impact on the 
Judiciary. This is the best way to reduce the pendency of cases before the Courts and simultaneously 
enhancing the infrastructure of the Judiciary. 

13.10 In this context, the Committee notes that the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate 
Tribunal, constituted by the Fina nce Act, 2003, is the appellate authority on matt ers relating to 
classification and valuation, with the appeals lying to the Supreme Court. 
13.11 The Committee further notes that  for the constitution of National Tax Tribunal, the 
Government had stated as under :–– 
“When the appeals or references from the orders of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and the 
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribun al lie with the High Courts, these Courts get 
flooded with such cases which needs considerable time to dispose them. Due to the heavy workload 
of the High Courts, there is a huge backlog of tax related cases as a result of which huge revenue is 
blocked in such litigations. This is adversely affecting the national economy. Hence, urgent measures 
are required to be taken to speed up taxation matters pending before the High Courts. 
 It may also be noted that there are at pres ent 21 High Courts. Many a time, decisions of the 
High Courts vary from each other which create  uncertainty, delays and problems in the 
administration of tax matters. Conflict of decisions amongst various High Courts on the same point 
of law have the effect of distorting uniformity a nd give rise to unnecessary appeals to the Supreme 
Court which results in further delay. 
 National Tax Tribunal will help in clearing the backlog and mitigating the burden that lie at the 
doors of High Courts. The constitution of the National Tax Tribunal would (i) relieve the taxpayers 
from the burden of pursuing the tax disputes for a long period and (ii) substantially reduce the 
workload of different High Courts which could no t concentrate and devote as much focus which the 
complex tax laws presently demand.” 
13.12  The Committee, in view of the foregoing, concl udes that there is no two opinion, as admitted 
by the Government in the National Tax Tribunal B ill, 2004, that in some specialised sectors, the 
appellate jurisdiction of High Court, which is already over burdened with pending cases, is bound to 
delay the delivery of justice, whereas, the Consti tution envisages quicker just ice in those fields by 
creating Tribunals. The Committee also finds that  there is similar provision in the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 wherein the early finality, of judgments are conceived. 
13.13  Mr. Justice V.S. Malimath stressed upon this point as under:–– 
“.............. Parliament enacted Article 323 A to pr ovide for special Tribunals for the purpose of 
hearing specialized matters like service matters on two grounds. One is, High Court is so much 
burdened with other types of works and, therefore, it is not possible for it to expeditiously dispose of 
service matters. Second is, service matters need an amount of specialization and, therefore, an 
element of experience of service matters is n ecessary. Therefore, specialized tribunals were 
constituted excluding the jurisdiction of all courts of the country including the High Court. If these 
cases are pending for a long time, the Government servant, who is expected to assist in 
administration, will go on lingering before courts and his service will be affected. With this heart, 
will he be able to do work in the Government? So, expeditious disposal is necessary from the point of 
view of administration and that is the intention, and that is what has been debated when Article 323 
A was enacted.” 

13.14  The Committee further sees no ha rm in envisaging Supreme Cour t as an appellate authority 
after the judgment of CAT/ SAT in addition to the writ jurisdiction of High Courts through Articles 
226/227 of the Constitution of India as decided in the L. Chandrakumar case. The Committee also 
notes that in Maneck Custodji Surjarji Vs. Sarafazali Nawabali Mirza (AIR 1976 SC 2446), it was held 
that jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constiution of India is an extraordinary jurisdiction which 
is to be exercised sparingly and in appropriate case s and it is not to be exercised as if it were an 
appellate jurisdiction or as if it gave unfettered and unrestrictive power to the High Court to do 
whatever it liked. 
13.15  The Committee opines that Section 27D will not serve the mandate of Article 323A as to an 
exclusively enhanced jurisdicti on for the Administrative Tri bunals. The qualification of the 
Chairman and Members of the Administrative Tribuna ls are that of High Co urt judges and senior 
most Secretaries of the Governme nt. Hence the additional/supplemen tal to the High Court stature 
given to’ the Administrative Tribunals will be reduced by having the appeal to the High Court even 
though it would be a Division Bench. 
13.16  The Committee is of the view that  if Section 27D is to be accep ted, the nodal Ministry should 
make an assessment of the financ ial commitment which would arise in handling such adjudication 
and that the nodal Department should be in a po sition to assess whether it is possible for the 
Union/State Government to meet the needs in terms of infrastruc ture and the cost of handling the 
litigation by the concerned High Courts. 
13.17  In view of the above, the Commi ttee is of the opinion that st atutory appeal can be provided 
under Section 27D, but that it shall lie to the Supreme Court. 
13.18  Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the Clause was adopted. 
14. Clauses 6 and 7 were adopted without suggesting any changes.  
15. Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title were adopted without changes. 
General Suggestions/ Recommendations of the Committee 
 Extension of jurisdiction of Central Administrative Tribunal 
16. The Committee feels that within the two decades of the implemen tation of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985, Chandrakumar case has taken away nine years a nd created uncertainty on the 
existence of Administrative Tribuna ls. By enlarging the jurisdiction  of the Central Administrative 
Tribunal, its stature will be elevated in the eyes of the people. In many Organisations/ Constitutional 
bodies, the employees’ grievances redressal mechanism has not grown to their level of expectation. 
Therefore, the Committee feels that it is high time that a proper mechanism is put in place for the 
employees of other organisations such as NDMC,  DDA, Nationalised Banks, Central Universities, 
Prasar Bharati, Election Commission of India,  UPSC, MTNL and BSNL, Central Information 
Commission, Central Vigilance Commission etc. ,whose  service conditions are at par with those of 
Central Government employees, and that they are to be covered in  the Administrative Tribunals 
Act, 1985. 

17.0 The Committee takes note of the following observation of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the 
Chandrakumar case: 
“It has been brought to our notice that one reason why these Tribunals have been functioning 
inefficiently is because there is no authority charged with supervising and fulfilling their 
administrative requirements. To this end, it is suggested that the Tribunals be made subject to the 
supervisory jurisdiction of the High Courts within whose territorial jurisdiction they fall. We are, 
however, of the view that this may not be the be st way of solving the problem............The situation at 
present is that different Tribunals constituted under different enactments are administered by 
different administrative departments of the Central and the State Governments. The problem is 
compounded by the fact that some Tribunals have been created pursuant to Central Legislations and 
some others have been created by State Legislatio ns. However, even in the case of Tribunals created 
by Parliamentary legislations, there is no uniformity in administration. We are of the view that until a 
wholly independent agency for the administration of all such Tribunals can be set-up, it is desirable 
that all such Tribunals should be, as far as possible, under a single nodal Ministry which will be in a 
position to oversee the working of these Tribunals. For a number of reasons that Ministry should 
appropriately be the Ministry of Law……” 
17.1 The Committee notes that for instance, even th ough the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal earlier 
pertained to the Ministry of Finance, its nodal Ministry is the Ministry of Law and Justice. Therefore, the 
Committee is of the considered opin ion that the nodal Ministry fo r the Administrative Tribunals 
should also be the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
18.  Penalties:- France has a legal practice of holding the erring officer liable to indemnify the aggrieved 
party by personally paying fine for every day of default in complying with the orders of Tribunal, besides 
interest. The Committee recommends that provision should be incorporated in the Administrative 
Tribunals Act for holding the erring officer liable to indemnify the aggrieved party by personally paying 
fine for every day of default in compliance with th e orders of the Tribunal. This would expedite the 
enforcement of orders of Tribunal. 
19. Legal Aid:  - The Committee feels that legal aid should be provided at least for all Class IV 
employees and workers of temporary status etc. Lega l aid should be available in all Benches of the 
Tribunals and in such manner as wi ll enable Government employees in need, to get the assistance they 
require. 
20.0  Provision of Appeal: - At present the appeal against the order of Tribunal is under Article 136 of the 
Constitution to the Supreme Court which is not efficacious to secure the end of justice. A statutory 
provision of appeal in addition to the above, to the Supreme Court should be made.  
20.1 If statutory provision of appeal to the Supreme Court cannot be envisaged, a clarifying amendment 
should be made that the order of a Tribunal finally disposing of an application will not be called in 
question in any Court, except by way of special leave petition in the Supreme Court. 
 
 
 

 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,  
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES. LAW AND JUSTICE 
XIII  
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 5
th 
June, 2006 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      ––     Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar  
 4. Dr. P.C. Alexander  
 5. Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK  SABHA 
 6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 7. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar 
 8. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 9. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan 
 10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
 11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan  
 12. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
  WITNESSES  
 I.           * * * 
 II.  Representatives of Ministry of Pers onnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
  1. Shri Pratyush Sinha, Secretary 
  2. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri Budh Prakash, Director  
 III.          * * * 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2.         * * * 

3. Thereafter, the Committee heard another presentation  by the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions on the Administrative Tr ibunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Secretary, 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions gave detailed outline of the reasons that 
necessitated the introduction of the Bi ll and specifically clarified that the power to establish the tribunals 
was not meant to be exercised arbitrarily. About the power to punish for contempt , the Secretary clarified 
that it was inherent only in the Supreme Court and High Courts and as part of the privilege to the 
Parliament and State Legislatures, no other court, trib unal or authority should have or be conferred with 
such a power. Thereafter, Members raised queries which were clarified by the Secretary. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 5.15 
P.M. to meet again on the 14th June, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVI  
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 12 th July, 2006, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan     ––    Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 3. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki  
 4. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
  LOK SABHA  
 5. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 6. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
 7. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 8. Shri Harin Pathak 
 9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan  
 10. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  WITNESSES 
 I.  * * * 
 II.  * * * 
 III. Representatives of the Ministry of P ersonnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
 1.  Shri Alok Tandon, Director 
 2.  Shri Prabhakaran, Under Secretary 
 IV. Representative of the Central Admi nistrative Tribunal Bar Association 
  Shri A.K. Behera, President.  
 V.  Representative of the Central Secretaria t Services Section Officers Association 
  Shri D.N. Sahoo, Convenor and General Secretary 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer  
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard presentation of the President, the Central Administrative Tribunal 
Bar Association and the Convenor and General Secret ary of the Central Secretariat Services Section 

Officers Association on the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The witnesses stated that 
the Administrative Tribunals were established for a specific purpose through an Act of Parliament in 
exercise of its legislative powers. Therefore, they could not be abolished by the executive in exercise of its 
administrative power and that abolition power remained with the Parliament. The representatives further 
elaborated that the Administrative Tribunals had been functioning effectively and had considerably 
reduced the burden of the High Courts in service matters. Citing a Supreme Court judgement the 
representatives further stated that the High Courts were supposed to have judicial superintendence over the 
Tribunals but it did not have the administrative superintendence. As for the implementation of the Tribunal 
judgements the representatives further clarified that instead of making the highest official responsible for 
non-implementation, a nodal officer may be appointe d in each Ministry/Department. Thereafter, the 
Members sought some clarifications which were replied by the representatives. 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
7. The Committee adjourned at 12.57 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVIII  
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 2nd August, 2006, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan   ––   Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 5. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
  LOK  SABHA  
 6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 7. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 8. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 9. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
 10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
 11. Shri Harin Pathak 
 12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan  
 13. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran  
 14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  WITNESSES 
 I. Representatives of the Ministry of P ersonnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
  1.  Shri L.K. Joshi, Secretary 
  2.  R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary (AT & A) 
  3.  R.P. Nath, Director (AT)  
 II. Representative of the Department of Perso nnel and Administrative Reforms, Government 
   of Tamil Nadu  
  Thirumati Girija Vaidyanathan, Secretary  
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2.  The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the witnesses and congratulated the Secretary, Ministry 
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on his taking over charge as Secretary. 
3.  The Secretary, Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms, Government of Tamil Nadu, 
while deposing before the Committee on the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006 stated that 

the State Government was not presently considering the review of abolition of the Tamil Nadu State 
Administrative Tribunal and that the cases pending therein had already been transferred to the Tamil Nadu 
High Court. She narrated the circumstances leading to  abolition of the Tamil Nadu State Administrative 
Tribunal. 
4.  The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions apprised the Committee that 
the Central Government did not have intention to abolish any Administrative Tribunal as of now. He stated 
that the Bill proposes to add an enabling provision to the parent Act which would empower the Central 
Government to abolish a State Administrative Tr ibunal on a specific request made by the State 
Government. 
5.  The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee. 
6. * * * 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
8. The meeting adjourned at 3.55 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

II  
SECOND MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 21 st September, 2006, in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan     –     Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Virendra Bhatia 
 5. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 6. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
 8. Shri Harin Pathak 
 9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan  
 10. Prof. M. Ramadass 
 11. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  WITNESSES  
 1. Mr. Justice Ashok Agarwal, former Chief Justice of Madras High Court and 
      Chairman (Retired) of Central Administrative Tribunal. 
 2. Mr. Justice V.S. Malimath,  former Chief Justice of Karnataka High Court and  
      Kerala High Court and Chairman (Retired) of Central  
      Administrative Tribunal.  
 3. Shri Dilip Sharma, Advocate, High Court of Himachal Pradesh 
 4. Shri M.P. Singh, Retired Member of Central Administrative Tribunal. 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006. 
3. Mr. Justice Ashok Agarwal, while deposing before the Committee on the Bill, opined that since the 
rate of disposal of cases in Administrative Tribunals was excellent, there was no need for their abolition. 
He was of the view that if at all abolition of Administrative Tribunals was envisaged, it could not be done 
by an Executive notification and that it should be done only by a Legislative Act. He also voiced his 
opposition for taking away powers to punish for contempt from Administrative Tribunals. 

4.  Mr. Justice V.S. Malimath apprised the Committee that the Bill was against the spirit of Article 323-
A of the Constitution. He stressed upon the need for specialized Tribunals for quick disposal of cases and 
deposed that an appeal may be provided against th e decisions of Tribunals to the Supreme Court under 
Article 138 of the Constitution. In respect of contem pt powers of Tribunals, he submitted that if contempt 
powers are to be taken away from them, an alternative statutory machinery should be envisaged to execute 
the orders of Tribunals. He suggested that the Chairman  of the Tribunal should be retired Chief Justice of 
High Court. 
5. Shri Dilip Sharma, Advocate traced the background of the enactment of the Administrative Tribunals 
Act, 1985 and opined that power to entertain appeals against decisions of Tribunals should not be given to 
High Courts. 
6. Shri M.P. Singh apprised the Committee that in view of the backlog of cases in High Courts, the 
Tribunals were the need of the hour and that the Government should not be given the power to abolish 
Tribunals by notification. He was of the opinion that such a step would defeat the principle of 
‘independence of judiciary’. He was not in favour of granting appellate powers to High Courts and taking 
away contempt powers from Tribunals. 
7. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee.  
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
9. The meeting was adjourned at 12.41 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

III 
THIRD MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3 rd October, 2006, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      ––      Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 5. Shri Virendra Bhatia 
 6. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 7. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 8. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
  LOK  SABHA 
 9. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 10. Dr. C. Krishnan 
 11. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up in-house discussion and clau se by clause consideration on the Administrative 
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006. 
3. The Members opined that the powers to punish for contempt should not be taken away from 
Administrative Tribunals since exercising contempt power is the sole method open to Administrative 
Tribunals to ensure implementation of its orders. They voiced their concern that if Administrative 
Tribunals were abolished, the aggrieved Government employees would not be entitled to speedy justice 
since they would have to approach High Courts which are already overburdened. They were of the view 
that as observed by the Apex court in L.K. Chandrakumar case, though the rate of disposal of cases by 
Administrative Tribunals was excellent, steps should be taken to ensure better functioning of Tribunals. To 
achieve this objective, the qualification prescribed in Section 6 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 
should be amended to the effect that a person should not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman 
unless he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court and that a person 
should not be qualified for appointment as the Vice-Chairman unless he had been a Judge of a High Court 
and that a person should not be qualified for appointment as an Administrative Member unless he had held 
the post of a Secretary to the Government of Indi a or any other post under the Central or a State 

Government carrying a scale of pay which was not less than that of a Secretary to the Government of 
India, or had, for at least two years, held the post of  an Additional Secretary to the Government of India or 
any other post under the Central or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which was not less than 
that of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India. 
4. While deliberating upon various provisions of the Bill, the Members were of the opinion that the 
establishment of State Administrative Tribunals should be made mandatory and that the Central 
Government should abide by the request made by the State Governments for the same. With regard to the 
procedure for abolition of Administrative Tribunals, the Committee felt that such a proposal should 
necessarily be placed before the Parliament for its  approval. On the issue of providing appeal against 
orders of Tribunals to High Courts, the Members opine d that appeal should lie to the Supreme Court and 
that it should be provided in the parent Act. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.25 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VI  
SIXTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th November, 2006, in Main Committee Room, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      ––      Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Virendra Bhatia 
 5. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 6. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 7. Shri Tarlochan Singh 
  LOK  SABHA 
 8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar  
 10. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 11. Dr. C. Krishnan 
 12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the newly nominated Member Shri Tarlochan Singh to the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the consideration of the draft 17th  Report on the 
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006. Initiating the discussions, the Members desired that the 
orders/judgements of the Administrative Tribunals should be implemented in letter and spirit and that a 
mechanism should be provided for in the Act itself for smooth implementation of the Tribunal orders 
including a penal provision for non-compliance of its orders. 
3.  As for the qualifications for appointment as the functionaries of the Tribunal, the Members suggested 
some changes in section 6 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. For the appointment of the 
Chairman, the Members suggested that in place of the Judge of a High Court it should be either a sitting 
Judge of the Supreme Court or a Ch ief Justice of High Court and for the post of the Vice-Chairman, it 
could be a High Court Judge. For the other functionaries, the Members suggested that they could be the 
Secretaries and the Addition al Secretaries with at least two year s tenure as Additional Secretary. The 
Members were of the opinion that with the increase  in retirement age from 58 to 60 years and in some 
cases even upto 62 years, it would be appropriate that even the Secretaries were considered for the posts of 
Tribunal Members irrespective of their term in offi ce as Secretary. Since ther e might be quite a good 
number of officers for appointment who retired as Secret ary or a post equivalent thereto, though earlier in 

1985 there was always a shortage of persons who reti red as Secretary. The Members were also of the 
considered opinion that the constitution of the State Administrative Tribunals should also be made 
mandatory. Subject to the above changes the Committee adopted the Report. 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. * * * 
7. The meeting was adjourned at 12.25 
P.M.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - A 
 
INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 18TH MARCH, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. XXVIII of 2006
 
THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
 B E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: –– 
 
 
13 of 1985. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. This Act may be called the Administrative Tribunals 
(Amendment) Act, 2006. 
 2. In the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in section 3, after clause (g), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:––  
 ‘ (ga) “High Court” means the High Court within whose 
territorial jurisdiction, the Tribunal concerned is situated.’. 
 3. Section 17 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
 4. In section 27 of the principal Act, the brackets and words 
“(including a High Court)” shall be omitted.  
 5. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following 
Chapters shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“CHAPTER IVA 
Short title. 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Omission  of section 17. 
 
Amendment of section 27. 
 
 
Insertion of new Chapters IV A 
and IVB. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABOLITION OF TRIBUNALS 
 27 A. (1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the 
continued existence of the Central Administrative Tribunal or any 
of its Benches is not necessary, it may, by notification, abolish the 
Tribunal or any of its Benches. 
 (2) The Central Government may abolish, by notification, 
 (a) an Administrative Tribunal established for a State under 
sub-section (2) of section 4 after the receipt of a proposal from the 
State in this behalf; 
 (b) a Joint Administrative Tribunal established under sub-
section (3) of section 4 on receipt of an agreement entered into by 
the concerned States for the abolition of such Administrative 
Tribunal: 
 Provided that the abolition of the Tamil Nadu Administrative 
Tribunal and the transfer of the pending cases and records of the 
said Tribunal to the High Court of Judicature at Madras, by the 
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions No. G..S.R. 71(E), dated 
the 17th February, 2006 issued under sub-section  (2) of section 4, 
shall be deemed to have been done under this section as if the 
provisions of this section were in force on and from the 17th day of 
February, 2006. 
 (3) If a proposal or agreement under clause (a) or clause (b) 
of sub-section  (2) , is forwarded to the Central Government, the 
concerned State shall also forward along with it a proposal for the 
transfer and disposal of cases pending before any State 
Administrative Tribunal or any Joint Administrative Tribunal in 
consultation with the concerned High Court. 
 (4) The Central Government may provide in the notification 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) for the transfer and disposal 
of the cases pending before the Tribunal or any of its Benches 
immediately before its abolition. 
 27B. (1) On the abolition of a Tribunal, the persons holding 
the office as the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or a Member of the 
Tribunal immediately before the abolition of such Tribunal, shall 
vacate their respective offices. 
 (2) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and a Member of the 
Tribunal, after vacation of their o ffices under sub-section (1), shall 
not be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature 
termination of their term or any contract of service: 
 
Power of Central Government to 
abolish Tribunals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vacation of office by Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman or Member of 
the Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 of 1947. 
 Provided that the Chairman  of the Tribunal and every 
other person appointed as Vi ce-Chairman and Member, who 
were in service of the approp riate Government and took 
voluntary retirement from the service of the appropriate 
Government to join the Tribuna l as Chairman, Vice-Chairman 
or Member, as the case may be, shall be entitled to draw his pay 
from the appropriate Government from the date of abolition of 
such Tribunal till his attaining th e age of superannuation or till 
the completion of his tenure in  that Tribunal, whichever is 
earlier. 
 27C. (1) On the abolition of the Tribunal or any of its 
Benches, the officers and other employees, –– 
 (a) who were appointed on deputation basis to the Tribunal 
immediately before the abolition of the Tribunal, shall, on such 
abolition, stand reverted to their parent cadre; and 
 (b) who were appointed on regular basis to the Tribunal 
immediately before the abolition of the Tribunal, shall, on such 
abolition, become the officers and employees of the appropriate 
Government with the same rights and privileges as to pension, 
gratuity and other like matters as would have been admissible to 
him if the rights in relation to such Tribunal had not been 
transferred to, and vested in, the appropriate Government and shall 
continue to do so unless and until his employment in the appropriate 
Government is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and 
conditions of employment are duly altered by that Government. 
 (2) The officers and other employees not falling under clauses 
(a) and (b) of sub-section (1), on such abolition, shall vacate their 
respective offices and no such o fficer and other employee shall be 
entitled to claim any compensation  for the premature termination of 
their term of office or of any contract of service. 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, 
the transfer of the services of an y officer or employee, employed in 
the Tribunal, to the appropriate Government shall not entitle such 
officer or employee any compensation under this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
 (4) Where the Tribunal has established provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the officers 
and other employees employed in the Tribunal, the monies relatable 
to the officers and other employees whose services have been 
transferred by or under this Act to the appropriate Government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vacation of office by staff of 
Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

shall, out of the monies standing, on the abolition of the Tribunal, to 
the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other 
fund, stand so transferred and shall be dealt with by the said 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER IVB 
APPEAL TO HIGH COURT 
 27D. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of 
the Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court.  
 (2 ) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within 
a period of sixty days from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the Tribunal to the person aggrieved by the said 
decision or order: 
 Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of sixty days if it is satisfied that the 
aggrieved person had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within the period of sixty days. 
 (3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be heard by a 
Bench of two Judges of the High Court.”. 
 6. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after 
clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––  
 “ (ea) the manner in which the amount of provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund credited, shall be dealt with 
by the Central Government;”. 
 7. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after 
clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––  
 “ (ba) the manner in which the amount of provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund credited, shall be dealt with 
by the appropriate Government;”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeal to 
High Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 35. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 36. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 In pursuance of article 323A of the Constitution, the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 was 
enacted. The said Act envisaged the setting up of administrative tribunals to deal with service related 
matters and sought to exclude the jurisdiction of all courts including the High Courts in such matters. The 
functions and powers including the power to punish for contempt were assigned to the tribunals. The Apex 
Court has since held that writ jurisdiction of the High Courts under articles 226 and 227 shall continue to 
be with High Courts and administrative tribunals shall be subject to such jurisdiction of the High Courts. 
The High Courts as court of record already have the power to punish for contempt. As the Tribunals have 
become subject to the jurisdiction of the High Courts, it is no longer necessary to retain the power to 
punish for contempt with them. 
2.  Further, the Central Administrative Tribunal was established with its Principal Bench at New Delhi 
and 16 other Benches located in various parts of the country to adjudicate service related disputes of the 
Central Government employees and other employees specifically covered by it. In addition, 
Administrative Tribunals in eight States were established by the Central Government on the request of the 
respective State Government to adjudicate service re lated disputes of State Government employees. Three 
of the eight State Governments viz. Government of Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, 
have requested the Central Government for abolition of the State Administrative Tribunals. 
3.  Since the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 does not contain any specific provisions for abolition 
of a Tribunal, there is a need for amendment of the Act in order to provide for an enabling provision for 
abolition of the Tribunal and also for transfer of pending cases to some other authority after the Tribunal is 
abolished. The amendment is consid ered necessary for taking care of the service conditions of its 
functionaries, viz., Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members and o fficers and other Staff of the Tribunal in 
case the Tribunal is abolished. Further, an amendment to the Act is also required to provide for appeal 
against the orders of an Administrative Tribunal to the respective High Courts to bring the Act in line with 
the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar delivered in March, 1997. 
4.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
SURESH  PACHOURI. 
N
EW DELHI; 
The 16th March, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 All the expenses towards the Central Administrative Tribunal are borne by the Central Government 
and in respect of State Administrative Tribunal the same are borne by the respective State Government. At 
present, there is no proposal under consideration of the Central Government for abolition of Central 
Administrative Tribunal or any of its Benches. Ther efore, even if the Bill is enacted, no expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India is likely to be incurred immediately on such enactment. However, the Bill 
involves financial consequences in future when the subject matter of the Bill will be invoked for abolition 
of the State Administrative Tribunals. In case the State Administrative Tribunal is abolished, the 
expenditure by way of pay and allowances in respect  of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members of such 
Tribunal will have to be borne by the respective State Governments and no expenditure from Consolidated 
Fund of India is likely to be incurred on this account. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clauses 6 and 7 of the Bill empower the appropriate Government to make rules in regard to the 
manner in which the amount of provident fund, supera nnuation, welfare and other fund credited shall be 
dealt with by the appropriate Government under new section 27C for vacation of office by the staff of the 
Tribunal. 
 The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and detail. The 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - B 
REPLY RECEIVED FROM THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING) TO QUESTIONNAIRE ON THE BILL 
S.No.                Questionnaire               Reply 
   1                         2                   3  
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What is the consequence of the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Shri T.  Sudhakar Prasad v. 
Government of A.P. and others? Does it not 
overrule the decision in Shri L. Chandra Kumar 
case pertaining to appellate jurisdiction of High 
Court which has been relied upon in the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons for further 
amendment of the Administrative Tribunals 
Act. 
 
 
If the Administrative Tribunals are deprived of 
contempt powers, they will have to approach 
the High Courts in contempt cases. Whether 
this will not increase the workload of High 
Courts which is already overburdened? 
Whether this will not make High Court the 
executive court for the implementation of the 
judgments of the Administrative Tribunals as 
there would be no other provision for execution 
of its judgments? What is the harm if 
Administrative Tribunals are given the powers 
for contempt as are being used by Courts? 
What were the grounds on which the abolition 
of Administrative Tribunals has been sought by 
three States? 
 
 
 
 
In the case of T.Sudhakar Prasad vs. Andhra Pradesh 
High Court and others the Hon’ble Supreme Court had 
upheld the validity of Section 17 of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act which does not in any way mean that this 
section could not be amended or deleted. The deletion of 
Section 17 was necessitated because the Constitution has 
protected the status of Ho n’ble Supreme Court and the 
High Court as the courts of record. All other courts are 
governed by the Contempt of Court Act, 1971 as far as 
power to punish for contempt is concerned. National 
Commission to review the Working of the Constitution 
has also not favoured conferment of such power on the 
Tribunals. 
The respective High Courts exercise the power to punish 
for contempt for all courts  in India as per their 
jurisdiction. Administrative Tribunals are not 
exceptions. There is no move to deprive Administrative 
Tribunals of their powers to punish for contempt, which 
will be invoked in accordance with the Contempt of 
Courts Act, 1971 after deletion of Section 17 of the 
Administrative tribunals Act as proposed. 
 
 
(i) The Madhya Pradesh Government had indicated that 
the tribunal had not performed up to the expectations 
and proved to be expensive and their effectiveness had 
been reduced as a perceived specialized agency as a 
substitute of High Court. 
(ii) Government of Tamil Nadu proposed abolition of 
Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal as they felt that it 
had merely become an additional tier in the judicial 
process and as such needed to be abolished. 
(iii) Karnataka Government felt that Karnataka 

 
 
 
 
 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In one of the memoranda submitted to the 
Committee, it has been stated that if a Section is 
inserted in the Administrative Tribunals Act 
empowering the Government to abolish the 
Tribunal, it is as good as repealing the Act by 
subterfuge method. What is Ministry’s opinion 
in this regard? 
It is pertinent to note that Chapter IV-A of the 
proposed Bill does not lay any guidelines for 
effecting the abolition of the Administrative 
Tribunals. Is it not a case of excessive 
delegation of power to the Executive? Would it 
not amount to conferring those powers to 
Government which the Constitution did not 
give by intent? 
 
The judgment in the case of L. Chandra Kumar 
does not prohibit the legislature from providing 
for separate appellate body in service matters in 
line with the Consumer Protection Act,1986 
where separate appellate bodies have been 
provided for in the form of State Consumer 
Commission and National Commission. What 
prevents the setting up of such an appellate 
body in service matters? 
 
In the judgment in L. Chandra Kumar case, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has recommended for 
making the Law Ministry the “nodal Ministry” 
for all Tribunals including the CAT. Whether 
the Ministry has considered this at any stage? 
Whether there is any hindrance in making the 
Law Ministry the nodal Ministry? Since the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions is the formulators of the Government 
policy and play an important role in extension 
of tenure of Members of the Tribunal, to what 
Administrative Tribunal, after Supreme Court’s orders in 
the case of L. Chandrakumar  had become an additional 
tier in the judicial system and as such proposed for 
abolition of Kamataka Administrative Tribunal. 
We do not subscribe to this view. Every proposal for 
abolition from a State will have to be accompanied by a 
proposal for transfer of pe nding cases in consultation 
with the High Court concerne d. Therefore, it may not be 
correct to say that there is any move to repeal the act by 
subterfuge. 
 
We do not subscribe to this view. Chapter IV-A of the 
proposed bill is regulatory in nature. The Central 
Government will act in this matter only on receipt of a 
proposal from the State concerned in so far as the State 
Administrative Tribunals are concerned after due 
consultation with the High Court concerned with regard 
to the transfer of pending cases. 
 
In L. Chandra Kumar case the Supreme-Court has held 
that every judgment of the Tribunal is subject to 
scrutiny/judicial review by the High Court. Therefore, 
provision of separate appellate body for service matters 
within the jurisdiction of Administrative Tribunal cannot 
in any way replace the inviolable right of the citizens to 
go in appeal before the High Court. An additional 
appellate body within the system will therefore only 
elongate the justice dispensation system of 
Administrative Tribunals. 
The issue regarding making the Law Ministry the nodal 
Ministry for all Tribunals was recommended by the 
Supreme Court in L. Chandr akumar’s case. This issue 
was considered by a Committee of Secretaries in 1997 
which decided that for all Administrative Tribunals i.e. 
Administrative Tribunals under Article 323-A of the 
Constitution, the Ministry of Personnel shall continue to 
be the nodal Ministry. For other Tribunals the Law 
Ministry was to take a well considered decision. These 
views were conveyed to the Ministry of Law who are 
already processing further action on the 
recommendations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. This 

 
 
 
 
 
8. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 
 
extent their independence may be expected? 
 
 
Is it not a fact that granting the power to abolish 
Tribunals to the Government is against the well 
established law that the authority which is 
competent to create an institution should only 
be competent to abolish the same? 
 
 
 
Since the Executive is one of the stake holders 
in cases which come before the Administrative 
Tribunals, whether it is not a paradox that the 
Executive is given the power to abolish the 
Tribunals? Does it not tantamount to nullifying 
the constitutional provision of Art.323-A? if the 
Executive is given such a power, whether there 
is not a possibility that Members of the 
Tribunal would be hesitant to deliver orders 
against the Executive? 
How is it justified to abolish a body which owes 
its existence to an enactment of Parliament, by 
a notification of the executive? Does it not 
warrant approval of the Parliament? Whether 
repealing Bill is not required for abolition of 
Tribunals and deletion of contempt provisions? 
 
 
 
 
 
What is the rate of disposal of cases by CATs 
vis-a-vis institution of cases? What is the 
Department as well as the Ministry of Law do not 
interfere with the judicial functioning of such bodies, as 
such any insinuation about their independence is 
unfounded. 
The proposal to give powers to abolish Tribunals 
emanate from the General Cl auses Act, 1897 which 
permits that an authorit y competent to create an 
institution is competent to abolish also. Under the 
provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act,1985, the 
Central Government is competent to set up the 
Tribunals. As such the Central Government should be 
competent to abolish them under the provisions of the 
Act. The proposed Bill is to make an enabling provision 
in the Act for the purpose. 
It is hypothetical. The Government does not interfere 
with the judicial functioning of the Tribunals, therefore 
the presumption of Members of the Tribunals being 
hesitant to deliver orders against the executive is not 
correct. 
 
 
 
The Parliament through the Administrative Tribunals 
Act, 1985 has empowered the Central Government to set 
up Administrative Tribunals by issuing notification for 
the purpose. A similar dispensation to facilitate the 
abolition of such Administrative Tribunal was also 
required in case some State Governments proposed to 
abolish the Administrative Tr ibunals. Specific approval 
of Parliament was not required for setting up of the 
Tribunal under the provisions of the Act. Similarly 
specific approval of Parliament may not be required for 
such abolitions also if the proposed Bill becomes a law. 
In so far as deletion of Co ntempt Powers is concerned 
proposal is before the Parliament and in no way it is 
proposed to be done without the approval of the 
Parliament. 
A statement indicating institution, disposal and 
pendency of cases before Central Administrative 

 
 
 
12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. 
average time taken to dispose a case by CAT? 
In the States which are being given powers to 
abolish the Administrative Tribunals as per 
their choice, whether sword of abolition will 
not hang over the existing Tribunals and 
uncertainty will not prevail in their cases which 
will hamper the working of such Tribunals? 
What is the justification in creating uncertainty 
and chaos in the existing Tribunals? 
What will be the fate of pending cases before 
the Administrative Tribunals which may be 
abolished any moment and more so of the 
injunctions or stays granted by such Tribunals? 
Tribunal on year to year basis is annexed. 
There has been no intention of creating uncertainty or 
chaos in the existing Tribunal. The enabling provision 
facilitating abolition of Administrative tribunals on the 
request of States is proposed to be inserted to give effect 
to proposal of the State Government duly supported by 
the High Court concerned.  
 
 
No proposal of abolition of any Administrative Tribunal 
can be considered if it is not accompanied by proposal 
for transfer of pending cases formulated in consultation 
with the concerned High Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - C 
COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING) ON THE VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS CONTAINED IN MEMORANDA SUBMITTED BY 
INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS/EXPERTS ON THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL 
Sl.No.           Name of the organisation           Co mments             Suggestio n     Response of the Government 
  1                           2                  3                    4                     5 
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohanty, Sagar, Cuttack 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Orissa Administrative Tribunal is 
having pending cases as old as 1994 
thereby belying statutory intention of 
speedy justice. 
(ii) Litigants have little faith in 
Administrative Tribunal after their 
down gradation to the level of lower 
court leading to lack of faith. Litigants 
rush to High Court after  litigation at 
Administrative Tribunal. 
(iii) Why the Government servant has 
to approach the Administrative Tribunal 
and thereafter has to go to High Court 
and then Supreme Court an employee 
of  Public Sector Undertaking of 
corresponding grade can come to High 
Court directly. 
 
 
 
 
Administrative Tribunals should be 
abolished to save time and money for 
both public and Government. All the 
pending cases can be transferred and 
equal number of posts be created in 
the High Courts. The Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and Members can be retired 
by giving full pay for the balance 
period of their term. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The amendments are confined to 
insertion of enabling, clause for 
facilitation of abolition of 
Administrative Tribunal - either State 
or Central. The enabling provision so 
inserted will facilitate such 
consideration and adequate provisions 
are proposed for insertion to protect 
the service conditions of Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman and Members of an 
Administrative Tribunal so abolished 
and also for transfer of cases. Since all 
State Governments do not favour 
abolition of Administrative Tribunals, 
there is no need for abolition/repeal of 
Administrative Tribunals Act 
However, the necessary provisions are 
incorporated in the proposal for 
transfer of pending cases etc. and 
service condition of Chairman, Vice--
Chairman and Members and other 
employees of Administrative Tribunals 
proposed for abolition. 

 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Raikwar, C.R. Patparganj, Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) The Administrative authorities and 
persons adversely affected by orders of 
Administrative Tribunals will not take 
seriously the orders of the Tribunal 
after power to punish to contempt is 
withdrawn. He says that the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court has not given any 
directions that the powers of 
Administrative Tribunals be withdrawn 
and the Supreme Court had merely 
upheld the writ jurisdiction of the High 
Court under the Constitution and 
Administrative Tribunals are to be 
subject to such jurisdiction of the High 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
(ii) The abolition of Administrative 
Tribunals in the States will defeat the 
very purpose for which the 
Administrative Tribunals Act was 
enacted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17 the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC) 
 
(ii) Not all States have set up 
Administrative Tribunals. Since State 
Administrative Tribunals are managed, 
and financed by the concerned State 
Governments, the States are within 
their rights to propose such an 
abolition. An SLP of the Union of 
India against Madras High Court order 
abolishing Tamil Nadu Administrative 
Tribunal is pending in the Supreme 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) A large number of citizens will be 
deprived of the right of speedy justice 
whereever Administrative Tribunal is 
abolished. 
 
 
(iv) Record of disposal of 
Administrative Tribunals has been 
excellent as compared to the 
subordinate courts and High Courts. 
(v) The abolition of the Administrative 
Tribunals will increase the pending 
cases in the High Courts whereby 
speedy justice will be denied to the 
citizens by putting additional burden on 
the High Courts. To ensure speedy 
justice Section 17 of the Administrative 
tribunal Act should not be deleted. 
(vi) We must preserve dynamism and 
innovativeness of the judicial system by 
not abolishing the Administrative 
Tribunals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Court who had, however, not stayed 
the orders of the Madras High Court. 
However, the matter is sub-judice. 
 
(iii) No comments except that 
corresponding number of Judges will 
have to be increased in the courts of 
the State where the State 
Administrative Tribunal is abolished 
and it is for the Department of Justice 
to take a view.  
(iv) No comments. Facts speak for 
themselves. Definitely Central 
Administrative Tribunal has 
consistently reduced pendency. 
 
(v) No comments. The High Courts 
will have to rise to the occasion. 
 
 
 
 
(vi) The provision for abolition is 
merely enabling one which is proposed 
only because the occasion may 
demand abolition or any 
Administrative Tribunal and if there is 
no provision in the Administrative 

 
 
 
 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roy, Ramesh Chand, Kolkata 
    
  
 
 
 
 
Ramachandran, S. Saidapet,  
Chennai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tribunal should have requisite power, 
to punish any party. One attempt to 
delay the case by not submitting the 
report or reply, he should be punished. 
In the case of absence by any party 
without any valid reason, the case may 
be decided in absentia. 
 
A litigants should not be asked to go 
to the same authority for justice which 
has been the cause of action for such 
injustice. He uses the analogy of father 
and son to justify that the father is not 
expected to punish his son and the 
person in the Central Administrative 
Tribunal being in form the 
bureaucracy should not be expected to 
be fair therefore judgements should be 
delivered by High Court. 
(ii) Section 17 should be retained as 
Central Administrative Tribunal 
should have the same power as 
punishment like the Supreme Court. 
(iii) He has stated application fees in 
the Tribunal should be Rs.50 for Class 
Tribunals Act to enable its abolition, 
no worthwhile consideration will be 
possible even in a justified situation 
where abolition could be warranted. 
All the powers do exist in the relevant 
laws/procedure governing 
Administrative Tribunals and even 
after deletion of Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, these 
powers could be exercised by the 
Administrative Tribunals under 
Contempt of Court Act, 1971. 
The only point to which the 
Government can respond in this regard 
is deletion of Section 17 for which an 
amendment is proposed. The 
representationist feels that the Central 
Administrative Tribunal should have 
the same power for punishment like 
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court 
and High Courts are a class apart in 
terms of the Constitution of India, 
which clearly defend and protects their 
writ jurisdiction. Therefore, the 
Administrative tribunals will have to 
derive their power from Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971 only. With regard to 
court fee etc. no unreasonable 
classification can be made in judicial 

 
 
 
 
 
7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sharma, Dilip, Advocate,  
Himachal Pradesh High Court,  
Shimla 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Any provision providing for 
abolition of Administrative Tribunal 
would be a retrograde step because the 
Administrative tribunals Act was 
enacted to provide alternative 
mechanism with a view to save the 
High Courts from the avalanche of 
litigation. 
(ii) The State and Central Governments 
are invariably parties in cases before 
Administrative Tribunals if a provision 
is made in the Administrative tribunals 
Act, 1985 providing. for abolition of 
Administrative tribunal by the Central 
Government in the case of Central 
Administrative Tribunal and on the 
request of the State Government in the 
case of State Administrative Tribunals. 
The Administrative Tribunals would 
entertain the appreh ension in going 
against the orders i.e. the concerned 
Government. 
(iii) Abolition of the contempt 
jurisdiction of Administrative Tribunals 
is not in the interest of justice and is 
contrary to Supreme Court 
pronouncement in the case of T. 
III and IV and Rs. 100 for Class II and 
Rs.500 for 
Class I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process as all are equal before law. 
 
 
We have merely incorporated an 
enabling provision in the 
Administrative Tribunal Act to 
facilitate abolition of any 
Administrative Tribunal, in whole- or 
in parts, if and when it is so decided on 
merits by the appropriate Government. 
It does not in any way mean that it has 
been decided to abolish all 
Administrative tribunals. The only two 
State Administrative Tribunals i.e. 
Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have 
been abolished on the basis of relevant 
High Court pronouncements upheld by 
the Supreme Court. 
(ii) For regulatory purposes even High 
Court and Supreme Court are attached 
to the Govt. of India. The 
appointments of High Court Judges 
and Supreme Court Judges are also 
processed by the Govt. of India albeit 
in consultation with the Chief Justice 
of India. Same process is followed 
with regard to Administrative 
Tribunals. The abolition of any State 
Administrative Tribunal cannot be 
made without consulting the concerned 
High Court for transfer of pending 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Himachal Pradesh State  
Administrative Tribunal Bar  
Association 
 
 
 
 
 
Khosla, Mrs. Arti, Former  
Additional Secretary to the Govt. 
of India 
 
Sudhakar Prasad. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It has only reacted against the provision 
to delete Section 17 of the 
Administrative tribunals Act. In their 
opinion effectiveness of the orders of 
the Central Administrative Tribunal 
will be gone, if Section 17 is deleted. 
 
 
 
Rather than amending the Act. She has 
proposed abolition of Administrative 
Tribunals in toto  for which in her 
opinion Administrative Tribunals Act 
itself can be repealed by taking the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is suggested that in case contempt 
powers of the Administrative 
Tribunals are to be done away with, a 
provision analogous to Section 27 of 
the Consumer Protection Act is to be 
provided so as to make the orders 
passed by Central Administrative 
Tribunal effective. 
 
 
 
 
 
cases even in terms of the amendment 
which are being processed.  
(iii) The proposed amendment is aimed 
at making Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 applicable to Central 
Administrative Tribunal too like all 
other courts rather than having a 
separate provision in the Act. This 
deletion of Section 17 of the Act was 
also recommended by the National 
Commission on the Working of the 
Constitution. Therefore, it is wrong to 
suggest there is any move to take  
away the contempt powers of Central 
Administrative Tribunal.  
It is not very correct to say that 
Administrative Tribunals will not have 
the power to punish for contempt. 
They will be required to invoke to the 
intervention of the concerned High 
Court in accordance with the Contempt 
of Court Act, 1971. This deletion of 
Section 17 is in accordance with the 
Report of the National Commission on 
the working of the Constitution. 
We have no comments except that 
there is. no need to get alarmed. 
Neither deletion of Section 17 to delete 
powers of the Tribunal or inclusion of 
Section 27-A to facilitate abolition, are 
meant to withdraw these powers or to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chadha, SS, Dehradun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approval of the Parliament. She feels it 
justified because the tribunal will be 
toothless without it. The objective 
appears to be to protect senior officers 
like Secretaries to the Govt. of India 
from being punished for contempt. The 
proposed amendments are therefore, not 
bonafide ones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Article 323-A of the Constitution 
specifically excludes the jurisdiction, of 
all Courts except the jurisdiction of 
Supreme Court. It is not that the 
Tribunal Act. 1985 is being amended 
by introducing the jurisdiction of High 
Court over the Administrative Tribunal. 
It is against the spirit of Article 323-A 
of the Constitution. 
(ii) There is no “State” where the 
dispute between Government and 
employees does not exist. The abolition 
on the “request of the State 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abolish these Tribunals in a blanket 
manner. The deletion of Section 17 
does not in any way takes away the 
power of Central Administrative 
Tribunal to punish for contempt. The 
only distinction is that there will have 
to be invoked in terms of contempt of 
courts Act, 1971 like any other Court 
in India. This is done in accordance 
with the recommendations of the 
National Commission on the Working 
of the Constitution. 
Section 27 A is an enabling provision 
which will be invoked only if and 
when it is formally decided by the 
relevant Government to abolish an 
Administrative Tribunal. 
(i) The amendment is being made in 
pursuance of the directions of the 
Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar’s 
case which made 
Administrative Tribunals amenable to 
the writ jurisdiction of the High 
Courts. 
 
 
(ii) The amendment is being proposed 
to give effect to the directions of the 
Supreme Court. Since the State 
Administrative Tribunals are managed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government” is a constitutional 
discrimination as the right of 
Government employees is to be 
protected from arbitrariness, by colorful 
exercise of their Powers. It is the 
employee who is aggrieved and not the 
Government. Thus, the “enabling 
Provisions” are nothing, but farce in the 
eyes of Law. The dictum that justice 
delayed is justice denied and it will 
encourage corruption and nepotism and 
red tapism in State services. 
(iii) If Legislators are really interested 
in curbing the corruption, bribery and 
documentary frauds in Public records 
for which prevention corruption Act 
1988 is promulgated the Administrative 
Tribunals should be vested with powers 
of enlarged jurisd iction as part of 
service matter as criminal mis-conduct 
of Public servant  for which CBI under 
the superintendence of CVC is the 
independent investigating agency. The 
present trend is that the culprit public 
servants having amassed unaccounted 
money hire heavy weight reputed 
Lawyers and obtain “Bail”. The case 
goes on for several years in High 
Courts or Courts of Special Judges 
while the employee continues under 
suspension indefinitely enjoying double 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and set up at the request of State 
Governments and these are financed 
by them, the views of the State 
whether or not to have an 
Administrative Tribunal are 
significant. Not all States have 
Administrative Tribunals. Therefore, it 
is open for the States having 
Administrative Tribunals to do away 
with that institution and propose 
abolition. Even the Supreme Court has 
not interfered with the abolition of two 
State Administrative Tribunals in the 
case of Madhya Pradesh and Tamil 
Nadu and the Central Government had 
to implement the directions of the 
High Court to abolish such Tribunals 
for those States. It is to facilitate 
considerations in such situations that 
this enabling provision is necessary. 
 (iii)  No comments. Government as a 
matter of policy does not interfere with 
the judicial functioning of courts 
including the Administrative 
Tribunals. The High Courts are 
certainly aware of th eir obligations in 
this regard in this regand 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
benefits of private earning as the Ratio 
of conviction is hardly 6% which is also 
related to ignorance of investigating 
Agency of Departmental rules. 
(iv)“Inexpensive and speedy justice” 
was the watch word for establishment 
of Administrative Tribunals under the 
Act with the introduction on Appeal 
Channel in High Courts, the financial 
commitment of the Government and the 
public servant will increase manifold in 
terms of Lawyers fees and other 
expenses coupled with Travelling 
Expenditure. As under the Act, 
procedure/Rules, the aggrieved persons 
under Rule 17, is at liberty to file 
Review application when any new fact 
carne to his notice. As the 
Administrative Tribunal has already 
examined and verified the Rules and 
facts on affidavits and orally there is no 
scope for further scrutiny by High 
Courts. The scope of scrutiny comes in 
the operation only wh ere the Tribunal’s 
scope is limited to exercise discretion in 
the matter of compensation, mental 
agony courts expenses and penal 
interest to pensioners which is fortified 
by the Apex Courts various judgements 
on the delayed payment of pensionary 
benefits and salaries etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) No comments. Government as a 
matter of policy, does not interfere 
with the judicial functioning of courts 
including the Administrative 
Tribunals. In so far as the 
Administrative Tribunals are 
concerned, the application fee is  
Rs. 100 only and the applicant can 
himself plead his case. Since the High 
Courts are the appellate courts and the 
right to appeal is inalienable, the 
expenditure involved in filing and 
defending in appeal are inescapable in 
terms of the law of the land. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)The insertion of Section 2(ga) is 
redundant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) Section 17 of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985 should not be 
deleted as this is supported’ by the 
Supreme Court pronouncement. 
 
 
 
 
(vii) Insertion of Ch apter 4A relating to 
abolition of Tribunals is 
unconstitutional. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) Since there are several High Courts 
having jurisdiction over constituent 
Benches of Administrative Tribunal, it 
was necessary to define High Court 
with reference to the State in which 
concerned Bench of the Central 
Administrative Tribunal or the State 
Administrative Tribunal was located. 
 
 
(vi) It is not correct  to say that powers 
of contempt have been withdrawn 
from Administrative Tribunals. On the 
other hand Administrative Tribunals 
are to be made amenable to the vires of 
contempt of Court Act, 1971. In this 
situation Section 17 was not necessary. 
 
 
(vii) It is not intended to do away with 
the Institution of Administrative 
Tribunals altogether only an enabling 
provision is being inserted to take care 
of the exigencies where such 
considerations could be necessary. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pankaj Kumar, Advocate  
Supreme Court of India,  
New Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) It is a hypothetical Statement that 
a stage may come where the continued 
existence of the Central Administrative 
Tribunal or any of its Benches may 
.have to be done away with. As such 
insertion of section 
27-A may not be correct. 
(ix) Under Article 323-A of the 
Constitution, the right to Appeal to 
High Court has been taken away as a 
measure of relief to the High Courts. 
The reason for shifting back this relief 
will be against the intents and purpose 
of the constitutional remedy. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) Under the proposed amendment 
the Government endeav our is to insert 
an enabling provision whereby by 
issuing a notification, the 
Administrative Tribunal and its Bench 
can be constituted or abolished as and 
when required. By implication, a 
Tribunal and its benches can remain 
functional only at the pleasure of the 
executive. This amounts to clear 
transgression of judicial function and 
in derogation of the principle of basic 
structure as enunciated by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in Keshvananda 
Bharati’s case. 
(viii) There have been proposal from 
State Governments seeking abolition 
of Administrative Tribunals. This 
provision is inserted to facilitate such 
consideration. Therefore, it is deemed 
necessary. 
 
(ix) The Government has only 
followed directions of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court while doing so and we 
have no further comments in this 
regard. 
 
 
(i) It may not be enti rely correct to say 
that abolition of an Administrative 
Tribunal will be at the pleasure of the 
executive only. In the case of State 
Administrative Tribunals, a proposal 
of the State Government has to have 
consultation with the Chief Justice of 
the concerned High Court as well as a 
plan to take care of the pending cases 
and services of functionaries of such 
Administrative Tribunals. Only when a 
well considered pro posal with reasons 
is given. A consideration can be given. 
The Administrative Tribunal would be 
considered for abolition. The 
Administrative Tr ibunals so far 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) The service matters are essentially 
in the nature in-house disputes, being 
a lesser significance than those 
involving fundamental rights. The best 
course of the action for the 
Government is to resolve services 
related dispute by constituting a 
Tribunal comprising of Administrative 
Members, rather the judicial one. The 
Tribunal as suggested above carry the 
notion of an in-house arrangement and 
will act on principle of natural justice 
for reduction of service related 
disputes. If the parties are aggrieved 
they can agitate by way of writ in the 
High Court and single Judge will be 
competent to adjudicate the disputes. 
Thereafter appeal can be preferred 
before the Division Bench or the 
larger bench of the High Court. This 
will ensure the avoidance of prolixity 
in disputes and is also cost effective 
and the judiciary will be insulated 
from executive and legislative 
encroachment. 
(iii) Deleting Section 17 providing 
powers for punishment for contempt 
abolished have been at the behest of 
the directions made by the respective 
High Courts which were not disputed 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
(ii) No comments. Since the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 
has replaced the jurisdiction of Courts 
in so far as service disputes are 
concerned, therefore the concept of in-
house settlement may not be relevant 
here. However, the Government has 
been taking necessary action through 
JCM etc. to settle broader issues which 
cause service disputes. However for 
dispensation of Ju stice, the present 
arrangement appears to be the alright. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) The purpose of this assertion is not 
very clear. We are of the view that the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selvethy Murugan S., 
& 23. Chennai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) The Administrative Tribunals have 
been abolished at the whims of the 
State Government and has cited the 
case of Tamil Nadu in this regard. The 
State Governments have not proposed 
the abolition of on larger interest but on 
vested interest. 
(ii) In the Tribunals Government is in 
dominating position. Whenever the 
Government feels that the 
Administrative Tribunal is. passing 
order against the Government, the 
Government may decide for abolition 
of Administrative Tribunal. 
(iii) While enacting Administrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985, the legislators 
would have honestly thought that the 
powers of establishment of 
Administrative Tribunal alone should 
be given to the State Government and 
such judicial forum constituted in the 
larger interest of public cannot be 
of the Tribunal is justified. It is 
submitted that in view of. the above 
discussion this Hon’ble Committee 
may consider and examine the 
averment as stated by the petitioner in 
such a way that the judicial function 
may be insulated from executive 
influence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
powers of Central Administrative 
Tribunal to punish for contempt have 
not been withdrawn but this power will 
be exercisable in terms of contempt of 
Courts Act, 1971. 
 
 
(i) It may not be correct The abolition 
of State Administrative Tribunal in 
Tamil Nadu was done on the directions 
of the High. Court of Madras which 
was not stayed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, with whom an SLP 
was filed by the UOI. 
(ii) As a matter of abundant caution 
and policy, the Government does not 
interfere with the judicial functioning 
of any judicial body including 
Administrative Tribunals. The 
apprehensions are misplaced. 
 
(iii) The fact of the matter is that 
abolition of a body created by the 
Government can be abolished by the 
Government and it would be perfectly 
legitimate under General Clauses Act. 
The Administrative Tribunals so far 
abolished have been the outcome of a 
judicial process upheld in the law of 
the land, as interpreted by the Supreme 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAT Bar Association, CAT  
Guwahati Bench, Guwahati 
 
abolished and therefore, provisions for 
abolition of Administrative Tribunal 
was not provided in the Administrative 
Tribunals Act,1985. It is as bad as a 
proposal of abolitions of  the High 
Court. 
(iv) Tribunals are having supplementary 
jurisdiction with the High Court and 
therefore such exerci ses of power must 
be free and cannot be under the clutches 
of the Government. 
 
 
 
(v) The judicial fo rum should have 
certainty and any uncertainty will be in 
violation of the preamble of the 
Constitution. 
 
 
(vi) Deletion of Section 17 of the 
principle act is in violation of the 
directions of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court in T. Sudhakar Prasad case. 
 
(i) The Association is concerned on the 
proposed amendments for enabling 
provisions for abolition of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Administrative Tribunals are not 
under the clutches of the Government. 
Only for the appointments and such 
regulatory matters, which are 
permitted in the law, the Government  
is involved in the affairs of the 
Tribunal. It is not correct to say that 
Government has been untime 
Administrative Tribunals. 
(v) No comments. The abolitions, if 
and when made, will be as per the 
process duly supported by the law of 
the land. What is presently intended is 
limited to creating an enabling 
provision so as to make such 
consideration possible. 
(vi) It is not correct to say that 
Administrative Tribunal shall not be 
having powers to punish for contempt. 
It will be exercised through Contempt 
of Court Act, 1971. 
(i) There could be occasions where 
such abolition may be necessary, 
which justifies providing for an 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Administrative Tribunals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) The Association feels that matters 
relating to the States should be resolved 
by taking opinion of State Government 
Employees’ Association. The Bar 
Association of the State Administrative 
Tribunals and in so far as Central 
Government Employees are concerned, 
the request of the States should not 
have any bearing. 
(iii) The proposed amendments seeking 
to make enabling provisions for 
abolition of Administrative Tribunals 
will open the door for doing away on 
the basis of enabling provision if 
carried out. 
 
 
 
(iv) Article 323-A of the Constitution 
was added to do away with the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabling provision. It is merely an 
enabling provision so that Government 
could consider the request made by the 
States for abolition which are duly 
supported by High Courts. We allay 
the fear that any proposal is underway 
to abolish Central Administrative 
Tribunal. 
(ii) Besides Central Administrative 
Tribunals, several States have 
Administrative Tribunals set up under 
Administrative Tribunals Act. Since 
such Administrative Tribunals are 
funded by the State Governments, 
therefore, their views in this regard 
assume significance and their views 
are required to be obtained before hand 
in the interest of fair play. 
(iii) The enabling provision by itself 
does not confer an absolute right on 
the executive to abolish an 
Administrative Tribunal. It will be 
after due consideration and 
consultation with the High Courts of 
the State Government in the case of 
State Administrative Tribunals. There 
will not be any scope for arbitrariness 
in considering such requests. 
(iv)We find it diffi cult to comprehend 
what is meant by mischief. If the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mischief. 
 
 
 
 
(v)The Association is deeply concerned 
with the proposed deletion of Section 
17 which will act in a manner 
derogatory to judicial institutions which 
Administrative Tribunals are. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) The Supreme Court in the case of L 
Chandra Kumar has accepted the fact 
that the Tribunal may perform 
supplemental role in discharging 
powers conferred by Article 226, 227 
and 32 of the Constitution of India. This 
does not call for deletion of the power 
under Section 17 of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act. Section 15 and 17 of the 
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 shall not 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intention is to describe delay as 
mischief to serve Government interests 
against litigants, it is pointed out that 
Administrative Tribunals have 
normally disposed of cases quicker 
than what was the case in the past in 
other courts. 
(v) Deletion of Section 17 does not 
mean that Administrative Tribunals 
have been deprived of the power to 
punish for contempt. In this regard, 
they have been equated with the 
Courts other than the Supreme Court 
and the High Court for exercising such 
powers. This was done in pursuance of 
the recommendation of. the National 
Commission on the Working of the 
Constitution. The Administrative 
Tribunals will however, be able to 
invoke provisions of the Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971 in this regard. 
(vi) It is true that the Supreme Court 
did not suggest deletion of Section 17 
of the Administrative Tribunals Act. 
However, since the Contempt of 
Courts Act exists and powers also 
remain under Section 17 of the AT 
Act, there could be . an occasion for 
differential interpretations. This 
deletion has been necessitated to 
ensure uniformity for the application 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Administrative Tribunal  
Bar Association, Chandigarh 
 
 
 
 
be of much relevance for the Tribunal if 
Section 17 of the AT Act is deleted. 
 
 
 
(vii) There is need to provide for 
clauses regarding regulation of services 
of employees of the Tribunal because 
abolition of Tribunals is not called for. 
(viii) The Association urges the 
Standing Committee to examine the 
feasibility to increase jurisdiction of  all 
Administrative Tribunals by 
incorporating nationalized banks, the 
insurance section and other public 
sector undertakings under Section 14(2) 
of the Administrative Tribunals Act. 
 
 
 
 
(i) This amending Bill appears to be the 
brain child of some arrogant 
bureaucrats who neither attempt to 
implement the directions of the 
Tribunal nor comply or respond to 
contempt notices. 
(ii) The Parliament in its wisdom never 
thought of giving the powers to abolish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for provision of Contempt of Courts 
Act by all Courts including 
Administrative Tribunals and is as per 
the recommendations of the National 
Commission on the Working of the 
Constitution. 
(vii) No comments. 
 
 
 
(viii)Though it is not a subject mater of 
the proposed amendment, the inclusion 
of various bodies not so far included 
within the jurisdiction of 
Administrative Tribunals has been 
considered whenever such requests are 
made by concerned Departments of the 
Government of India. Such 
organizations are included within the 
jurisdiction of the Administrative 
Tribunals on merits. 
(i)There are no comments but 
allegations. These are based on 
conjectures without any foundation. 
 
 
(ii)Two of the High Courts viz Madras 
High Court and Madhya Pradesh High 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such institutions to the executive 
otherwise it was likely to impinge upon 
the independence of judiciary. One 
cannot be the judge in his own cause. 
What was intended to be incorporated 
in the principal Act should not be 
allowed to be incorporated by way of 
an amendment in view of the 
independence of judiciary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Whi1e proposing the amending Bill 
shelter is sought to be taken of requests 
of some of the States, namely, 
Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and 
Madhya Pradesh. If an Administrative 
Tribunal or a particular bench is not 
functioning properly, it could be dealt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Court have directed abolition of State 
Administrative Tribunals functioning 
in Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh 
respectively. Therefore, to say that the 
enabling provisions of abolition is 
proposed by the executive for its own 
benefit is not correct In fact, the 
amendments are necessary to facilitate 
consideration of request of abolition by 
the State Governments who feel that 
these Tribunals are to be abolished and 
their proposals are supported by the 
concerned High Courts. In so far as, 
contempt powers are concerned, the 
deletion of section 17 will not deprive 
power to punish for contempt of 
Administrative’ Tribunals. On the 
other hand, by this deletion, the power 
to punish for contempt will be 
exercisab1e through Contempt of 
Courts Act, 1971. This is as per the 
recommendations of the National 
Commission on the Working of the 
Constitution. 
(iii) However, we would like to point 
out that these are only enabling 
provisions and consideration of request 
cannot be unilateral, as it has to be in 
accordance with the procedure in 
which High Courts of the States would 
also be involved in so far it involves 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with by the Parliament and not within 
the delegated powers of the executive. 
The administrative Ministry is seeking 
blanket powers in use as a tool to keep 
the sword of abolition hanging over an 
adjudicating judicial body. The power 
to abolish such an institution should 
remain with the Parliament only. 
(iv) The Supreme Court in L. Chandra 
Kumar case has supported the 
continuance of Tribunals and suggested 
to bring all Tribunals under one nodal 
Ministry. Instead of acting in that 
direction the Administrative Ministry 
has mooted the proposal to wipe out the 
Tribunals altogether so as to rid of 
various directions of Tribunals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) The Administrati ve Ministry has 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transfer of cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) There is no move to unilaterally 
wipe out Administrative Tribunals. 
Only an enabling provision is being 
inserted to enable consideration of 
such requests from the States. 
Administrative Tribunals are a class 
apart in terms of Article 323(A) of the 
Constitution. There are other Tribunals 
also in terms of Article 323(B) of the 
Constitution. The Ministry of Law had 
drafted a Cabinet Note on which 
comments of this Department were 
also sent. The su ggestions of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court were given 
due consideration by a Committee of 
Secretaries which was of the view that 
Administrative Tribunals being a class 
apart should continue to be within one 
Department i.e. Department of 
Personnel and Training and for rest of 
the Tribunals Law Ministry can 
consider making a nodal agency. 
(v) The directions of the Hon’ble 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
omitted an important judgment of the 
Supreme Court wherein the powers of 
Administrative Tribunals are said to be 
at par with the High Courts with regard 
to contempt of itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) In L. Chandra Kumar case the  
judgment of the Tribunal has nor been 
made appealable to the High Court. The 
High Court can scrutinize the judicial 
review done by the Tribunal. The scope 
of appeal and judicial review are quite 
different and have been misunderstood 
by the Administrative Ministry. 
(vii) The intention of the administrative 
Ministry is primarily to strip the 
Tribunals of their jurisdiction under 
Contempt of Courts Act otherwise there 
is no reason for making the Tribunals 
toothless. If the Government does not 
bother about a contempt proceeding 
initiated by the Tribunals, the position 
of enforcement of judgment can be well 
imagined when even this power would 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supreme Court in the case of T. 
Sudhakar Prasad Vs. Government of 
Andhra Pradesh and others were duly 
considered while formulating the 
amending Bill which does not in any 
way take away the powers of 
Administrative Tribunals with regard 
to punishment for their contempt. The 
proposed Bill simply removes the 
duplication between Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971 and Section 17 of the 
AT Act. 
(vi) We do not subscribe to the view of 
the Association. The Government 
formulated its views after due 
deliberation and consultation with the 
Law Ministry. That Ministry was 
involved at every stage before acting 
on the direction of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court. 
(vii) It was never in tended to reduce 
the effectiveness of the Administrative 
Tribunals. We have simply brought 
about uniformity in the invocation of 
the provisions of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 in Administrative Tribunals 
rather than having a separate provision 
in the Administrative Tribunals Act. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Justice RK Mahajan,  
Himachal Pradesh High Court,  
Allahabad High Court 
 
 
 
not be available to Administrative 
Tribunals. 
(viii)The Administrative Ministry has 
not bothered to improve the conditions 
of service of members of Tribunals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ix )The only reason assigned by the 
administrative Ministry for the 
amendment is the request of some of 
the States and that cannot be the reason 
for abolition, and stripping the Central 
Administrative Tribunal of its powers. 
 
 
 
(i) It is good that few States have 
decided to abolish Administrative 
Tribunals. He feels that the entire 
Administrative Tribunals Act should be 
scrapped and jurisdiction be restored to 
the High Courts and other Civil Courts. 
The Department had filed reply for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) By and large the service 
conditions of Vice-Chairman and 
Chairman are the same as those of 
High Court Judges. Wherever possible 
conditions of service in so far as those 
affect the performance of members etc. 
of administrative tribunal have been 
given due consideration. However, on 
occasions financial constraints have 
compelled the Government to restrain 
which was never intentional. 
(ix) Since the said Administrative 
Tribunals and Central Administrative 
Tribunal are governed by the same set 
of Law, it may not be proper to 
provide different provisions to Central 
Administrative Tribunal and State 
Administrative Tribunals. It is not 
correct to say that any power of 
Central Administrative Tribunal is 
being stripped in this regard. 
(i) No comments. These are mere 
observations without much support 
from facts. We do not subscribe to 
their views. We are merely proposed 
enabling provisions to facilitate such 
consideration. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri NR Goyal, IAS (Retd.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
years together and cases are remitted by 
Administrative Tribunals as 
representations for decision. There is no 
use for Administrative Tribunals. 
(ii) The employees who have completed 
reasonable period of service in 
Administrative Tribunals be retired 
voluntarily/compulsorily if they do not 
opt so. Those employees who are 
experienced and enjoy good records 
may be given option to serve on the 
authority where cases are transferred in 
the old conditions of their service. 
(iii)The retention of Section 17 is 
undesirable. 
(i) The concept of justice at door step is 
negated specially in small matters and 
in many small cases the employees 
avoid to move Courts. Therefore, in the 
event of such a Tribunal the provision 
is to be made to create such authorities 
at District level Headquarters or if the 
volume of work is less then 
combination of Districts can be made. 
If such an authority is created, then the 
jurisdiction should accordingly be 
made. 
(ii) While deleting Section 17 of the 
Principal Act, ‘the CAT (Contempt of 
Courts) Rules, 1986 also needs to be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Provisions have been made in the 
amending Bill to protect the service 
interest of the employees. We cannot 
arbitrarily do away with the services of 
legitimately appointed employees 
without protecting his legitimate 
interests. 
 
(iii) No comments. 
 
 
(i) The financial, viability of such a 
proposal and considering the number 
of Districts in India makes 
implementation of this suggestion 
prohibitive. 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Needful will be done only in case 
our proposal is approved by the 
Parliament and the same becomes an 

 
 
21. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri P.N. Jatti, Advocate, 
Rajasthan High Court,  
Jaipur Bench 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
repealed. 
(i) Government has not submitted true 
facts to Parliament. In his opinion 
Supreme Court has never said that the 
High Court have appellate jurisdiction 
over the Tribunal and that Tribunal 
cannot have contempt powers. It is 
contrary to Supreme Court 
pronouncement in the case of T. 
Sudhakar Prasad vs. Government of 
Andhra Pradesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Tribunals were created for speedy 
justice. Now the position is different 
because in large number of cases High 
Court stays the orders of the Tribunal 
and it may take years for final disposal 
in the High Court, This defeats the 
purpose of inexpensive justice. 
 
(iii) Government may consider having a 
National Administrative Tribunal to 
deal with cases decided by the Tribunal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Act of Parliament. 
(i) It is true that the Supreme Court 
direction in L. Chandrakumar’s case 
does not imply that contempt power 
should be taken away from 
Administrative Tribunal but the fact 
remains that National Commission to 
review the Working of the 
Constitution, had also recommended 
that tribunals be brought at par with 
other courts so as to invoke their 
contempt powers through concerned 
High Court in terms of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. Therefore, Section 17 
of the Administrative Tribunals Act is 
simply an additionality and its deletion 
does not in any way reduce the 
effectiveness of Administrative 
Tribunals. 
(ii) The prerogative of the High Court 
to consider orders on a appeal petition 
cannot be deemed as a cause of delay 
in dispensation of justice. Grant of stay 
by High Courts is a part of judicial 
process and not all cases are likely to 
go in appeal. We have no comments in 
this regard. 
(iii) Since High Courts have been 
deemed as basic structure of the 
Constitution and their appellate 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri N.R. Satyamurthy, 
Bangalore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as an Appellate Court. 
 
 
(iv) Appeals in the High Court against 
the orders of Administrative Tribunals 
will further burden the High Courts 
which are already overburdened. 
 
 
 
 
(v) Timely appointment of Members 
should be made. 
(i) The bonanza of Administrative 
tribunal granted by Rajiv Gandhi 
should not be withdrawn. Hence no 
need for amendment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
jurisdiction cannot be done away with, 
therefore creation of an appellate 
Tribunal’ may only further clog the 
process. 
(iv) This proposed ammendment is in 
accordance, with the orders of the 
Supreme Court. A supplemental role 
for the Administrative Tribunals vis-a-
vis High Courts and the right to appeal 
before the High Court have been 
stressed by the Supreme Court in 
Chandra Kumar’s case as such we 
have no comments in this regard. 
(v) The endeavour is always made to 
ensure timely appointments. 
(i) There is no proposal to abolish 
Administrative Tribunals in a blanket 
manner. The proposal is merely an 
enabling provision to facilitate 
consideration of such proposals from 
States which are not in favour of 
Administrative Tribunals. Moreover, 
not all States have State 
Administrative Tribunals. Therefore, it 
is also not mandatory that a State 
having an Administrative Tribunal 
cannot decide about the abolition of its 
Administrative Tribunal. In the case of 
Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh 
Administrative Tribunals, even the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Rajeev Bansal, BA, LLM   
Advocate & Solicitor, Delhi  
High Court 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Contempt power of the Tribunals 
should be strengthened. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Co-Government servants and 
pensioners should be enabled to plead 
for the Government employees. 
 
 
 
(iv) Appeals against the orders in 
favour of employees, should be 
prohibited. 
 
 
(i)There is no need for providing 
specific provision of appeal to High 
Courts in view of the fact that it will be 
redundant when Article 226 and 227 of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supreme Court has not questioned the 
legality of its abolition. 
(ii) There is no question of weakening 
the contempt powers of the 
Administrative Tribunals. Section 17 
of the Administrative Tribunals Act is 
proposed to be deleted merely to bring 
these Tribunal within the ambit of 
Contempt of Court Act,1971 which is 
according to a recommendation made 
by the National Commission to 
Review the Working of the 
Constitution. 
(iii) An affected employee can himself 
plead his case before an 
Administrative Tribunal as per 
Administrative Tribunals Act. He is at 
liberty to take the assistance of the 
Member of the Bar. 
(iv) All parties are equal before Law. 
Therefore, what is permissible to a 
litigant will also be permissible to the 
respondent and no unreasonable 
classification can be made in this 
regard. 
(i) No comments exce pt that it asserts 
the constitutional position and gives 
effect to the Supreme Court order in L 
Chandra Kumar case. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Administrative 
Tribunals  
Bar Association, Office-cum- 
Court  complex, 61/35,  
Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 
 
 
the Constitution exist. 
(ii) It would be prudent on the part of 
the legislature to bring all types of 
service matters under the jurisdiction of 
Administrative Tribunals so as to make 
them an exclusive Tribunal for deciding 
service disputes. In other words. instead 
of making a provision of abolition, 
exclusive Tribunals for dealing with 
service matters, be set up everywhere. 
(iii) The majesty of law should be 
upheld on any cost. Therefore, power to 
punish for contempt should be retained. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)The contempt power of Central 
Administrative Tribunal should not be 
deleted. The amendment bill proposes 
to withdraw contempt powers from the 
Administrative Tribunals as contempt 
powers are already available with the 
High Courts. It means that for any 
contempt of the judgment/order of 
Administrative Tribunals, contempt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) We are merely making an enabling 
provision to facilitate consideration of 
such requests from the States. It is not 
intended to make a blanket abolition. 
Since State Administrative Tribunals 
are set up only on the request of the 
State Governments and maintained by 
them, their requests require 
consideration. 
(iii) Power to punish for contempt is 
not being taken away from 
Administrative Tribunals by deletion 
of Section 17 of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act. We are deleting that 
Section to bring uniformity of 
application with regard to Contempt of 
Courts Act, 1971. This deletion is also 
as per the recommendation made by 
the National Commission, to review 
the working of the Constitution. 
(i) There is no move to divest 
Administrative Tribunals of the power 
to punish for their contempt. The 
deletion of Section 17 would enable 
the unambiguous application of 
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 with 
regard to Administrative Tribunals and 
the same is in accordance with the 
recommendations of the National 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bose JK, West Bengal 
 
 
 
 
petitions are to be filed in the High 
Court. This would add further burden 
upon the already overburdened High 
Courts. 
(ii) It is proposed to delegate the 
absolute unfettered power to abolish 
Administrative Tribunals to the 
executive without any guidelines and 
also it is sought to legalise the abolition 
of Tamil Nadu Administrative 
Tribunals. It does not stand to reason 
why clear distinction between 
legislative function and executive 
function in a democracy is bypassed. 
 
(iii) In case the Parliament desires to 
provide for an appeal to the High 
Courts, then the time provided for 
dealing is too short in service matters. 
The limitation period for filing an 
appeal should be six months instead of 
sixty days. 
    The Administrative Tribunals fail 
because the Governments concerned 
have a tendency to follow the delaying 
formula which causes severe hardship, 
both. Mental and physical. To support 
his contention he has attached a Press 
clipping from ‘Stateman’ Kolkatta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   While the individual has not come 
out with any of his own suggestion by 
himself. Press clipping attached 
contains 3 suggestion namely:– 
(i) Section 14 of the Act should be so 
recast so as to ensure that the Central 
Administrative Tribunal can exercise 
Commission to review the working of 
the Constitution. 
 
(ii)If an enabling provision is not made 
in the Administrative Tribunals Act to 
facilitate such consideration of 
requests made by State Governments 
etc., no worthwhile consideration can 
be given to such requests. The 
Government does not intend to assume 
blanket powers to abolish 
Administrative Tribunals. The States 
will have to indicate the preparedness 
of the High Courts to take up pending 
cases. 
(iii)The limitation period for filing an 
appeal is as per the procedure being 
followed by the High Courts. 
However, the Government is open to 
suggestions in this regard. 
 
   This is a grossly outdated suggestion 
having been made way back in 1991 
and the Hon’ble Supreme Court had-
considered the matter in L. 
Chandrakumar’s case and many of the 
suggestions have already been taken 
care of. In so far as qualifications for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patel, Harshad Bhai, Surat 
dated 20.09.1991 attaching therewith an 
article by a former Administrative 
Member of CAT. The article was titled 
‘Why Central Administrative Tribunal 
Fails’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     There is certain, arbitrariness in the 
functioning of the Tribunals because 
all powers and auth ority exercised by 
the High Courts before 1.11.1985. 
(ii) Central Administ rative Tribunal’s 
procedures should be reviewed in 
order to render them inexpensive. 
There is also a need to curtail the 
quoting of endless ruling in a 
judgment injecting informality into the 
proceedings. 
(iii) The qualifications of the Members 
of. the Central Administrative 
Tribunal should be revised so that 
someone will not be considered for 
appointment as Chairman unless he 
has been a Chief Justice of High Court 
for 2 years and for Judicial Member 
unless be is a Judge of a High Court 
for 2 years and Administrative 
Member unless he has held the post of 
Secretary to the Government of India 
or a similar post for the 2 years and 
such Chairman, Members etc. be 
appointed by the President on the 
recommendations of the Selection 
Committee presided over by the Chief 
Justice of India with the Union 
Cabinet Secretary and Chairman, 
UPSC as Members. 
 
 
Vice-Chairman and Judicial members 
are concerned it may not be practical 
to provide conditions more stringent 
than those prescribed for High Court 
Judges. In so far as Chairman, CAT is 
concerned, barring last two 
appointments, the retired Chief 
Justices of the High Courts 
recommended by the Chief Justice of 
India were appointed. Even now the 
appointment of Members etc. are made 
by the Government not in an arbitrary 
manner but after due consultation with 
the Chief Justice of India on the basis 
of recommendations made by High 
Power Selection Committee presided 
over by Supreme Court Judge 
nominated by Chief Justice of India. 
Perhaps this suggestion does not 
deserve the attention any more at this 
stage after the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
had. addressed itself to these Issues. 
 
 
 
 
 
   The maximum term of a Chairman 
Vice-Chairman or Member is five 
years which is also limited- by the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. 
 
 
 
 
 
13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chavan, D.S. from 
Igatpuri,Maharashtra.   
 
 
Brihmanand Prasad Chauhan, 
District Gopalganj, Bihar 
     
    
 
 
 
Deepak Verma Gurgaon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persons remain there for long time. He 
feels that the persons are transferred 
after some. period so that their 
arbitrariness is cured. 
 
 
 
This relates to an individual complaint 
relating to III Igatpuri  in district Nasik 
and is in no way connected to 
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) 
Bill 2006.    
(i) Nothing specific has been alleged.
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Administrative Members who do not 
have basic degree of Law are 
incompetent to deal with the service 
law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) The Central Administrative 
Tribunal needs to be upgraded and 
made a judicial body run by Judges of 
the States of the High Court. 
 
 
 
maximum age of 62 years for members 
and 65 years- for Vice-Chairmen and 
Chairman. The Chairman of an 
Administrative Tribunal, however, has 
the power to transfer any Vice-
Chairman or Member from a Bench of 
the Tribunal to another depending 
upon the exigencies of the work. 
No comments
 
 
(i) No comments. The intention, 
however, appear to be to make 
provisions in the Administrative 
Tribunals Act to make an adverse 
entry into the service record of such 
guilty persons against whom orders are 
passed by Central Administrative 
Tribunal. 
 
(i) The existence of Administrative 
Members in Administrative Tribunals 
serve the purpose of having 
administrative input in the expertise. 
Even Supreme Court have 
acknowledged the role being 
performed by Administrative Members 
in Central Administrative Tribunal in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Singh,VK, so called ‘Chief 
Justice’, International  
Monetary Fund, Law Court  
from Bahraich (UP)  
    
 
Shri S.K.Huizal, Bangalore 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri P.B.Srivastava, Advocate,  
Gaziabad 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Existence of Central Administrative 
Tribunal under the Department of 
Personnel and Training is a big 
handicap in delivering justice without 
fear and favour. 
 
It is a general representation. The 
assertions made in the representations 
cannot be cogently related in general. In 
general, he is alarmed at the delay in 
the judgments made by the Tribunal 
and no suggestions are made.
If  the Tribunal is abolished wholly or 
partially, control of administrative 
people would be impossible who are 
likely to become arrogant or 
disobedient. 
 
 
 
(i) Since High Courts have the power of 
superintendence over the 
Administrative Tribunal. Deletion of 
Section 17 is O.K. 
 
(ii) Bill seeking powers to abolish an 
Administrative Tribunal or any of its 
 
 
(ii) Present infrastructure of the 
Central Administrative Tribunal 
should be converted into labour and 
service Wing of the High Courts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
several orders. 
 
(ii) The handling of Administrative 
Tribunals in the Department of 
Personnel and Training is deemed 
appropriate because it frames, most of 
the rules and regulations relating to the 
service matters. 
No comments. The Central 
Administrative Tribunal is consistently 
reducing pendency. 
 
 
T h e r e   i s  n o  m o v e  t o  m a k e  a  b l a n k e t  
abolition of Administrative Tribunals. 
The proposal is limited to provide for 
an enabling provision in the 
Administrative Tribunals Act so as to 
consider proposals made by State 
Governments for abolition of State 
Administrative Tribunals. 
(i) No comments except that the 
Superintendence of High Court over 
Administrative tribunal is not 
administrative but judicial in nature. 
 
(ii) In terms of General Clauses Act, 
1897, the power to create includes 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federation of Consumer  
Organisations, Orissa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benches tantamount to nullify the 
Article 323-A of the Constitution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) No persons other than Law 
graduates be appointed as 
Administrative Members. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)Administrative Tribunals should be 
abolished totally as those have failed 
to achieve their objects and purposes 
and are sheer wastage of public money 
and time. 
(ii) Incompetent and ignorant officers 
are appointed as Members and 
Chairman of the Tribunal. 
 
 
(iii) The High Courts should have four 
powers to destroy and also the power 
to alter what is created. In other words, 
the power to rescind. the notification is 
in hand with the power to issue the 
notification. Non mention of the power 
to abolish in the Article  
323-A of the Constitution may not 
inhibit the Government from 
abolishing the institution so created. 
Incidentally, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court did not stay the orders of the 
Madras High Court when this 
Department went in for SLP in the 
Supreme Court. 
(iii) No comments. 
 
 
(i) This does not apply universally. 
The facts and circumstances in various 
Tribunals are different and each case 
requires consideration on merits. 
 
(ii) No comments as appointments are 
made on the basis of recommendations 
of a high power Selection Committee 
chaired by a sitting judge of the 
Supreme Court and after consulting 
Chief Justice of India. 
(iii) No comments. It is for the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri A. Jayachandran, Advocate 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu  
 
 
 
Narendra Prasad Shukla 
Rule of Law Society 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) If provisions of Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunal is deleted, the 
government officer or the department 
shall never be complied with the 
Tribunal’s Order. 
 
 
 
 
 
service Benches of single judges for 
service cases 
(iv) In case Tribunals are not 
abolished then power of contempt be 
conferred on the Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
This does not relate to the proposed 
amendments. The suggestion is that in 
place of sixty days for an appeal 
against an order, the period should be 
substituted to ninety days. 
 
 
 
Department of Justice to react.  
 
(iv) The proposal is merely to delete 
Section 17 of Administrative Tribunals 
Act which already conferred this 
power. This power will remain 
unaffected even after its deletion as 
this power will be exercised by the 
Administrative Tribunals in terms of 
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971. 
It is for the Department of Justice to 
react.  
 
 
 
(i) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17 the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) So far as in L. Chandra Kumar and 
others Vs. Union of India and others 
AIR 1997 SC 1125, was on the 
different footing where the vires of 
Article 323-A of the constitution of 
India and Section 28 of the 
Administrative Tribunal Act were 
challenged by means of which powers 
of the High Court to  hear and decide 
service dispute including power of 
Superintendence of the High Court 
were taken away and only to that 
extent, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held 
the provisions of Article 323-A of the 
Constitution of India and Section 28 of 
the Act,1985 to be ultra vires  and 
against basic feature of constitution and 
held that the High Court shall continue 
to exercise power of Superintendence 
and shall issue appropriate writ but it 
was clarified in the judgment itself that 
High Court shall not entertain fresh 
service dispute of Central Government 
employees directly but employees has 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC). 
(ii) The proposed amendment is in 
accordance with the ruling/ 
observation of the Supreme Court in L. 
Chandrakumar case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
31. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.N. Sahoo, Central Secretariat  
Service Forum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to first approach the Administrative 
Tribunal under the Act. 
(i) Abolition of Contempt Powers, 
coupled with the delegation of power to 
the Executive to abolish the tribunals 
will make the tribunals vulnerable to 
arbitrary action of  the bureaucracy, 
seriously undermining the 
independence and impartiality of the 
Judiciary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)The proposed addition of chapter 
IV-A, Sections 27-A, 
27-B and 27C may be rejected. 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to move the 
competent Court to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17 the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC). 
(ii) The proposed amendment is to 
make an enabling provision in the 
Administrative Tribunals Act for 
abolition of a Tribunal and to provide 
for consequential contingencies e.g. 
transfer of pending cases from the 
Tribunal to be abolished compensation 
for Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and 
Members of the respective Tribunal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K.Krishna Raja  
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) It is suggested that under Section 
14 and 15 of the Act, the jurisdiction of 
the tribunals may be extended to the 
employees of PSUs, like BSNL, MTNL 
and a host of others including 
autonomous bodies, and other 
institutions which are given grants from 
the public exchequer and the local 
bodies like Municipal Corporations, 
Municipalities etc. under the State 
Government and Union Territories. 
(iv) The Ministry may be asked to 
explore feasibility to establish an 
Appellate Body called National 
Administrative Tribunals over the 
Tribunals in the line of Consumer 
Courts. 
 
 
 
 
and other functionaries etc. as the 
existing Act does not provide, for the 
same and at the same time the 
Government had to abolish some State 
Administrative Tribunals as per the 
orders of the High Courts concerned. 
(iii) Though it is not a subject mater of 
the proposed amendment, the inclusion 
of various bodies not so far included 
within the jurisdiction of 
Administrative Tribunals has been 
considered whenever such requests are 
made by concerned Departments of the 
Government of India. Such 
organizations are included within the 
jurisdiction of the Administrative 
Tribunals on merits. 
(iv) Provision of separate appellate 
body for service matters within the 
jurisdiction of Administrative Tribunal 
cannot in any way replace the 
inviolable right of the citizens to go in 
appeal before the High Court. An 
additional appellat e body within the 
system will therefore only elongate the 
justice dispensation system of 
Administrative Tribunals. 
No specific points concerning the Bill 
has been made in this Memorandum. 

 
 
33. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All India Federation of  
Pensioners’ Associations,  
Chennai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bhoopendra Nath Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Our considered view on the proposed 
amendment on the ground that 
incorporation of enabling provisions for 
abolition of Administrative Tribunals in 
principal at the request of the States 
will defeat the very purpose of 
providing inexpensive and speedy 
redressal of the grievances of 
government employees and pensioners. 
So All India Federation of Pensioners’ 
Associations request the Hon’ble 
Standing Committee not to contemplate 
on the closure of Tribunal. 
 
 
 
(i) If provisions of Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunal is deleted, the 
government officer or the department 
shall never be complied with the 
Tribunal’s Order. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hence no comments. 
The proposed amendment is to make 
an enabling provision in the 
Administrative Tribunals Act for 
abolition of a Tribunal and to provide 
for consequential contingencies e.g. 
transfer of pending cases from the 
Tribunal to be abolished, 
compensation for Chairman, Vice-
Chairmen and Members of the 
respective Tribunal and other 
functionaries etc. as the existing Act 
does not provide for the same and at 
the same time the Government had to 
abolish some State Administrative 
Tribunals as per the orders of the High 
Courts concerned. 
(i) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17 the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) So far as in L. Chandra Kumar and 
others Vs. Union of India and others 
AIR 1997 SC 1125, was on the 
different footing where the vires of 
Article 323-A of the Constitution of 
India and Section 28 of the 
Administrative Tribunal Act were 
challenged by means of which powers 
of the High Court to  hear and decide 
service dispute including power of 
Superintendence of the High Court 
were taken away and only to that 
extent, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held 
the provisions of Article 323-A of the 
Constitution of India and Section 28 of 
the Act,1985 to be ultra vires and 
against basic feature of constitution and 
held that the High Court shall continue 
to exercise power of Superintendence 
and shall issue appropriate writ but it 
was clarified in the judgement itself that 
High Court shall not entertain fresh 
service dispute of Central Government 
employees directly but employees has 
to first approach the Administrative 
Tribunal under the Act. 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the Working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC). 
(ii) The proposed amendment is in 
accordance with the ruling/ 
observation of the Supreme Court in 
L.Chandrakumar case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35. 
 
 
 
 
36. 
 
 
 
 
37. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38. 
 
 
Banwari Lal Vyas 
 
 
G.S.Bhise  
 
 
 
All India Central Confederation  
of Pensioner Associations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Justice Ashok Agarwal,  
Retd.Chief Justice, Mumbai  
Some States have requested for 
abolition of Administrative Tribunals. I 
am not agreeable to this.
 
 
 
 
The powers of contempt over the last 
20 years have been used very very 
sparingly and cannot be termed of any 
excessive resort to contempt 
proceedings. The powers of contempt 
for CAT Benches is inherent and hence 
need not be withdrawn. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) The Central Government has 
introduced the Bill proposing to 
withdraw the Contempt powers from 
No comments. 
 
 
No point concerning the Bill has been 
raised. He has onl y requested for a 
copy of matter published in the 
Gazette. Hence no comments. 
Deletion of Section 17 does not in any 
way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17 the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of . the National Commission to 
Review the Working of the 
Constitution (NCRWC). 
(i) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to move the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39. 
 
 
 
and Retd. Chairman, CAT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sankalp & Indian Institute for  
Social Development, New Delhi 
 
the Administrative Tribunals by 
omitting Section 17 of the Principal Act 
which gives the power of contempt to 
the Administrative Tribunals. If the 
same is done then the image of 
Administrative Tribunal as an effective 
judicial forum would be totally lost. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) In my view abolition of 
Administrative Tribunal is a legislative 
function and the same cannot be 
delegated to the Executive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of India’s notification 
abolishing Tamil Nadu Administrative 
Tribunal is blatantly illegal and fully 
unconstitutional. The sub-section (2) of 
competent Court to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17, the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the Working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC). 
(ii) The provision for abolition is 
merely enabling one which is proposed 
only because the occasion may 
demand abolition of any 
Administrative Tribunal and if there is 
no provision in the Administrative 
Tribunals Act to enable its abolition, 
no worthwhile consideration will be 
possible even in a justified situation 
where abolition could be warranted. 
Notification abolishing Tamil Nadu 
Administrative Tribunal was issued as 
per the directions of the Madras High 
Court which held that even though 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAT Bar Association, Lucknow 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4 of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act of 1985 provides for the 
establishment of an Administrative 
Tribunal for the State by the Central 
Government (by notification) on 
request in this behalf from any State 
Government. The sub-clause never 
provides for abolition of Administrative 
Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) The Central Admini strative Tribunal 
without the power to punish for its 
contempt will be toothless and it would 
result in hindrance in the administration 
of justice. 
 
 
 
 
there is no specific provision in the 
Administrative Tribunals Act such 
abolition can be made in exercise of 
the powers under Section 21 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 and 
directed the Central Government to 
issue notification abolishing the 
Tribunal without waiting for any other 
formality. While the Supreme Court 
has admitted the SLP against the 
judgement of the Madras High Court, 
it declined to grant stay on the 
operation of the said order of the High 
Court. Hence, in order to avoid 
contempt proceedings in the matter the 
said notification abolishing the Tamil 
Nadu Administrative Tribunal was 
issued on 17.2.2006. The enabling 
provision for abolition of the Tribunal 
is being made to meet such situation. 
(i) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17, the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri P.G. Edlabkar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) It would be clear that there is 
absolutely no r eason, occasion or 
justification for inserting enabling 
provision for abolition of the Central 
Administrative Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
(i)The existence of Administrative 
Tribunals is a great need in the present 
days to improve upon the service 
matters and implement the. Service 
Rules in true spirit with no hesitation. 
Hence the present status quo  of the 
Administrative Tribunals may not be 
abolished. 
 
 
 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the Working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC). 
(ii) There have been proposals from 
State Governments seeking abolition 
of Administrative Tribunals. In some 
cases such proposals were followed by 
High Court’s directions to abolish 
those Tribunals. Hence the enabling 
provision for abolition of the Tribunal 
is inserted to facilitate consideration of 
such proposal. 
(i) The proposed amendment is to 
make an enabling provision in the 
Administrative Tribunals Act for 
abolition of a Tribunal and to provide 
for consequential contingencies e.g. 
transfer of pending cases from the 
Tribunal to be abolished, 
compensation for Chairman, Vice -
Chairmen and Members of the 
respective Tribunal and other 
functionaries etc. as the existing Act 
does not provide for the same and at 
the same time the Government had to 
abolish some State Administrative 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Manickavasagam, former 
Member of CAT, Chennai  
Bench 
 
 
(ii) In a case the respondent sought 
extension. of time limit and postponed 
implementation of the judgement of 
CAT over 18-24 months. The elderly 
aged pensioners mostly suffered on this 
account. Hence the contempt petition in 
the Administrative Tribunal is the only 
weapon to get through such ordeal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) The Limitation Rule under Section 
21 .may be removed through an 
amendment to the Administrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985. 
Deleting section 17 of the AT Act is 
like throwing the baby with the bathtub! 
Such a move will render the AT Act 
vulnerable and dependent. The 
Tribunals as per the orders of the High 
Courts concerned. 
(ii) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to move the 
competent Court to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17, the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC). 
(iii) No comments as this is not a 
proposal covered under the proposed 
Amendment Act. 
 
 
Deletion of Section 17 does not in any 
way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to move the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Justice K.S. Bakthavatsalam,  
former Vice-Chairman, CAT, 
Chennai Bench. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent character will be lost. The 
very idea of giving relief to the High 
Courts will be lost. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) So far as Section 27 B. is concerned 
I do not think it is reasonable to relieve 
the Chairman and Vice-Chairman 
without any compensation for the pre-
mature termination of their terms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
competent Court to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
By deletion of Section 17, the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC). 
(i) In the proviso to sub-section (2) of 
section 27 B it has been provided that 
those who were in service of the 
appropriate Government and took 
voluntary retirement from the service 
of the appropriate Government to join 
the Tribunal as Chairman, Vice -
Chairman or Member, as the case .may 
be, shall be entitled to draw his pay 
from the appropriate Government from 
the date of abolition of such Tribunal 
till his attaining the age of 
superannuation or till the completion 
of his tenure in that Tribunal, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Justice V.S. Malimath 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) In my view in Section 15 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act 1985, 
jurisdiction, powers and authority of 
State Administrative Tribunals is given. 
In that section the jurisdiction of all 
courts the term “all courts” is used. So 
it must be made clear in the Bill about 
the section 15 of the original Act also 
brought in line with the Supreme Court 
judgement in Chandra Kumar case in 
March 1997. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) In all other respect, I think the 
Amendment is to be brought is correct. 
Section 27D of the Bill provides. for an 
appeal against the decision or order of 
the Tribunal to the High Court. 
In my opinion this is unwarranted, 
besides being a retrograde step. The 
effect of providing an appeal is to 
widen the jurisdiction of the High Court 
authoring the High Court to interfere 
even on questions of fact. The attempt, 
whichever is earlier. 
(ii) In L.Chandrakumar’s case .the 
Supreme Court has observed that the 
Tribunals will, nevertheless continue 
to act like courts of first instance in 
respect of areas of law for which they 
have been constituted. It will not, 
therefore be open for litigants to 
directly approach the High Courts even 
in cases where they question the vires 
of statutory legislation, except where 
the legislation which creates the 
tribunal is challenged by overlooking 
the jurisdiction of the concerned 
Tribunal. Further, it is being provided 
in Section 27 D that any person 
aggrieved by any decision or order of 
the Tribunal may file an appeal to the 
High Court. 
(iii) No comments. 
 
The suggestion of Dr. Justice 
Malimath for conferring jurisdiction of 
Supreme Court alone already stand 
conferred by Section 28 of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
However, in L. Chandrakumar’s case 
the Supreme Court held that “clause 
2(d) of Article 323 A and clause 3(d) 
of Article 323 B to the extent they 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore, in reality is not to bring the 
law in tune with the decision of the 
Supreme Court but to further enhance 
the scope for interfering with the 
Tribunal’s order as the appellate 
jurisdiction is much wider than the writ 
jurisdiction. Therefore the effect of 
providing an appeal on facts and law is 
to enlarge the scope for interference by 
the High Court which result I presume 
the Government never intended. 
Introduction of Section 27 D to provide 
for an appeal is uncalled for and I 
strongly oppose it. 
Instead I suggest a provision being 
made to provide for an appeal to the 
Supreme Court against the order of the 
Tribunal in exercise of the power under 
Article 138 (1) of the Constitution 
which says “The Supreme Court shall 
have such furthe r jurisdiction and 
powers with respect to any of the 
matters in list I as Parliament may by 
law confer.” 
 
 
 
 
 
exclude the jurisdiction of the High 
Courts and the Supreme Court under 
Articles 226/227 and 32 of the 
Constitution are unconstitutional. 
Section 28 of the Act and the 
“exclusion of Jurisdiction” clauses in 
all other legislations enacted under the 
aegis of Articles 323 A and 323 would 
to the same extent be unconstitutional. 
The jurisdiction conferred upon the 
High Courts under Article 226/227 and 
upon the Supreme Court under Article 
32 of the Constitution is part of the 
inviolable basic structure of our 
Constitution. While this Jurisdiction 
cannot be ousted other courts and 
Tribunals may perfom a supplemental 
role in discharging the powers 
conferred by Articles 226/227 and 32 
of the Constitution. The Tribunals 
created under Article 323 A and 
Article 23 B of the Constitution are 
possessed of the competence to test the 
constitutional validity of statutory 
provisions and rules. All decisions of 
these Tribunals will, however, be 
subject to scrutiny before a Division 
Bench of the High Court within whose 
jurisdiction the concerned Tribunal 
falls.” 
Since Supreme Court has categorically 

 
 
 
 
 
 
45. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri G.R. Patwardhan, Retired  
Secretary to Govt. of India & 
Member CAT, Jodhpur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Clause 3 
It appears that the Minister has not been 
fully briefed about the judicial 
pronouncements of the Apex Court on 
this point. While he has placed reliance 
on the case of L.Chandra Kumar which 
was decided on 18th March 1997, the 
law as it stands today is contained in the 
judgement of the Apex Court delivered 
on 13th December, 2000 in the case of 
T. Sudhakar Prasad Vs. Government of 
Andhra Pradesh and others reported in 
(2000) I.S.C.C.516. In this case the 
Honourable Court held that section 17 
of the Act is protected by sub clause (b) 
and (g) of clause (2) of Art. 323-A of 
the Constitution of India and that the 
High Courts enjoy only the power of 
judicial superintendence over 
Administrative Tribunals   but not 
administrative superintendence. 
(ii) Clause 5 
The proposals under this clause deal 
with delegation of powers to abolish 
Central/State Administrative Tribunals 
ruled that appeals from CAT should 
not directly flow to the Supreme Court, 
the Government does not agree to the 
suggestion of Dr. Justice Malimath.
   
(i) In the case of T. Sudhakar Prasad 
Vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh 
and others the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
had upheld the validity of Section 17 
of the Administrative Tribunals Act 
which does not in any way mean that 
this section could not be amended or 
deleted. The deletion of Section 17 
was necessitated because the 
Constitution has protected the status of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court and the High 
Court as the courts of record. All other 
courts are governed by the Contempt 
of Court Act, 1971 as far as power to 
punish for contempt is concerned. 
National Commission to review the 
Working of the Constitution has also 
not favoured conferment of such 
power on the Tribunals. 
 
 
 
(ii) The proposal to give powers to 
abolish Tribunals emanate from the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Bapu, Mylapore, Chennai 
 
 
and its benches. No guidelines have 
been mentioned for exercise of this 
power. It is, therefore, a clear case of 
excessive delegation of legislative 
power to the Exccutive. No reasons 
have been given to seek these powers 
from Parliament whereby the Executive 
will be empowered to abolish an 
institution created by a statute. 
(iii) Chapter IV - B 
Under this clause it is proposed that 
every appeal under S,27 (D)(l) shall be 
heard by a bench of two judges of High 
Court. It is for consideration if this 
prescription should find place in High 
Court Rules or in the A.T. Act? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) At present the decisions and orders 
of the Administrative Tribunal are 
challenged before the High Court by the 
permits that an authority competent to 
create an institution is competent to 
abolish also. Under the provisions of 
the Administrative Tribunals Act,1985, 
the Central Government is competent 
to set up the Tribunals on the request 
of a State Government. As such the 
Central Government should be 
competent to abolish them especially if 
the State no longer wants to continue 
with this arrangement. Even the 
establishment of Central 
Administrative Tribunal is notified by 
the Central Government under the Act 
and, therefore, there could be no 
objection if the Central Government is 
enabled to abolish if and when it is 
satisfied that its continuation is no 
longer necessary. The proposed bill is 
to make an enabling provision in the 
Act for the purpose. 
(iii) In  L. Chandrakumar’s case the 
Supreme Court has held that every 
Judgement of the Tribunal is subject to 
scrutiny/judicial review by a Division 
Bench of the High Court. The 
proposed amendment is to give effect 
to the ruling of the Supreme Court. 
(i) The proposed Section 27D (2) 
provides that an appeal shall be 
preferred within a period of 60 days 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aggrieved party by writ petitions under 
article 226 of the Constitution. There is 
no specific time limit in the 
Administrative Tribunal Act or in the 
Constitution for invoking the writ 
jurisdiction under Article 226. It is, 
therefore, desirable to provide for 
appeal to the High Court against the 
decision / order of the Tribunal within a 
definite period of time. In this view of 
the matter the proposal to insert Section 
27D is welcome. 
(ii) The proposal to omit Section 17 of 
the Act which confers power on the 
Tribunal to punish for contempt is not 
desirable. Section 27 of the Act deals 
with execution of the orders of the 
Tribunal. The order of the Tribunal 
finally disposing of an application has 
to be executed in the same manner in 
which any final order of the 
Government or the authority in respect 
of the grievance to which the 
application relates which had been 
executed. In other words just as the 
order of the Government or any other 
authority is executed, the Tribunal’s 
orders is executed. In practice, seldom 
the Tribunal’s orders are implemented 
within a reasonable time, let alone 
within the time-frame mentioned in 
from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative tribunals Act, 1985. By 
deletion of Section 17 the 
Administrative tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the Working of the Constitution 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri M.P. Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those orders. Devoid of Section 17, the 
Tribunal is not in the picture at all for 
due compliance and enforcement of its 
orders. 
(iii) The Administrative Tribunals came 
to be established by notifications issued 
in exercise of the powers conferred on 
the Central Government by the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act 
1897 states that the power to issue 
notifications etc. includes power to add 
to, amend, vary or rescind them. 
Therefore without recourse to amending 
the Act to provide for an enabling 
provision for abolition of Tribunal, it is 
possible under the present provisions 
themselves to issue notifications to 
achieve the said objective of abolition 
of a Tribunal or Benches thereof. 
(i) Clause 3  of the aforesaid 
amendment Bill proposes to withdraw 
the Contempt Powers from the Central 
and State Administrative Tribunals by 
omitting Section 17 of the Principal 
Act. 
(a) In this connectio n, I may state that 
there are no execution rules for 
enforcing implementation of the 
judgement/orders of the Administrative 
(NCRWC). 
 
 
(iii) While it may be permissible to 
abolish a Tribunal in exercise of the 
powers under Section 21 of the 
General Clauses Act, as a matter of 
abundant caution, the amending Act 
proposes expressly to confer upon the 
Central Government the power to 
abolish a Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Deletion of Section 17 does not in 
any way take away the power of an 
Administrative Tribunal to punish for 
contempt for itself. On the other hand 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tribunals. At present orders/judgements 
of the Tribunal are enforced through 
Contempt jurisdiction and in fact this is 
the only way of implementation of the 
judgement of the Tribunal. If the power 
of Contempt is withdrawn, the Tribunal 
will become toothless and will not be in 
a position to function smoothly and get 
its orders/judgement implemented. 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Article 323-A of the Constitution of 
India envisages Administrative 
Tribunal with power of Contempt. The 
Constitutional validity of the said 
article has already been upheld. The 
same has further been reiterated by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of 
T. Sudhakar Prasad vs. Government of 
Andhra Pradesh & Others (2001, SCC 
page -516). In this case the apex court 
went to the extent of holding that the 
validity of Section 17 of the principal 
Act is protected not only by sub-clause 
(b) of clause (2) of Article 323-A but 
also by sub-clause (g) thereof. 
it does away with the duplication 
between the Contempt of Court Act, 
1971 and Section 17 of the 
Administrative Tribunals At, 1985. By 
deletion of Section 17 the 
Administrative Tribunals would come 
within the ambit of Contempt of Court 
Act, 1971 and can exercise their 
prerogative to punish for contempt 
within the provisions of Contempt of 
Court Act, 1971. This is also in 
accordance with the recommendations 
of the National Commission to Review 
the working of the Constitution 
(NCRWC). 
(b) In the case of T. Sudhakar Prasad 
vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh 
and others the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
had upheld the validity of Section 17 
of the Administrative Tribunals Act 
which does not in any way mean that 
this section could not be amended or 
deleted. The deletion of Section 17 
was necessitated because the 
Constitution has protected the status of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court and the High 
Court as the courts of record. All other 
courts are governed by the Contempt 
of Court Act, 1971 as far as power to 
punish for contempt is concerned. 
National Commission to review the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii Clause 5 
The proposed amendment provides for 
the abolition of Central Administrative 
Tribunal or any of its benches /State 
Administrative Tribunals by the Central 
Government by issuing a notification. 
By the amended provision the 
Government envisages to get the 
legislative power delegated to abolish 
the Tribunals as and when considered 
necessary. 
(a) In this connection,  i t  i s  s t a t e d  t h a t  
the petition are filed by the aggrieved 
Government servants against the 
Government department to redress their 
grievance after exhausting all 
departmental remedies. If the legislative 
powers which is the exclusive domain 
of the legislature are delegated to the 
Government, it may exercise it at 
whims and fancies or at any time as and 
when some adverse judgements against 
the Government are delivered by the 
Tribunals. Moreover, in such a situation 
the Members of the Tribunal cannot 
function fearlessly and objectively. 
Besides, it would also erode the 
Working of the Constitution has also 
not favoured conferment of such 
power on the Tribunals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) The Parliament through the 
Administrative Tribunals Act,1985 has 
empowered the Central Government to 
set up Administrative Tribunals by 
issuing notification for the purpose. A 
similar dispensation to facilitate the 
abolition of such Administrative 
Tribunal was also required in case 
some State Governments proposed to 
abolish the Administrative Tribunals. 
Specific approval of Parliament was 
not required for setting up of the 
Tribunal under the provisions of the 
Act. Similarly specific approval of 
Parliament may not be required for 
such abolitions also  if the proposed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
principle of independence of the 
judiciary which is enshrined in the 
Constitution of India. 
(b) If Tribunals are abolished and the 
cases are transferred to the High Courts, 
it would further increase the number of 
pending cases in the High Courts. 
 
 
 
 
 
iii Chapter IV-B  of the amendment 
Bill provides for an appeal to the High 
Court from the judgement of the 
Tribunal. As stated above, it would 
result in increase of the number of cases 
pending in the High Courts and would 
cause further delay in the disposal of 
cases. 
Bill becomes a law. 
 
(b) This issue is relevant for the 
Central Government only in respect of 
the Central Administrative Tribunal ( 
CAT) if and when a proposal to 
abolish it is considered. There is no 
proposal to abolish CAT at present. If  
at all such a proposal  is considered at 
some future date, the High Courts can 
take the additional load as they did 
prior to the enactment of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act. 
iii In L. Chandrakumar’s case the 
Supreme Court has held that every 
judgement of the Tribunal is subject to 
scrutiny/judicial review by a Division 
Bench of the High Court. The 
proposed amendment is to give effect 
to the ruling of the Supreme Court. 
 
 
 
 