 
 
                              
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
   154 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON THE SUBJECT 
 ―REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF RECRUITMENT ORGANISATIONS OF 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA‖ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 08th August, 2025) 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs 
 

3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              4-5 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   6 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                           7 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                   8-9 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                              10-16 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                   17-53 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                  54-64                                                  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
(IV)    CHAPTER IV                                                                                                                65 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH                  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE*                                  66           
 
 
 
___________________________ 
*to be appended at later stage 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
1. Shri Brij Lal         Chairman 
   
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
3. Ms. Swati Maliwal 
4. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
7. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. Shri Sana Sathish Babu* 
10. Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla** 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Arup Chakraborty 
14. Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandanagouda 
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
16. Shri Varun Chaudhry 
17. Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
18. Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
19. Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
20. Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
21. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
22. Shri Radhakrishna 

5 
 
23. Shri A. Raja 
24. Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao 
25. Shri Saleng A. Sangma 
26. Shri Pushpendra Saroj 
27. Shrimati Manju Sharma 
28. Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.Narayanan, Joint Secretary  
2.  Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
3. Shri Kuldip Singh, Deputy Secretary 
_______________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 07.01.2025 
** Nominated w.e.f. 06.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred 
Fifty Fourth Report (154th) on Action Taken on One Hundred and Thirty First (131st) 
Report of the Committee on the subject "Review of Function ing of Recruitment 
Organisations of Government of India " pertaining to the Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances & Pensions.  
2. The One Hundred and Thirty First Report of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 
Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha on 3rd August, 2023 and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on the 3rd August, 2023.  
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions, furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and Thirty First Report of the Committee 
on 29th February, 2024 . The Committee considered the One Hundred Fifty Fourth 
Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 7th August, 2025. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
8th August, 2025                        BRIJ LAL 
                                                     Chairman, 
                                                         Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
                                                       Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                               Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
PT  Preliminary Test 
CrPC Criminal Procedure Code 
IPC  Indian Penal Code 
IT  Information Technology 
RERA Real Estate Regulatory Authority 
SC              Scheduled Caste 
ST  Scheduled Tribe 
OBC Other Backward Class 
EWS Economically Weaker Section 
VH Visually Handicapped 
DoPT Department of Personnel and raining 
ED Executive Director 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
GD General Duty  
SI Sub Inspector 
AC Assistant Commandant 
LWE Left Wing Extremism 
 
  

8 
 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions on the recommendations / 
observations of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievance s, Law and Justice in its One Hundred and Thirty First 
(131st) Report on  the subject "Review of Function ing of Recruitment Organisations 
of Government of India" , which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd August, 
2023 and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 3rd August, 2023. 
2. The Committee had made 3 7 recommendations/observations in its 1 31st 
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized 
under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have 
been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.47, 2.48, 2.49, 2.60, 2.73 and 
2.101 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the 
Department has accepted those recommendations. (Total-6) 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. in 
respect of paras 2.4, 2.11, 2.12, 2.14, 2.16, 2.19, 2.21, 2.28, 2.29, 
2.41, 2.46, 2.53, 2.61, 2.62, 2.63, 2.67, 2.75, 2.86, 2.91, 2.92, 2.96 
and 2.106  of the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the 
explanations advanced by the Department and does not wish to 
pursue those as of now. (Total-22) 
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has 
not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. with regard to paras 
2.7, 2.9 , 2.39, 2.52, 2.76, 2.77  and 2.104 of the Report. The 
Committee does not accept the reasons given by the Department  and 
reiterates the same.(Total-7) 
Chapter – IV: Recommendations/observations (1) in respect of which final replies 
of the Government have not been received. The Committee expresses 
its deep concern that it did not receive the replies from the 
Government in respect of Committee' s recommendation s vide Para 
No. 2.85 and 2.34. (Total-2) 

9 
 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations 
made by the Committee in Chapter – III of this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e. of 
131st Report) have been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
------ 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.0    SSC has been conducting online examinations for quite some time now. NRA 
thus may consult SSC for finalizing the modalities involved in the pro cess of 
conducting the exam. Thus, the Committee feels will give NRA a broad idea about 
the way in which competitive exams are conducted. (Para 2.47)  
Action Taken  
1.1 NRA has noted it for compliance and has fu rther stated that it is in touch 
with various States/ Organization including consultation with stakeholders. NRA 
has carried out regular interaction with various stakeholders including SSC. In  fact, 
Chairman, SSC is an esteemed Member of General Body of NRA. The experiences 
and expertise of SSC in holding recruitment examinations have been shared to 
enable NRA to finalize the modalities involved in the process of conducting the 
exams. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.2    The Committee also recommends that NR A should consult Railway 
Recruitment Board as well regarding the recruitment proposal being prepared, so 
that NRA can finish the task within the given timeline and without any criticism. 
Also, it needs to work on the modalities of actual conduct of examina tion and 
publication of results cautiously and on immediate basis. As two years have already 
lapsed, NRA cannot take another two years to get fully functional. (Para 2.48) 
Action Taken  
1.3 National Recruitment Agency (NRA) has noted it for compliance and 
further stated that M/o Railways has two representatives in the General Body of 
NRA. Principle Executive Director -Staff and Executive Director of RRBs, who 
deal with all RRBs are members. Once the decision is taken, as explained in 
response to 2.46 above, NRA will take appropriate action. 
 

11 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4    The Committee recommends that NRA should move very fast and start from 
the reverse direction since if it conducts examination for class 10, the number will 
be huge. Hence, the Committee a dvises NRA to start with graduate level 
examination so that the number of candidates with required eligibility is reduced. In 
case it starts with an exam which requires eligibility of class 10 th, all graduates will 
automatically become eligible and hence t he numbers would be large and 
unmanageable.  (Para 2.49) 
Action Taken  
1.5 National Recruitment Agency (NRA) has noted the recommendation of the 
Committee for compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6 The philosophy of speed and accuracy required by bankers are changing 
from time to time.   Around ten years back, the workload and the nature of work 
perhaps did not need any speed or accuracy.   But today, speed and accuracy play a 
very important role owing to the hundreds of Central and State schemes bei ng 
executed by the bankers and the nature of pro -poor schemes launched by the 
Government. The Committee emphasises that because of the technology being used 
nowadays, whether it is e -banking or online banking, Public Sector Banks have to 
cater to large number of customers including the Jan -Dhan Yojana account holders 
and hence bankers have to be very fast with public dealing and also absolutely 
updated on the latest technology.   They should not face any kind of glitches and 
slow down in the process of service delivery. (Para 2.60) 
Action Taken  
1.7 Department of Financial Service has noted the same. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.8 The Committee notes that not more than one lakh  students or examinees can 
appear at one go.   This number is very small.   IBPS needs to take steps to increase 
the number of students who can appear at one go for the examination.   It means 
IBPS will have to increase the number of the centres.   As on today , maximum 
number is one lakh or one lakh twenty thousand.   So, they need to work out on the 

12 
 
modalities on how to execute this computer based exam so that the number of 
candidates who appear in the exams can be increased at one go. (Para 2.73) 
Action Taken  
1.9 IBPS is exploring the possibility of increasing the number of centers/ venues 
in collaboration with service providers and other testing agencies, so that more 
candidates can appear per session, as suggested. 
1.10 The new centers  will be ensured to meet the strict safety and security 
standards and other infrastructure norms stipulated by Service Provider/IBPS. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.11 The Committee suggests that they may explore the possibility of bringing an 
Act to govern recruitment under this scheme.   The Committee notes that after 
serving four years on the job, 75 per cent of the soldiers will be discharged from 
their services, and only 25 per cent would be inducted into the armed forces, as per 
the extant rules, the que stion that remains is about the rest. To prevent disaffection 
amongst these Agniveers, which  apparently comprises of youth of this country, 
Committee suggests that the remaining Agniveers may be given reservation/ 
preference in other Government jobs so tha t trained persons and the skills acquired 
by them during the service in Forces can be utilised to the maximum extent 
possible. Some jobs where it is practical to provide preference to them are Police 
Forces, Parliament Security Service and any other Combat Force. (Para 2.101) 
Action Taken  
1.12 Decision has been taken by Ministry of Home Affairs for providing 
following relaxation/benefits to Ex-Agniveers on their re-employment in the forces 
for recruitment to the post of Constable(GD) /Rifleman in the Central Armed Police 
Forces and Assam Rifles: 
i. 10% of vacancies shall be reserved for Ex-Agniveers in the recruitment 
to the post of Constable (General Duty)/ Rifleman. 
ii. The upper age limit shall relaxable upto five years for the candidates of 
the first batch of Ex-Agniveers. 
iii. The upper age limit shall be relaxable upto three years for the 
candidates of Ex-Agniveers. 
iv. Ex-Agniveers shall be exempted from Physical Efficiency Test(PET) 

13 
 
INDIAN ARMY 
 
1.13  (a) Empowering Agniveers. Empowerment of Agniveers t hrough 
educational upgradation and skill certification during his/ her service period has 
been ensured as follows:-  
 
 (i) Ministry of Education. 
  
(aa) National Institute for Open Schooling (NIOS) .  Based on 
the training and course syllabus, the Agniveer shall be upgraded 
from Secondary (10th) to Higher Secondary level (12th). 
 
(ab) Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) .    
Based on skill & experiential learning, each Agniveer  shall obtain 
60 credits (50%) for Graduation.  
 
(ii) Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship . Skill 
certification in accordance with National Skill Qualification Framework 
(NSQF) levels, the following shall be accrued :- 
 
(aa) ‘Kaushal Praman Patra’ or ‘Short Course Skill Certificate’ 
as per trade as approved by National Council of Vocational 
Education and Training (NCVET).  
 
(ab) ‘National Trade Certificate’ or ‘Long Course Skill 
Certificate’ (ITI Certificate) as per trade under Directorate General 
of Training (DGT).  
           
(b) Reservations. The following reservations in various jobs under different 
ministries of Central Govt have been notified:- 
           
(i) Ministry of Home Affairs .    10% horizontal reservation in 
CAPFs.  MHA has also written to States and UTs for reservation in 
respective Police Services.  
 
(ii) Ministry of Defence .   10% horizontal reservation in all levels 
posts has been notified.  
 

14 
 
(iii) Ministry of Finance .   Banks have been directed to extend the 
loans to ex -Agniveers under various govt schemes for encouraging 
entrepreneurship. 
 
(iv) Ministry of Micro Small and Medium Enterprises .   Higher 
subsidies, 5% reservation in courses and loans under preferential 
schemes have been extended to ex-Agniveers by MSMEs. 
 
(v) Ministry of Railways.   Notification issued for 10% reservation in 
RPF & all Level -1 posts as also 5% reservation in all Level - 2 to 7 
posts.  
 
(vi) Defence Industry . The defence industry confirmed due 
preference to Agniveers and incorporation of suitable provisions in their 
recruitment policies. 
 
INDIAN NAVY 
 
1.14 The Agnipath Scheme envisions that the ‘Agniveers’ would be provided with 
higher academic qualifications and skill certification based on their military training 
and experience. In order to facilitate enhancement of education qualification of 
‘Agniveers’, I ndian Navy has initiated an Outreach Programme. Under the 
programme, IN has signed MoUs with National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) 
for award of Class XII cer tificates (for MR sailors) and with Indira Gandhi National 
Open University (IGNOU) to facilitate award of Degree/Diploma (for SSR Sailors). 
Further, in order to facilitate smooth and productive absorption of ‘Agniveers’ in the 
civil industry, IN has been a ccorded status of ‘Dual Category i.e. Awarding Body 
(AB) &Assessment Agency (AA)’ from National Council of Vocational Education 
and Training (NCVET). This has enabled IN to ‘Adopt’ industry accepted 
qualifications from the various industry -promoted Sector Skill Councils to be given 
to ‘Agniveers’ on completion of their four years in the IN. These certifications are 
aimed at enabling them to become skilled manpower in the civil society towards 
nation building. The suggestions of the committee w.r.t. absorption of Agniveers into 
other Government jobs particularly Parliament Security Forces, Police Force and 
other combat forces is concurred. In addition, absorption of 75% Agniveers, not 
selected in Armed Forces, is also recommended for Group ‘C’ posts  of State and 
Central Government Organisations through appropriate age and qualification 
relaxations. 

15 
 
INDIAN AIR FORCE 
 
1.15 Details of declared reservation by GoI, to Agniveer after completion of four 
years are appended below: - 
Department Reservation 
Indian Railways  10% reservation in Level 1 (Grade D) 
 5% reservation in Level 2 and above. 
 Age relaxation of 5 years for first batch of 
Agniveer and 3 years to subsequent batches. 
Department of 
Post 
10% horizontal reservation for ex -Agniveer over and 
above ESM quota. 
CAPFs & Assam 
Rifles 
 Will recruit Ex-Agniveer to the post of Constable 
(GD)/Riflemen. 
 10% reservation of vacancies. 
 3 Years relaxation in prescribed upper age limit. 
5 years relaxation only for first batch of 
Agniveer. 
 Exemption from Physical Efficiency Test (PET). 
 
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
 
1.16 ICG is working out procedure and shortly coming up with modus operandi to 
comply with the reservation for Agniveer recruits. 
 
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (DPSUs) 
 
1.17 The following has been implemented to ex Agniveers who complete their 
tenure under the Agnipath Scheme, for job preference in DPSUs: 
(a) Based on the educational requirement released in the advertisement for 
Agniveers, the posts identified for Agniveers in DPS Us are Driver (Transport), 
Laboratory Asst (Medical), Laboratory Asst (X -ray), Technician, clerk -cum-
Computer Operator ‘C’ Pharmacist, Staff Nurse and Engineering Assistant (Trainee) 
etc. 
(b) 5 years relaxation for candidates of the first batch of Agnipath Scheme. 
(c) 3 years age relaxation in the prescribed upper age limit will be given to ex 
Agniveers in Direct Recruitment. 

16 
 
(d) 10% horizontal reservation for ex Agniveers will be applicable. The 
reservation & relaxation for the Agniveers will be as per the DPE/DoPT 
directives/guidelines. 
ARMED FORCE HEADQUARTER (AFHQ CIVILIAN) 
1.18 The details of 10% of anticipated retirement vacancies for the year of 2026 & 
2027, in various Civilian Posts in Group (A, B, C & D) / service, is reserved for Ex -
Agniveer, are being complied and projected to MoD/D(JCM) Reservation cell 
shortly. 
BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION  
1.19 10% of reservation for ex -Agniveers in all rank/posts of the Organisation in 
Direct Recruitment is applicable on fulfilling of the eligibility criteria given in 
existing Recruitment Rules of various ranks/posts by ex-Agniveers. 
 
***  

17 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0       The Committee observes that UPSC and SSC conduct various examinations 
each year and allocate recommended candidates to different posts. For instance, 
through the Civil Services examination, UPSC selects about 1000 candidates every 
year and these candidates are posted across 19 different services.  With reference to 
this the Committee notes that the same process and yardstick is being applied t o 
select candidates who would be manning the top administrative posts in various 
services. It may happen sometime that the aptitude and interest of the candidate 
selected may not be suitable for that particular post.(Para 2.4) 
Action Taken 
2.1   Union Public Service Commission  conducts the Civil Services Examination 
strictly in accordance with the provisions contained in the Rules of the Examination 
and recommends the candidates on the basis of the merit. The candidates selected 
by UPSC through the Civil Services Examination are allocated services as per their 
rank and preference. The concerned Cadre Controlling Authorities (CCAs) 
provides requisite training to the candidates on/before their joining the post which 
is devised by the CCAs taking in account the nature of duties assigned to the post to 
develop the required skill needed to do the work allocated to the post in their 
Department. 
2.2 Recruitment examinations, conducted by Staff Selection Commission caters to 
posts which have similarity in pay level, educational qualification, age and other 
aspects of recruitment rules. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3 The Committee observes and appreciates that with changing times, the 
Government has brought in several significant changes in the training methodology. 
However, the efficiency, energy and intensity of the officers still needs to improve 
and the officers need to be further trained for working in adverse situations, 
particularly to tackle law and order problems effectively. (Para 2.11)             

18 
 
Action Taken 
2.4 The National Programme for Civil Services Capacity Building (NPCSCB)/ 
Mission Karmayogi with the vision of citizen centric and future ready civil service is 
working towards competency driven capacity building for enabling the civil servants 
to prov ide effective public service delivery. Capacity Building Commission (CBC) 
will create along with the relevant CTIs, case studies and best practices and refresher 
courses on this and associated subjects. These will be on IGOT so that anyone can 
access these courses as and when they need. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5 The Committee feels that a Civil Servant is an interface between the 
government and common public and works at the grassroot  level which requires 
considerable human touch and sensitive approach towards the people. He/ she works 
among the poor people most of the times and not the elite. If there is lack of 
sensitivity one cannot be a good administrator. So, Committee wishes to e mphasize 
that the civil servant has to be given training in such a way that he develops a more 
humane and empathetic approach towards any issue. The Committee also observed 
that the present day civil servant did not possess the same legal prowess as their 
predecessors. (Para 2.12)  
Action Taken 
 
2.6 Training Division, DoPT, has informed that the Capacity Building 
Commission (CBC)has initiated a series of citizen centric behavioural  improvement 
courses covering over 300,000 Railway Employees, U.T. Police Forces, Gramin Dak 
Sevak, Income Tax Officials. This could be incorporated as part of the foundation 
course at LBSNAA and other cen tral training institutes like NAIR, NADT, NACIN 
and could also be given to the civil servants at various points in their careers. CBC 
has the details of the courses. These also include courses for behavioral competency 
development that inter -alia contribute towards developing a human and empathetic  
approach towards issues encountered by the Civil Servants.   
Recommendation/Observation 
2.7 The Committee feels that there is a need to impart better training in the legal 
part as they are also quasi-judicial officers so that the officers when they take the final 
assignment, address the judicial problems more meticulously than what they are doing 
nowadays. (Para 2.14)            

19 
 
Action Taken 
2.8 LBSNAA is doing this as part of induction program. CBC will add refresher 
courses on IGOT for the legal part so that officers can refresh their knowledge as and 
when needed. Further CBC has partnered ministries/ department to create know your 
ministry online training which incorporates basics of the legal provisions 
administrated by department e.g. Department of Food and Public Distribution or 
Deportment of Consumer Affairs. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.9 The Committee feels that rendering services to common people is the primary 
task of the Civil Servants and inclinati on to serve the society with human touch must 
be an essential quality amongst the Civil Servants. The Committee therefore, 
recommends that while examinations are conducted and the question paper is 
prepared, these factors also need to be taken into account  apart from the subject and 
intelligence. The Committee is of the view that these factors probably could help in 
moulding the prospective/selected candidate to work for betterment of the society.  
(Para 2.16)               
Action Taken 
2.10 Union Public Service Commission has informed that the topics prescribed 
in the General Studies Paper -IV (Ethics, Integrity and Aptitude) of the Civil 
Services (Main) Examination by and large address the mentioned issues. The detail 
of the syllabus of this Paper-IV is attached as Annexure II. 
2.11 The scheme and syllabus of mandated open competitive examinations 
conducted by Staff Selection Commision are based on the recommendations of the 
Expert Committee. 
2.12 Ministry of Home Affairs,  has accepted the recommendations of the 
Committee and issued appropriate directions in respect of recruitment made in 
Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs). 
INDIAN ARMY 
 
2.13  (a) Officer Entry. All candidates applying for officer entries are 
evaluated for 15 Officer Like Qualities (OLQs) through a three pronged 
psychological evaluation during the selection process in the Services Selection Board 
(SSB). Social Adjustment, Cooperation and Sense of Responsibility are three 

20 
 
important OLQs for which each candidate is tested and only those found suitable are 
selected. 
 
(b) Agniveers. The Indian Army is introducing psychometric tests as part 
of the recruitment process. Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR) is 
formalizing the user module to include the aspect of teamwork and social adaptability 
with an aim to select candidates having inclination to seek and enjoy the company of 
other people, having a friendly disposition, receiving as well as extending 
cooperation willingly and likely for working as member of a team for achieving the 
goals. It includes cooperation, accommodating, team spirit, adaptability, empathy and 
emotional stability. 
INDIAN NAVY 
 
2.14 The requirement of rendering service to common people brought out in the 
concerned paragraph is in the context of an essential quality in the Civil Servants. 
Military Services, on the other hand, places even higher demands on individuals who 
need to be ready to make the ultimate sacrifice for  his/ her country. Recruitment in 
the Armed Forces intrinsically imbibes these ethos and the personnel joining are 
expected to possess them. Further, the implementation of projective techniques in the 
officer’s selection as well as the physical and mental stress of the sailor’s recruitment 
process, enable adequate assessment of candidates on these grounds. 
INDIAN AIR FORCE 
 
2.15 Conduct of examination and preparation of question papers are done by Board 
of Officers constituted as per standard Operating Proc edure issued to ensure fair 
selection of the candidate. Ethics and moral values are inculcated in all air warriors 
during training and remain as a continuous process throughout their service tenure. 
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
 
2.16 The Recruitment process in ICG a ccords due importance to the human aspect 
of the candidates besides ensuring possession on wording knowledge in the 
professional subjects. Considering the challenging environment in which ICG 
personnel are required to work, extensive assessment on personal ity traits of the 
Officers candidates is undertaken by a team of qualified Psychologists, Group 
Testing Officers and Interviewing Officers who had been trained in Defence Institute 
of Psychological Research (DIPR). In order to further strengthen the human aspect 

21 
 
during recruitment of ICG Enrolled Personnel, adaptability test has been recently 
implemented to check the personality traits of recruits through a simple examination 
designed by DIPR. 
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (DPSUs) 
 
2.17 For Executive posts, the selection methodology adopted is written 
examinations and interviews. After written tests, the shortlisted candidates are 
interviewed by a Selection Committee to evaluate the candidates for their aptitude, 
potential, behavioural competencies and  also passion to serve the society. For non -
executive posts (C&D category) the selection methodology is based on written 
examination. 
2.18 DPSUs have a well definedOnboarding Plan and Mentoring Scheme to 
integrate the new joinees not only to the culture of the Organisation but also to mould 
the candidates to serve the Nation. 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO) 
2.19 The Recruitment & Assessment Centre (RAC) of DRDO is responsible for 
recruitment of DRDS cadre of DRDO through Direct Recruitment (DR) and Lateral 
Recruitment (LR) through open advertisement. The DR is conducted based on GATE 
score and personal interview. Similarly, LR is based on administrative, technical 
screening and final interview. In both cases, no written examinati on is held. Only in 
case of Limited Departmental Competitive Examination (LDCE) and DR where 
GATE is not there against a discipline the examinations are conducted. 
2.20 The Centre for Personnel Talent Management (CEPTAM) conducts 
examination for Group ‘C’ and Group ‘B’ posts by conducting examinations. 
ARMED FORCE HEADQUARTER (AFHQ CIVILIAN) 
2.21 Already in Civil Service Exam through which AFHQ Civil Service Officers 
are recruited in the Grade of Section Officer directly, a paper in ethics, integrity and 
aptitude is a part of General Studies. 
BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION  
2.22 During the departmental recruitment the selection is carried out through written 
and practical test only. 
2.23 At present there is no scientific method to gauge the attributes regarding 
inclination to serve the society and human touch. 

22 
 
2.24 However, inclusion of some questions on serving society, environmental 
responsibility and moral values are being looked upon.  
2.25 At departmental training institutes, respective additional subjects ar e being 
analysedto be incorporated during induction / refresher / promotional training to 
inculcate the attributes related to human touch. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.26 The Committee recommends that the UPSC may draft a policy on mediation 
or arbitration with the aggrieved parties in cases where the Commission has been 
challenged.  It is equally important to apply rules that take into account the 
likelihood of victory and the time consumed for each case. Thus, UPSC can direct 
the concerned ministries/ departments to set up Groups whose job is to examine all 
pending litigation and rank these on the basis of value and ‘winnability’, and then 
take a call on whether they should be carried on. Only those cases which have a 
strong winning possibility should be c ontinued to be fought in court and the rest 
should be settled via arbitration and mediation.   (Para 2.19)              
Action Taken 
2.27 1 (a) The Union Public Service Commission , a Constitutional Body, is 
mandated to carry out a wide range of functions under Article 320 of the 
Constitution of India. These functions, inter -alia, include (i) conduct of 
examinations for appointment to the services of the Union; (ii) direct recruitment 
by selection through Interviews; (iii) appointment of officers on promoti on/ 
deputation/ absorption; (iv) framing and amendment of Recruitment Rules for 
various services and posts under the Government; (v) disciplinary cases relating to 
different Civil Services & (vi) besides, advising the Government on any matter 
referred to t he Commission by the President of India. In the discharge of this 
constitutional mandate UPSC is solely governed by merit, duly reinforced by the 
principles of equity, justice and fair play. 
(b)       The defending cases pending before the various courts a cross the 
country where action(s) of the Commission has been challenged by the aggrieved 
parties pertain to the matters/ issues indicated in para 1(a) above. 
         (i) Examinations and Recruitment Tests: UPSC is entrusted with 
conducting structured exam inations and direct recruitments as per the rules of the 
examinations, recruitment rules/service rules notified by the Government of India 
in the nodal Ministries/ Departments concerned. These rules prescribe, inter -alia, 

23 
 
the eligibility conditions, scheme s and syllabus of the examinations, age, 
qualifications etc. Applications received are thoroughly scrutinized in the 
Commission, as per extant rules. The majority of the court cases relate to the 
eligibility conditions, rejection of applications/candidature. Mediation or arbitration 
with any petitioner is not feasible as this may require relaxation/amendment in the 
extant rules notified by the concerned Ministries/ Departments. Without relaxing/ 
amending these rules no relief can be granted to any petitione r in the above cases. 
Therefore, settlement in such Court Cases through mediation or arbitration is not 
feasible. 
        (ii)   Recruitment Rules/Service Rules:      UPSC is an advisory body 
and renders advice on proposals for framing/ amendment of Recrui tment Rules/ 
Service Rules brought before it by the Administrative Ministry/ Department after 
due concurrence/ approval of DoPT. The same is processed as per extant DoPT 
guidelines and advice of the Commission is issued accordingly. In cases where a 
petitioner has challenged the Recruitment Rules/ Service Rules of an 
Administrative Ministry/ Department, UPSC is mostly made a Proforma party and 
no action on part of UPSC generally lies in such cases. 
         (iii)  Disciplinary matters : With regard to cases relating to advice 
rendered by the Commission pertaining to disciplinary cases, it is the Disciplinary 
Authority (DA), who after considering the advice of UPSC and the representation 
of the Charged Officer (CO) thereon, imposes the penalty on the CO. It is  for the 
DA to accept or disagree with the recommendation/ advice of the Commission. 
Being aggrieved with the penalty imposed, the CO/ applicant approaches the CAT/ 
Court challenging penalty order. In most of the cases, Administrative Ministry is 
impleaded as main respondent, and UPSC is cited as proforma respondent. The 
directions/ decisions passed by the CAT/ Courts in such cases are mainly for 
Administrative Ministry to implement and the UPSC has no role in granting relief 
to the applicant/ petitioner. 
        (iv) Selection of SCS Officers to AIS : The proposals for 
promotions/ selections of State Civil Service (SCS)/ State Police Service (SPS)/ 
State Forest Service (SFS) to the Indian Administrative Service (IAS)/ Indian 
Police Service (IPS)/ Indian Forest Service (IFS) are received from the concer ned 
State Governments/ UTs. The promotions/ selections are done after following 
respective Promotion Regulations and the guidelines formulated by the 
Commission in consultation with other Ministry/ Departments of Government of 
India. 

24 
 
In case of Director Ge neral of Police (DGP), there have been separate 
guidelines, drawn in line with the Supreme Court directions/ orders, from time to 
time. 
        (v) Promotion/Deputation: Recommendations of the Commission are 
conveyed on the basis of DPCs/ SCM (PTs) in acco rdance with the guidelines and 
rules issued by the Govt. of India as amended from time to time. Aggrieved parties 
in such cases are the officials from the Center/ State Services challenging the 
outcome of DPCs/ SCM (PTs). Representatives of various stake holders viz. UPSC, 
DoPT and State Governments form part of DPCs/ SCM (PTs). It is worthwhile to 
mention here that after thorough scrutiny and consideration of all the relevant 
aspects a candidate is recommended fit or unfit by DPCs/ SCM (PTs). Mediation or 
arbitration with any petitioner is not feasible as this would require review of DPCs/ 
SCMs (PTs) earlier recommendations. Therefore, settlement of such Court Cases 
through mediation or arbitration is not feasible. 
2.         As may be noted that mediation or arbitration with petitioner/ 
applicant in most of the cases is not feasible, hence the matter of framing a policy 
on mediation or arbitration with the aggrieved parties does not seem possible so far 
as UPSC is concerned. 
3.         UPSC role is mainly advisory as given in the Constitution. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.28 On the issue of filling up of existing and backlog vacancies which are there 
in various Ministries/Departments of the Central Government, the Committee notes 
that the Staff Selection Commission itself is short of staff as out of 541 sanctioned 
strength, it has only 329. The Committee feels that unless SSC itself has complete 
staff, how can it expect to conduct its activities and functions with utmost 
efficiency and in a time bound manner. Hence, the Committee recommends that 
SSC needs to fill the vacant pos itions in its organization at the earliest in order to 
carry out the other recruitment processes smoothly.     (Para 2.21) 
Action Taken 
2.29 In Staff Selection Commission (SSC), as on 30.08.2023, out of 542 
sanctioned strength, 345are in position and a total 117 posts are vacant. Further, total 
51 Ex -cadre posts which were under deemed abolition have now been revived and 
recruitment process in respect of these posts is going on as per existing Recruitment 
Rules.   SSC is not the  Cadre Controlling Authority for most of the vacant posts 

25 
 
which belong to the Central Secretariat Service, Central Secretariat Stenographer 
Service and Central Secretariat Clerical Service. The Commission is the cadre 
controlling authority for the post of Multi Tasking Staff, Data Entry Operator, Staff 
Car Drivers and the Canteen Staff only. The Commission takes necessary steps to fill 
up the vacancies available in these cadres from time to time. Government is 
committed towards strengthening of SSC.   It has posted 41 no. of employees in last 1 
year.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.30 In order to expedite the recruitment process, the Committee strongly 
recommends that computer based examination should be brought into practice 
wherever possible to reduce the ti meline of the examination which will enable the 
Commission to mitigate the time taken for sorting of applications, preliminary 
examination, mains examination, publication of results and interviews.  (Para 2.28) 
Action Taken 
2.31 Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) has informed that almost all the 
stages involved in the recruitment process are computerized to improve accuracy, 
efficiency and speed of disposal and also to ensure fairness of the selections made. 
Keeping pace with the technological adv ancements taking place, constant efforts 
are made to bring about improvements in each stage of the recruitment process 
especially in the Online Recruitment Application (ORA) software through 
technological interventions. 
2.32 In Staff Selection Commission (SSC), all the examinations are conducted in 
computer based mode, except for Paper -II of Junior Hindi Translator Examination 
which is conducted in pen and paper mode. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.33   Implementation of the recruitment rules in every organization needs to be 
attended on a regular basis.  Once rules have been approved, they are neither being 
operationalized nor being implemented.   The Committee recommends that there 
should be some robust monitoring system for formulation of recruitment rules. This 
monitoring system so devised should take every step possible to implement the 
approved rules without any delay. (Para 2.29) 
Action Taken  

26 
 
2.34 An online portal, i.e., Recruitment Rules Formulation Amendment and 
Monitoring System (RRFAMS), for processing of Recruitment Rules is under 
operation since December, 2016. UPSC is also onboard in the RRFAMS portal 
from December, 2018 onwards. Further, ins truction have been issued vide DoPT 
OM dated 18.4.2022, requesting the Ministries/ Departments to nominate an officer 
not below the rank of Joint Secretary, as the nodal officer to monitor the progress of 
framing/amendment of RRs and also to ensure that th e time limit of 10 weeks (as 
specified by the UPSC) for notifying the approved RRs is adhered to. 
2.35 Department of Posts  has informed that the Recruitment Rules are being 
operationalized, formulated, updated and implemented on a regular basis. The 
existing Recruitment Rules are being implemented in letter and spirit. The 
monitoring of Recruitment Rules is being carried out vigorously. 
2.36 Railway Board  has informed that, the Recruitment/ Service Rules for 
various Group A &  B posts, Organized Services and Miscellaneous Cadres are 
already framed and notified. The recruitment rules are reviewed/ amended/ revised/ 
updated as per the instructions issued by Ministry of Railways and Department of 
Personnel and Training from time to time in consultation with Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) through RRFAMS (Recruitment Rules Formulation, 
Amendment & Monitoring System - an online platform for sending proposal to 
UPSC. The Recruitment/Service Rules approved by UPSC are vetted by M inistry 
of Law and Justice before notification of the same in the e -Gazette portal.   The 
Implementation of Recruitment/Service Rules is done at Railway level as well as 
Railway Board level and wherever required in consultation with UPSC. Further, the 
Recruitment Rules made for non - gazetted posts in Railways are being fully 
implemented in Railways. 
2.37 Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has informed that  RRs are being 
formulated promptly as and when any new post is sanctioned. Once recruitment 
rules are framed, these are implemented in the forces strictly without any delay. 
Further, recruitment rules are being revised/modified from time to time as per the 
instructions issued by DoPT. 
2.38 Department of Revenue  has informed that the Recruitment Rules are 
notified for each post in the Department including organized Indian Revenue 
Service. The Recruitment Rules are fully operationalized and requisition to 
recruitment agencies i.e. SSC and UPSC is made as per extant Recruitment Rules. 

27 
 
Moreover, RRs are framed and implemented as per guidelines and instructions 
issued by DoPT (Nodal Ministry/ Department/ Organization) 
2.39 Department of Financial Services  has info rmed that the appointments to 
posts are made based on the extant/approved or model recruitment rules. Whenever 
the need arises, these are reviewed and revised to incorporate the requisite changes. 
INDIAN ARMY 
 
2.40 (a) Officers. Induction of candidates as officers into various entries of 
Indian Army is governed by Army Instruction (AI)/ Army Order (AO) as applicable 
for each entry. The selection procedure at the SSB is based on the policy/ parameters 
given out by Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR). The complete 
selection & induction process is carried out strictly as per instructions contained in 
AI/ AO & Technical Instructions of DIPR without any dilution. Review of AI/ AO/ 
Technical Instruction is carried out as per requirement. 
 
(b) JCOs/OR/Agniveers. The recruiting rules are revised regularly and 
implemented in letter and spirit. Regular monitoring on implementation of policies is 
being carried out. 
 
INDIAN NAVY 
 
2.41 The Indian Navy has a detailed and intricate system of formulation and 
implementation of recruitment rules. The formulation process employs a consultative 
process with the responsibility of approval vested in the appropriate authority at the 
apex level. Promulgation of recruitment rules is undertaken with due care, through all 
available and appropriate channels, such that the target populace is aware of the 
recruitment regulations. Further, implementation of recruitment rules is undertaken 
through participation of concerned stakeholders at each stage of recruitment, with 
checks and balances placed at each level. 
INDIAN AIR FORCE 
 
2.42 Induction in the IAF is governed by Air Force Instructions (AFIs) issued by 
Govt of India. These AFIs remain valid till a new AFI is issued. Implementation of 
induction related AFI is monitored during each induction cycle (6 monthly) and 
ensured by the Air Officer in Charge Personnel. 
 

28 
 
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
 
2.43 ICG follows Recruitment Rules (RRs) promulgated by Ministry of Defence in 
letter and spirit. Further, the RRs have been revised periodical ly by following due 
procedure whenever changes are required to be incorporated in sync with the 
changing environment. The guidelines promulgated in RR as well as CGOs are 
complied with in letter and spirit during recruitment of officers and Enrolled 
Personnel. In order to ensure full compliance of existing RRs and Coast Guard 
Orders (CGO), all the salient features are incorporated in the software and website 
designed for recruitment of Officers and Enrolled Personnel, wherein application can 
be submitted by  only those candidates who fulfil the criteria prescribed by RR and 
CGOs. 
 
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (DPSUs) 
 
2.44 DPSUs have formulated a framework of Recruitment Rules and Procedures. 
The policy enables the Organizations to attract the right talent and also promote 
consistency, transparency and fairness in the selection process. The Recruitment rules 
are reviewed regularly to facilitate recruitment and make the system more robust and 
effective. 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO) 
2.45 All the exams for recruitment to various cadres of DRDO are conducted 
strictly as per their respective Recruitment Rules. 
DEFENCE ACCOUNTS DEPARTMENT (DAD) 
2.46 The Recruitment Rules for Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts are being processed 
through RR FAMS (Recruitment Rules Formulation Amendment and Monitoring 
system) portal of the DoPT. The recruitment rules as approved by the Ministry are 
uploaded on the RRFAMS portal along with the requisite supporting documents and 
are forwarded to the DoPT for app roval. Once the same are approved by the DoPT, 
they are further submitted to UPSC through portal. On approval of UPSC the 
physical draft RRs are forwarded to legislative Wing of Ministry of law & justice 
followed by their Raj Bhasha Wing for vetting of Eng lish and Hindi version before 
final publication in the Gazette by the Ministry. The Recruitment Rules for Group C 
Posts are processed through physical mode. 

29 
 
2.47 Once the Recruitment Rules are published, further necessary action regarding 
filling up of pos t through promotion etc. is carried out by the department at the 
earliest.  
2.48 Thus all the laid down procedures as per extant Government orders are being 
followed by this department as far as framing of the Recruitment Rules is concerned.  
ARMED FORCE HEADQUARTER (AFHQ CIVILIAN) 
2.49 All the Recruitment Rules are framed and implemented as per DoPT guidelines 
in AFHQ Cadre.  
BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION  
2.50 The implementation of recruitment rules in respect of all trades of the 
department are being attended to on a regular basis. 
2.51 The revision in the recruitment rules is made by way of amendment to 
incorporate changes due to implementation of Central Pay Commission Report, 
modification of orders/ instructions on the subject, creation/abolition of posts etc. 
during the intervening period and is forwarded to Competent Authority for final 
approval, for promulgation and implementation in the Deptt. 
2.52 Proposal for Revision of various cadre / post of Group ‘B(NG)’ and Group ‘C’ 
ranks / posts of the organisation are at various stages. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.53   The Committee is of the opinion that there are a large number of pending 
cases (especially where SSC is a party), most of which are students’ related. These 
students mainly comprise indi viduals who have appeared/ are appearing for the 
various recruitment examinations conducted by SSC. Since these students are 
mostly unemployed, fighting such litigations is a huge financial and psychological 
burden for them, especially at the start of thei r career journey.   The Committee is 
therefore, of the view that the Commission should analyze the cases filed by the 
students and if it is an exam related matter steps should be taken to settle those out 
of court. In the matters of exam related ones, the Commission should persuade the 
Government Counsel to place the facts before the respective courts and request the 
courts to dispose of the cases as quickly as possible. This will help the Commission 
to concentrate on its core function, i.e. conducting examination and filling the 
vacancies, rather than spending time in Courts. (Para 2.41) 

30 
 
Action Taken  
2.54 Staff Selection Commission (SSC)  has stated that, there is a grievance 
redressal mechanism in order to minimize litigations. All the grievances received 
through representation and CPGRAMS portal are being disposed of at the senior 
level after scrutiny of the issues raised by the candidates. For each Court/CAT case, 
the grievance of th e candidate is analyzed by the Commission on the basis of 
available records to find out whether the claim/grievance of the candidate (s) is 
justified or legally tenable. In case the claims are found to be justified then 
necessary steps are taken to address the grievance of the candidate. In the matter of 
exam related court cases which form the majority of court cases, brief background 
or synopsis is sent to the Government Counsel for suitably apprising the court 
about the factual position with a view to early settlement of court cases. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.55    The Committee emphasizes that the much awaited National Recruitment 
Agency (NRA), which was mandated to conduct examinations for Group 'B' and 
group 'C' employees, is not fully functional as of now and hence Committee keenly 
wants to be apprised of by when NRA foresees to become completely operative. 
(Para 2.46) 
Action Taken  
2.56 National Recruitment Agency (NRA) is a new organization created and has 
been made functional by setting up of its office in hired lease space only in April 
2022. The estimates indicate that approximately 1.5 Crore candidates are likely to 
appear for Graduate level. The numbers in CET -12th pass level and CET -10th pass 
level will be in the range of 3 to 4 core. The magnitude of arrangements for 
conducting CET will be unprecedented. The conduct of CET by NRA will be a 
total paradigm shift. Keeping this in view, Chairman, NRA had proposed that  to 
begin with, examination for post of Government for which qualification is 
graduation should be entrusted to NRA for conducting Tier -I examination. In the 
meantime, SSC, RRBs and IBPS were allowed to conduct the recruitment 
examinations as per prevalent  practice. In August 2022, NRA was requested to 
examine the issues which are likely to arise in the new CET system and address 
them ab initio . The implications were analyzed to prevent and mitigate existing 
problems. NRA has conducted a study of prevalent recruitment systems in Central 
and State governments. NRA has also held discussions with various stakeholders 
such as SSC, RRB, IBPS and private service providers and examined the legal 

31 
 
framework of examination system. Based on the inputs, NRA has prepared  and 
submitted a detailed report in last week of September 2022, in which all aspects of 
the CET have been discussed. The report has made suggestion on legal framework 
as well as on setting up examination infrastructure. Further, NRA has 
communicated to DoPT in May 2023, highlighting complexities involved in 
conduct of the CET.  Based on detailed analysis, NRA has been assigned the task to 
formulate Normative Standards and Guidelines for conduct of Computer Based 
Test (CBT) conducted by Central Government a nd its agencies for recruitment to 
various posts and admission to Under Graduate/Post Graduate Courses, vide 
DoPT’s Order No. 39020/14/2023 -Estt.(B) dated 18 th October, 2023 (Annexure-
III), in order to check malpractice during conduct of CBT. Legislation t o check 
malpractice during conduct of examination systems has been enacted.  
Standard guidelines for conduct of examination are also under preparation. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.57   The Committee notices that a term which has time and again been used i n 
connection with the examination and recruitment process conducted by RRBs is 
NTPC, i.e. Non -Technical Popular Categories. The Committee is of the view that 
this term NTPC creates a lot of confusion as it has been noticed that even when it is 
published in newspapers, it is mistaken with the Organization NTPC, i.e. National 
Thermal Power Corporation. Hence, the name of NTPC, being currently used for 
railway examination should be changed and the same abbreviation shall not be 
used.  (Para 2.53) 
Action Taken  
2.58 It has been stated by the Railway Board that it has been clearly indicated in 
the Centralized Employment Notification (CEN) issued from time to time that it is 
for Non- Technical Popular Categories (NTPC) Graduate & Under -graduate posts, 
therefore due care is being taken so that there is no confusion that it is for National 
Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC).   However use of abbreviation NTPC will be 
avoided in future Centralized Employment Notification issued by RRBs. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.59 The Committee further observed that barring a few recruiting organisations 
in India, in most of the organisations, whatsoever be the nature of the job, the 
recruitment pattern and the question pattern are almost the same.   Perhaps the 
examination conducted  by the UPSC under the National Defence Academy is 

32 
 
something different.   To become a pilot, they used to conduct an examination 
which is called Pilot Aptitude Battery Test (PABT).   That is conducted exclusively 
to measure the aptitude of a particular perso n, whether he will fit in the mission or 
the job.   The Committee firmly believes that as on today, neither the speed and 
accuracy nor the service is improving at large, So, the Committee wants to know 
whether there is any such special examination, (like Pi lot Aptitude Battery Test), 
say banker aptitude battery test, being conducted or contemplated by IBPS to test 
the speed and accuracy of the bankers being recruited.   The Committee is keen to 
know how the syllabus is being designed and the guidelines for th e examination 
being conducted to cater to the current changing scenario and keeping pace with 
it.      (Para 2.61)                                        
Action Taken  
2.60 It has been informed by the Department of Financial Services that syllabus 
of the banking examinations and the guidelines are pre -defined and reviewed by 
Banks/ IBPS. It may be noted that IBPS specializes in conducting Aptitude tests for 
new entrants to Banking posts in PSB/RRBs. 
2.61 Depending on the type and the level of the post, the testing methodology 
comprising online tests, group exercises and interviews, (for Officers only) is 
designed to assess candidate’s aptitude and suitability for banking jobs. Every test 
is customized by the in -house psychometricians a t IBPS to the required job 
competencies with varying weightages, for example, 
1. Reasoning Ability 
2. Quantitative aptitude, 
3. Linguistic skills, 
4. General and Financial Awareness 
5. Computer Aptitude and Knowledge; 
besides assessing the Social and Leadership abilities  of the candidate required 
for the post. 
2.62 To meet the increasing need for specialized skills in banks, e.g., IT, 
Agriculture, Marketing, HR, Risk, Treasury, etc., the variety of recruitment tests for 
Specialists is increasing. The syllabus for Professi onal Knowledge tests for such 
Specialists is designed by Subject Matter Experts, in line with the market and 
technological changes. 

33 
 
2.63  IBPS regularly studies the feedback from Banks and Financial Institutions, 
and undertakes Validation studies relating both the tests and ‘on -the –job’ 
performance of the selected candidates. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.64 The Committee is of the view that the pattern of the examination needs to be 
changed from time to time taking into account the nature of work of the bankers so 
that accuracy and speed of the prospective candidates is properly evaluated.   The 
Committee further  recommends revamping the syllabus to meet the changing 
demands in banking sector, that have emerged due to wide use of technology in the 
field.   (Para 2.62)  
Action Taken  
2.65 The pattern of the examination and syllabus is reviewed and revised on an 
ongoing basis by IBPS, in consultation with the Banks and NABARD.  Further, 
Banks also have frequent in-house training programmes meant for up-skilling or re-
skilling of employees to their needs. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.66    The Committee insists on maintaining sanctity and fairness in conduct of 
examination by these organizations. With most of examinations being conducted 
online and many of the work related to the conduct of examination and short-listing 
of successful candidates being outsourced to e xternal agencies, organizations need 
to ensure the sanctity and fairness of the system and overall control over the entire 
process. (Para 2.63) 
Action Taken  
2.67 Recently, Department of Personnel and Training has issued Order 
No.39020/14/2023-Estt.(B) dated 18 th October, 2023 (Annexure-III), to check 
malpractice during conduct of CBT.   Past experience in conduct of CBTs by 
Examination Conducting Agencies (ECAs), as also by various State ECAs 
indicates certain digital and physical vulnerabilities that ha ve been exploited 
through unfair means by unscrupulous elements.   Based on a detailed analysis of 
these vulnerabilities and factors that contribute to such vulnerabilities, need has 
been felt for significant revamp in the current approach including: 

34 
 
i. Desiloed working of Examination Conducting Agencies (ECAs), to a more 
coordinated and unified shared systems of both planning and conduct of 
examinations; 
ii. Normative and Standardized protocols and guidelines that are adopted across 
ECAs and its Service providers; 
iii. Model Requests for proposals (RFPs) and Service Levels of procurement of 
both, ie. physical examination Centers and software related services; 
iv. Access control policy aimed mainly at impersonations and use of appropriate 
technology; 
v. Cyber Security Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) that are shared and 
enforced across ECAs and all its Centers and sharing of critical information. 
vi. Devise policies that encourage and nurture competitive ecosystem of Service 
Providers in the Market. 
vii. Develop and optimize strategies for use of the national pool of resources so 
developed across the Central ECAs and also make it available to States as and 
when requested. 
2.68 Accordingly, National Recruitment Agency (NRA) has been asked to 
formulate Normative Standards and Guidelines for conduct of Computer Based 
Test (CBT) by Central Government and its agencies for recruitment to various 
posts and admission to Under Graduate/Post Graduate Courses, vide Order No. 
39020/14/2023-Estt.(B) dated 18 th October, 2023,  to check malpractice during 
conduct of CBT. Broad indicative areas to be covered under the head of ‘Normative 
Standardized protocols and Guidelines to be adopted across ECAs and its Service 
Providers’ are listed in the Annexure enclosed with the Order dat ed 18 th October, 
2023.  These guidelines/standards, unless otherwise provided, shall apply to Staff 
Selection Commission, Railway Recruitment Boards, Institute of Banking 
Personnel Selection, National Test Agency and such Central Agencies as 
reconducting examination for recruitment to various posts and admission to Under 
Graduate/Post Graduate Courses.    State Examination may also adhere to these 
guidelines and standards, so as to curb malpractices and ensure leak proof conduct 
of CBT mode of examinations. 
2.69 The Public Examination(Prevention of Unfair Means) Bill, 2024 has been 
enacted, to deal with the unscrupulous elements involved in malpractices/unfair 
means/offences during the examination . 
2.70 Union Public Service Commission  conducts the Examinatio ns as per the 
Rules notified by the Government in a fair, just and impartial manner on merit basis 

35 
 
selection with due regard to the integrity, confidentiality and fairness of the 
examination process. No examination of the Commission is conducted in online 
mode. Further, no work related to conduct of examination and short -listing of 
successful candidates has been outsourced by the Commission to any external 
agency. 
2.71 Staff Selection Commission  has stated that the commission has taken 
following measures to ensure sanctity of its examinations: 
 The venues of exams suggested by the Service Provider are audited by the 
Regional Offices on sample basis. 
 The background of examination functionaries are checked. 
 The list of examination functionaries are shared with the Regional Offices by 
the Service Provider in advance which are sanitized after Comparing with the 
candidate database. 
 Examination functionaries are provided with ID cards and they are required to 
display ID card mandatorily during the examination. 
 Exam functionaries are rotated at various exam centers. 
 Entire venue is covered by CCTV monitoring 
 Live CCTV footage is monitored in a state -of-the-art control room at SSC 
Headquarter and also at Regional Offices. 
 Candidates are not allowed to enter with prohib ited items such as mobiles, any 
kind of electronic devices etc. 
 Candidates are frisked by body tapping and with hand held metal detectors. 
 Candidates are allocated computer nodes for examination on system generated 
random basis. 
 Exam is conducted on LAN without internet with very high level of system 
security protocol. 
 Low powered room jammers are deployed in the venue during the conduct of 
examination to prevent any misuse by electronic devices in case the same has 
been sneaked in surreptitiously. 
 Special representatives of the Commission i.e invigilating officers(Neutral 
Persons) are deployed to keep an eye on the examination. 
 In addition, Flying squad is also deputed by the Regional Offices for surprise 
check of the conduct of the examination. 
 Biometric records of examination functionaries are also being maintained. 
 Exit verification is done to ensure that there is no mismatch in identity of the 
incoming and outgoing candidate. 

36 
 
 Strict penalty provisions (monetary) are kept in the contract(RFP) with the 
Service Provider. 
 Strict action like cancellation of candidature, lodging of FIRs, etc. are taken if 
a candidate is caught indulging in malpractices during the exam. 
 On the basis of past experiences, venues are dropped/new venues are selected.  
2.72 Railway Board has stated that Technical and infrastructural parameters have 
been laid down for selecting exam centres for conduct of Computer Based Tests 
(CBTs). Exam Conducting Agency (ECA) proposes a list of examination centres 
which are then duly inspected by RRB for ascertaining the conformance to the laid 
down standards. In case some of the proposed centres are found not to be fit as per 
the standards, then those centres are rejected. However exam centres are selected at 
all major districts in the State including far flung areas. 
 
2.73 According to Department of Financial Services, IBPS selects service partners 
for examinations mainly on proven delivery standards, quality and efficiency 
parameters. IBPS also deploys surveillance systems (e.g. CCTV, jammers, fa ce 
scan, biometrics) in its examination. Further, psychometric/statistical tools are used 
to eliminate any possibility of unfair means.     Test content preparation, test 
uploading and result processing is done in-house by IBPS. At every stage, complete 
control over the process, content and data is with IBPS. Further, the conduct of 
examinations with the help of service providers of global repute is supervised 
through a centralized, state -of –the –art Examination Command Centre (ECC) at 
IBPS HQ with the option of live video streaming from test venues, pan India. 
 
2.74 To prevent use of unfair means in CRP examinations, IBPS is planning to 
introduce ‘Aadhaar Verification of candidates and scribes, (on voluntary basis). 
Further, as a deterrent /preventive measu re, candidates/scribes would be barred 
from future CRP examinations (1 year to life) depending on the gravity of 
malpractice resorted to, as is being done by other Testing Agencies. 
INDIAN ARMY 
 
2.75 (a) Conduct of Exams for Officer Entries. Written exam for NDA, 
CDSE and SSC (NT) entries is conducted by UPSC. Sanctity and fairness in conduct 
of psychological evaluation of candidates during the selection process in the SSB is 
being ensured. 
 

37 
 
(b) Conduct of Online CEE for Agniveers/ JCOs/OR. To maintain 
sanctity and fairness during the conduct of Online Common Entrance Exam for 
recruitment in Indian Army, 227 Observer Teams, each comprising of one Officer 
and two Junior Commissioned Officer/ Jawans each from Army Recruiting Offices 
and representative of Loca l Military Authority alongwith the EdCIL (Education 
Consultancy Services India Limited), representatives of outsourced PSU for the 
conduct of exam, were employed pan India to observe the proceedings, provide 
feedback on the conduct and highlight aberrations for corrective measures. 
 
INDIAN NAVY 
 
2.76 Outsourcing of certain recruitment activities are undertaken so as to enhance 
the efficiency of the overall recruitment process. However, the outsourced activities 
are only a part of the overall process and are undertaken under the oversight of the IN 
as well as various checks and balances have been incorporated towards maintaining 
the sanctity and fairness of process. 
 
INDIAN AIR FORCE 
2.77 (a) Directorate of Education conducts Air Force Common Admission Test 
(AFCAT) in association with C -DAC under Mi nistry of Electronics & Information 
Technology for selection of officers in the IAF. The examination is conducted online 
in a fair manner maintaining absolute sanctity & bare minimum human intervention. 
(b) The IAF has signed an MoU with Centre for Develop ment of Advanced 
Computing (C-DAC) for conducting online testing of candidates for enrolling them 
as Air Warriors in the IAF. C -DAC is responsible for conduct of Scheduled Test for 
Airmen Recruitment (STAR) exam in a fair and transparent manner. 
(c) C-DAC hires online examination centre after verification and audit. Adequate 
manpower is deployed at the examination centre to take care of various activities like 
invigilation, physical frisking,biometrics (to rule out impersonation cases), jammers 
to prevent use of hidden electronic devices by candidates. 
(d) In order to ensure that the examination process is conducted in compliance 
with laid down procedure, IAF deputes uniformed personnel as observers at each 
examination centre. Further, senior IAF officers ar e available at Regional 
Coordination Centre, set up by C -DAC, to monitor conduct of examination. A 
centralised control room is also set up to monitor conduct of examination. Also, real -
time monitoring dashboard is provided by C -DAC to facilitate initiation  of various 

38 
 
examination processes. In addition, independent flying squads are deployed with IAF 
personnel and additional checks are conducted by Provost Units of IAF. 
(e) To make the online examination more robust, secure and to block unauthorised 
attempts/hacking by unscrupulous elements, various measures are implemented by C-
DAC to strengthen security system and technical aspects of STAR online 
examination. 
(f) The entire process of Agniveervayu including evaluation, result generation and 
shortlisting of candidates are automated, without human intervention, thus ensuring 
fairness and transparency. 
(g) Recruitments of Gp ‘C’ civilian posts are made by Units/Command HQs in 
offline mode with overall control over the entire process of selection (without 
outsourcing to any external agency), wherein sanctity and fairness of the system is 
ensured by the recruiting team of the Units/Command HQ. 
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
 
2.78 In order to ensure a robust and fool proof recruitment system, ICG has 
digitized the recruitment procedure since the year 2021 and the process of online 
examination has been partially outsourced to Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing (C-DAC). All the salient features of RRs and CGOs are incorporated in 
the software and website designed by C -DAC dedicatedly for recruitment of Officers 
and Enrolled Personnel. The entire recruitment process is under taken in free, fair and 
transparent manner is which human interference is minimum and nil scope of 
malpractice exists. 
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (DPSUs) 
 
2.79 Recruitments in DPSUs which are voluminous in nature are outsourced to 
recognised external agencies (PSU) which offer online recruitment solutions to bring 
in higher transparency and efficiency. DPSUs have an elaborate and fool p roof 
procedure in place to ensure transparency in different stages of recruitment process. 
 
DIRECTOR GENERAL, ARMED FORCES MEDICAL SERVICES 
 
2.80 The fairness in conduct of Under Graduate (UG) &  Post Graduate (PG) 
counselling is being maintained ensuring sanctity of the system through rational 
assessment of students qualifying in NEET, UG & PG exams. Further, Short Service 

39 
 
Commissioning Selection of Military Nursing Service Officers with effect f rom year 
2023 will be through National Testing Agency on an online mode. 
 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO) 
2.81 All examinations conducted for recruitment to various posts of DRDO are 
conducted under the supervision of DRDO officials to  ensure the sanctity and 
fairness of the system. 
ARMED FORCE HEADQUARTER (AFHQ CIVILIAN) 
2.82 The Recruitment to various posts in AFHQ Cadre is made Through 
UPSC/SSC. No Direct Recruitment is done by Armed Forces Headquarters.  
BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION  
2.83 Recruitment of other Group C posts are conducted departmentally under own 
arrangement which are scrutinized regularly on a definite time period basis. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.84   The Committee notes that of late, there have been instances where students 
copy to the clip board and by a touch of finger, they cut and paste it.   Sometimes, 
they use Bluetooth devices.  They sabotage web cameras and use multiple monitors 
etc.  There are impersonations. They use external storage devices.   The Committee 
therefore recommends that steps need to be taken to prevent or detect these types of 
cheating by using improvised software and having advanced technologies to 
overcome this type of challenge.    It further recommends to train the examiners for 
smooth and foolproof conduct of examinations.  (Para 2.67) 
Action Taken  
2.85 Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)  has informed that the 
Commission does not conduct any examination in online mode. Further, based on 
years of experience, the Commission has developed elaborate arrangements 
processes to maintain confidentiality, integrity and fairness of its examinations.  To 
cite a few: 
(i) Engaging adequate number of invigilators to prevent any wrong doing by 
candidates during the actual conduct of examination. 
(ii) Engagement of Supervisors and Assistant Supervisors to ensure that invigilators 
remain active during the course of the examination. 

40 
 
(iii) Deployment of Inspecting Officers (IOs) at each Centre from UPSC’s own 
pool of officers. Additionally, IOs from State Governments are also engaged. 
Senior Officers of Central Government are engaged as Observers. 
(iv) Police personnel at each venue are deployed to frisk the candidates. 
(v) Deployment of low powered jammers in all venues of examination. 
(vi) The punitive action like debarment or cancellation of candidature in case a 
candidate is found engaged in any kind of mal-practice. 
  
2.86 Staff Selection Commission has taken the following measures to prevent 
using unfair means/impersonation: - 
i. Entire venue is covered by CCTV monitoring. 
ii. Live CCTV footage are monitored in a State -of-the-art control room at 
SSC HQ as well as Regional offices 
iii. Candidates are not allowed to enter with prohibited items such as 
mobiles, any kind of electronic devices etc. 
iv. Candidates are frisked by body tapping and with hand held metal 
detectors 
v. Low powered room  jammers are deployed in the venue dur ing the 
conduct of examination to prevent any misuse by electronic devices   in 
case the same has been sneaked in surreptitiously. 
vi. All the registration desks and at the computer nodes, photos of the 
applicants and the person reporting for examination are 
captured/displayed for checking impersonation. 
vii. Exam is conducted on LAN without internet facility. 
viii. During the examination very high level of system security protocol is 
followed. 
ix. During the examination all such computer keys/features which may be 
misused for cheating/use of unfair means are made non-functional. 
x. Special representatives of the Commission i.e invigilating 
officers(Neutral persons) are deployed to keep an eye on the 
examination. 
xi. In addition, Flying squad is also deputed by the Regional Offices fo r 
surprise check of the conduct of the examination. 
xii. After the examination, photo and LTI of the outgoing candidate are 
captured again. This is done for exit verification to ensure that there is 

41 
 
no mismatch in identity of the incoming and outgoing candidate  for the 
examination. 
xiii. Strict action like cancellation of candidature, lodging of FIRs , etc., are 
taken if a candidate is caught indulging in malpractices during the exam. 
2.87 National Recruitment Agency (NRA ) has been assigned the task to 
formulate Normat ive Standards and Guidelines for conduct of Computer Based 
Test (CBT) by Central Government and its agencies for recruitment to various 
posts and admission to Under Graduate/Post Graduate Courses, vide DoPT’s Order 
No. 39020/14/2023-Estt.(B) dated 18th October, 2023, in order to check malpractice 
during conduct of CBT. 
2.88 As regards checking various malpractices in Railway Recruitment Board , 
there is Aadhaar -based authentication which has been introduced. RRBs give the 
place of exam about ten days before the actual date of exam and the actual venue is 
made available to the candidate only four days before the exam. The exam centre is 
allotted through a computerized randomized generation. Therefore, there is no 
manual intervention in this. Inside the centre,  the allotment of lab and the node, all 
is automated, randomized generated and made available to the candidates at the last 
minute. In the examination centres, checking & frisking of candidates with the help 
of Hand -Held Metal Detectors, registering of the ir bio -metric attendance before 
entry & mid of exam and after every bio break, taking &matching of their 
photographs through valid photo ID card, etc., are carried out. The question paper 
is in highly encrypted form. Last minute decryption happens only whe n the 
candidate actually logs in and is into the system. No two candidates sitting get the 
same sequence of questions and same sequence of four options for each question. 
Everything is randomized and shuffled. Strict vigilance is done and invigilators are 
shuffled periodically. CCTV surveillance is there and entire footage is stored. 
There is a complete log maintained for each activity performed by the candidate 
which determines how he has attempted the questions. Anything abnormal like too 
many questions were done suddenly towards the end or any such abnormal patterns 
are also detected and analyzed. 
2.89 Department of Financial Services  has informed that IBPS has put in place 
measures to prevent and detect possible methods of use of unfair means and 
impersonation, including advanced technological interventions and leverages 
technology at test-centers and back office to conduct examinations in a fair manner, 
under control and supervision through ECC. Training of invigilators/ observers is 
an ongoing exercise which will continue for strengthening invigilation at 

42 
 
venues.  Further, as stated in comments in para 2.63 supra, deterrent measures to 
prevent use of unfair means/malpractice in IBPS CRP examinations, Aadhaar 
Verification of candidates and scribes, and al so debarring them from CRP 
examinations for a specified period is being introduced. 
INDIAN ARMY 
 
2.90 (a) Conduct of Exams for Officers Entries : Sanctity and fairness in 
conduct of psychological evaluation of candidates during the selection process in the 
SSB is being ensured. 
    
(b) JCOs/OR/Agniveers. 
(i) Hand Held Metal Detectors (HHMD) were used at the time of 
frisking in order to identify microelectronic objects which could be used 
for unfair means. All students of the subject exam are being frisked 
electronically whenever they enter the exam hall by security staff, to 
identify any electronic devices. It is being ensured that no such gadget is 
taken inside by the students.  
(ii) Provision of Low Frequency Jammers for all examination centres 
is being e nsuredthrough Electronics Corporation of India Limited 
(ECIL)/ Bharat Electrical Limited (BEL) throughout the Online 
Entrance Exam. 
 
INDIAN NAVY 
 
2.91 In addition to the recommendation of the Hon’ble  Committee, the Indian Navy 
has implemented various propriety technological measures such as dedicated laptop 
based server booted exam nodes, MAC -IP binding, live CCTV based monitoring, 
live-exam dashboard, biometric identity authentication based on finger print scanning 
and facial recognition,a randomized seat allocation, randomization of questions and 
options, pre -exam and during exam analytics for threat monitoring etc. These 
measures have significantly strengthened the examination system against intrusio n 
and/or impersonation by candidates. Additionally, a second stage testing is carried 
out to select the desired quality of recruits out of those shortlisted in the first stage. 
INDIAN AIR FORCE 
 
2.92 (a) Adequate measures have been adopted by all training institutes to curb 
the menace of unfair means by trainees. 

43 
 
(b) Adequate steps have been taken to ensure fairness and robustness 
against any type of sabotage, impersonation and cheating during 
selection/recruitment examination. Following measures have been 
implemented by C -DAC and IAF for preventing malpractices during conduct 
of online examinations: - 
(i) Usage of Hand Held Metal/Electronic Device Detectors and 
physical frisking of candidates to prohibit use of any unauthorised 
devices. 
(ii) Dress code of t he candidates has been revised so that they are 
unable to hide prohibited electronic gadgets/Bluetooth devices/cameras 
etc. 
(iii) Screening of staff/Invigilating Officers. 
(iv) Use of CCTV cameras and capturing of biometric data of 
candidates at examinatio n centre (and matching the same at subsequent 
stages). 
(v) Deputing IT trained IAF representatives as independent observers 
at each examination centre to prevent or detect use of any improvised 
software. 
(vi) Installation of jammers by M/S ECIL to prevent usage of mobile/ 
Bluetooth based devices. 
(vii) Deployment of flying squads by both IAF and C -DAC to conduct 
surprise inspection of examination centre. 
(viii) Conduct of online exam through an isolated network and secure 
server. 
(ix) All question papers are encrypted and all questions and answer 
options are jumbled to ensure unique question paper is generated for 
each candidate. Auto randomisation of question, answer as well as 
seating plan ensures robustness against use of any possible unfair means. 
(x) Newer technologies as and when emerging are being adopted to 
make the examination system more robust. 
 
 

44 
 
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
 
2.93 With conduct of every cycle of online computer based examination of 
recruitment, ICG has improvised in the system. C-DAC has developed a software i.e. 
Central Management System (CMS) which detects the connection of any external 
hardware device to the Examination PCs in real time. Moreover, thorough 
sanitization of examination centres and PCs are undertaken by a joint team of C-DAC 
and ICG representatives two days before the conduct of examination. Mock test, 
security audit, scanning & sealing of all computers used for online examination are 
undertaken during the sanitization drive. Further, proper f risking of candidates at 
entry is being carried out to check for any Bluetooth device and other inapt devices. 
Bluetooth scanning is undertaken during exam to find out if any live Bluetooth 
devices are transmitting. CCTV is also installed in all examinatio n centres to detect 
any suspicious movement of candidates. 
 
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (DPSUs) 
 
2.94 Recruitment agencies while conducting online exams, adopt capturing 
biometrics to avoid impersonations which is validated during interviews. Jammers 
are used during exams to prevent the functioning of mobile phones and Bluetooth 
devices. Electronic devices are banned from being carried to the exam centres. 
Further, physical security checks / metal detectors are also used to prevent 
impersonations and use of electronic devices. Cameras are also installed in the 
classrooms / computer centres to monitor and avoid malpractices. 
 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO) 
2.95 Training/Instructions are always given to all officials of DRDO engaged for 
examination duties to check/disable the cut-copy-paste command. Examiners are also 
trained to identify Bluetooth devices, web cameras, use of multiple monitors and 
external storage devices and how to disable these devices before conduct of 
examinations. Low Frequency Jammers are also installed at the examination centres 
to prevent use of unfair means. 
 
BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION  
2.96 The Board of Officers (BOO) are detailed to conduct the recruitment 
examinations to ensure that there may be no m eans of unfairness either 

45 
 
electronically or physically. Improvements have been established in conduct of 
exams wherever likelihood of unfairness are visualised. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.97 The Committee is of the view that there should be some mechanism for 
refunding the fees for those who have not appeared, as majority of the students who 
are appearing for these exams are very poor people.   A mechanism by which 
money could be refunded to such candidates who could not appear and majorly 
belonging to very poor background may be explored. (Para 2.75) 
Action Taken  
2.98 DoPT vide OM dated 39020/03/2009 -Estt.(B) dated 15th July,2009,    has 
exempted  SC/ST candidates and Women Candidates to pay examination fee for 
recruitment in Central Government jobs.  UPSC charges a nominal amount of 
Rs.100/200/- from non-exempted candidates.  
2.99 Staff Selection Commission  charges a nominal fee of Rs.100 only for its 
examinations including examination for the post of Constable (GD), Sub -Inspector 
(GD).   Rs.200/- is charged for the post of Assistant Commandant (GD) by 
UPSC.  Further, the exempted categories, viz. SC, ST, Pw D (Persons with 
Disability), ESM, (Ex Servicemen) & Women candidates are not required to pay 
any fee. It may be noted that nominal fee acts as a deterrent against frivolous 
applications.  As per extant instructions, the fee once paid shall not be refunded 
under any circumstances nor will it be adjusted against any other examination on 
selection. 
2.100 Railway Board has stated that in order to offset heavy burden of expenditure 
incurred on the conduct of open market examinations and in light of factors like 
large number of non -serious candidates applying for recruitment, conduct of 
examination through online mode, etc ., refund of fees to those who have not 
appeared in the Computer Based Test (CBT) is not considered appropriate.  
2.101 IBPS is a self -sustaining autonomous body with no grants/ monetary 
contribution from Governments, Promoters or any other source. 
2.102 The examination fees for the candidates are decided by the Governing Board 
of IBPS, ensuring reasonableness of fees vis -à-vis the test -administration and 
overall costs. The candidates from certain categories -SC/ST, PWBD,EX -

46 
 
serviceman, which constitute, abou t 40% of the total count, are charged very 
nominal intimation charges/document processing costs. 
INDIAN ARMY 
 
2.103 (a) Officers Entries. No fee is charged from candidates who apply for 
various entries or are detailed/ shortlisted for appearing in SSB, by the Indian Army. 
 
(b) JCOs/OR/Agniveers. The conduct of the exam was outsourced to EdCIL at 
a cost of ₹500 per candidate. In congruence to the committee’s view, candidates were 
charged with 50% of the cost of exams as Examination Fee. Remaining cost of ₹25 0 
per candidates was borne by the state. 
 
INDIAN NAVY 
 
2.104 The exam fee charged from the candidates only pertains to the costs borne by 
the exam conducting agency involved in conduct of Stage I examination, which 
comprises hiring of exam centres and asso ciated IT infrastructure across the country, 
deployment of services for conduct of exam, provision of technology services such as 
hiring of servers, CCTV coverage, biometric identity authentication services, 
development of question bank, deployment of QB s oftware solution etc. The exam 
conducting agency is required to bear these costs not only for the registered 
candidates, but for an additional 15% buffer as an exigency. Also these costs are 
incurred regardless of whether the candidate appears for the exam  or not. Further, 
refund of exam fees to those candidates who do not appear for the exam shall entail 
increase in the quantum of fee paid by those candidates who appear for the 
examination.  
INDIAN AIR FORCE 
 
2.105 (a) Conduct of AFCAT/ STAR involves consi derable expenditure towards 
hiring of exam centres, invigilators, supporting staff, IT infrastructure and 
allied services. A nominal fee of Rs. 250/ - is being charged from the 
candidates appearing in the AFCAT/STAR against an amount of Rs. 750/ - per 
candidate being paid to C -DAC. Since the arrangement in hiring of seats, 
invigilators, IT equipment and support staff at various exam centres are as per 
the no. of candidates applied for the exam, refund of fee to the candidates may 
not be viable. However, if mu ltiple payments are received from a candidate 

47 
 
against single application, then the same is refunded back to the originating 
account after closing of registration and reconciliation of all payment records. 
(b) Further, no fees are charged from the candidate  for appearing in the 
examination for Gp ‘C’ civilian posts in IAF. 
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
 
2.106 In ICG recruitment process, a nominal fee is charged from the candidates and 
the larger part of expenditure is borne by the organisation. ICG is paying fee of Rs.  
750/- (Rupees Seven Hundred Fifty Only) per candidate to C -DAC for the services 
provided by them against nominal fee of Rs. 300/ - (Rupees Three Hundred Only) 
paid by candidates of General, OBC and EWS category, while SC/ST candidates are 
fully exempted fr om paying any fee. Further, provision has been put in place to 
refund the fee in case of duplicate candidates. 
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (DPSUs) 
 
2.107 The SC/ST,PwBD/Ex -servicemen (ESM) candidates are exempted from 
paying the Application fee. Test centres are hired by the Exam conducting agencies 
as the number of candidates called to appear for the written test. It may not be 
appropriate to refund fees for candidates who have not appeared, as the expenditure 
towards conducting the selection process gets incurred irrespective of the candidate’s 
appearance for the same. In case of cancellation of any Recruitment Notification, 
application fee paid is being refunded to all the applied candidates. 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO) 
2.108 Application fee is exempt for candidates belonging to SC, ST, PwD, Divyang 
and women candidates. Collection and refund of fees are done as per the policy of the 
Government.  
BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION  
2.109 At present minimal application fee (non-refundable) of Rs.50/- is being paid by 
General Candidates, EWS, Ex -Servicemen, OBC category candidates. Application 
fee for SC, ST & PwBD candidates is Nil. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.110 The Committee notes that the personnel from Army, Navy or other Defence 
forces who retire early as per extant rules, after retirement are not able to get 

48 
 
suitable jobs. Though they have a particular skill trade which have been imparted 
during the service p eriod, those are not taken as valid and this puts them in further 
hardship. The Committee is therefore of the view that the trade skill certification 
should be made valid, which will enable them to get suitable jobs. (Para 2.86) 
Action Taken  
2.111 As per extant instructions of Government, in Ministry of Home Affairs, 10% 
of vacancies  in CAPFs & AR are reserved for Ex -servicemen upto Assistant 
Commandant level. Ex -servicemen are also exempted from participating in the 
Physical Efficiency Test(PET) in  recruitment of Constable(GD) and Sub -
Inspector(GD). Furthermore, Ex-Agniveers are also provided following reservation 
in Constable(GD) Examination in CAPFs & AR: (i) 10% of vacancies shall be 
reserved for Ex -Agniveers in the recruitment to the post of Con stable(General 
Duty).; (ii) The upper age limit shall relaxable upto five years for the candidates of 
the first batch of Ex -Agniveers;  (iii) The upper age limit shall be relaxable upto 
three years for the candidates of Ex -Agniveers.; (iv) Ex -Agniveers sha ll be 
exempted from Physical Efficiency Test(PET). 
2.112 Staff Selection Commission carries out recruitment on the basis of rules/ 
guidelines made by the Government in this regard. For instance, there is a provision 
of deemed graduation in the case of defence personnel having a specified period of 
service; such personnel are eligible to apply for certain posts which carry 
graduation as the minimum qualification. Further, for various recruitments of SSC, 
there are reservations for Ex-serviceman. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.113 The Committee advocates that all necessary steps should be taken by MHA 
to encourage women to join Forces to the maximum possible extent. A major 
constraint that prevents women from joining forces is the difficult terrains and 
conditions in which they might have to work. So, a policy may be explored for 
women officers being given soft postings and not subjecting them to extremely 
strenuous and difficult working conditions, unless required in extreme 
circumstances like war, armed reb ellion etc and that too when there is absolute 
shortage of males who can be deployed by the Forces. (Para 2.91) 
Action Taken  

49 
 
2.114 Following steps are taken by Ministry of Home Affairs  to encourage the 
recruitment of women personnel for adequate representation in CAPFs &ARs :- 
i. Recruitment is conducted by making wide publicity through 
print/electronic media. All female candidates are exempted from 
payment of application fee. 
ii. There are relaxations in Physical Standard Test (PST) and 
Physical Efficiency Test (PET) for all female candidates for 
recruitment in CAPFs in comparison to male candidates. 
iii. Facilities are already available under the Central Government for 
civilian women employees like Maternity leave, Child Care Leave 
etc are also available to CAPFs women personnel. 
iv. One female member is detailed as member of the board for 
making recruitment of women personnel. 
v. Creches and Day care Centres have been provided by the CAPFs 
to women employees. 
vi. Committees have been constituted at all levels to check sexual 
harassment and to expeditiously deal with the complaints of 
women personnel. 
vii. Women personnel are given equal opportunity in their career 
progression, i.e. promotion/seniority as per the RRs at par with 
male counter parts. 
viii. A women candidate pregnant of 12 weeks standing or over  is 
declared temporarily unfit and her appointment is held in 
abeyance until the confinement is over. She is re-examined for 
Physical Efficiency Test (PET), six weeks after the date of 
confinement. If found fit, she is appointed to the post kept 
reserved for and allowed the benefit of seniority in accordance 
with the norms. 
ix. There is a separate policy for posting/transfer of women 
employees in the forces. 
INDIAN ARMY 
 
2.115 Wide publicity of vacancies for women officers is being done through print, 
electronic and social media. SSB parameters for women are same as for men. 
Induction of women in Permanent Commission through NDA has also been started 
w.e.f Jul 2022. 
 

50 
 
INDIAN NAVY 
 
2.116 The IN has transformed itself into a gender-neutral and inclusive force, without 
any bias in providing due opportunities and employment to its personnel. Towards 
being ready for any contingency, the IN conducts regular exercises simulating 
numerous scenarios. Having a policy for soft postings based on gender, as proposed 
by the Committee, would not only be discriminatory and against the basic tenets of a 
gender-neutral force but also may impact the combat preparedness of the Navy.  
 
INDIAN AIR FORCE 
 
2.117 (a) Posting policy of the IAF is gender neutral so as to maintain fighting 
efficiency, combat effectiveness and functionality. 
(b) Women joining IAF have an option to select the branch while applying 
to join service. Based on their branch duties postings are decided. 
(c) Provisions for request posting to specific locations based on personal 
requirements exist in the IAF policies,  especially for women officers. While 
planning their postings, they are considered for co -location with husband 
wherever feasible, while ensuring that the service requirements are also met. 
(d) With Agniveer women being inducted into IAF, adequate facilities for 
women are one of the criterion for earmarking place of postings for them. 
Accordingly, IAF has identified limited s tations for posting of Agniveer 
women which may be reviewed subsequently, based on enhancement of 
facilities at various other stations. 
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
 
2.118 Presently women officers are employed in shore billets.  However, induction of 
women officers a nd EPs (enrolled personnel) in permanent cadre will commence 
shortly to enhance participation of women in ICG. Subsequently, the women officers 
and Eps (enrolled personnel) will be deputed onboard afloat units for which 
modification onboard commissioned af loat units (Class of ship) is under active 
consideration. Further, suitable women friendly SQR’s (Standard Qualitative 
Requirement) are being amended for ships under construction/ to be constructed at 
various shipyards. Measures for Gender Sensitization are also being undertaken. 
BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION  

51 
 
2.119 Working conditions of the Border Roads Organisation are unique compared to 
other Civil  organisation and most of the Units/Formations are located in far flung 
Areas in adverse weather and terrain conditions. Accordingly, the number of women 
Group ‘A’ officers is less in the Border Roads Organisation. At present 19 women 
GREF officers  are ser ving in the Border Roads Organisation. Various initiatives 
regarding women empowerment have been started in the Organisation. Various 
factors are analysed while issuing posting of women officers, and in most of the cases 
it is endeavour of the department t o give women officers softer posting comparative 
to the male counterparts. However, due to paucity of units/formations located in 
softer areas, women officers are also being posted to High Altitude and Hard Areas as 
per Organisation constraints. 
 
2.120 As per posting policy of the organisation, the lady employees on completion of 
their tenure are asked to furnish five choice stations for their posting, accordingly, the 
lady employees are being posted. Moreover, the lady employees are also posted on 
spouse c oordinated assignments to ensure higher satisfaction level for women 
employees. At present 451 female subordinate employees  are serving with the 
department.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 2.121 The Committee also recommends that some sort of reservation may also be 
given to Transgenders. Steps may be taken to recruit transgenders as well so that 
they can be integrated well with mainstream society in near future.  (Para 2.92) 
Action Taken  
2.122 As informed by D/o Social Justice , and Empowerment, t he matter of 
reservation for Transgender Persons is Sub Judice in the Supreme Court of India. 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.123 The Committee recommends that with respect to border districts, it is 
paramount to recruit maximum youngsters from these areas. Special recruitment 
drives may be conducted for recruitment of local youngsters from states like 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, North Eastern states and Kashmir. It should be ensured 
that the 25 per cent of reservation for areas affected by militancy/LWE and 25% 
vacancies of border guarding forces allotted to border districts is fulfilled 
immediately so that the energy and talent of yout h of these areas are channelized 
and they do not deviate toward extremism and terrorism.  (Para 2.96) 

52 
 
Action Taken  
2.124 Ministry of Home Affairs  has stated that, as per policy, 25% vacancies in 
each Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) & Assam Rifles (AR)  are earmarked 
for  Border districts falling in Area of Responsibility (AOR) of forces and   25% 
vacancies are earmarked for LWE/Militancy affected areas in the Constable(GD) 
Examination.  Provisions already exist for conducting special recruitment rallies in 
border districts and militancy/LWE affected areas after conclusion of recruitment 
process for Constable (GD) examination by SSC. Recently, the following special 
recruitment rallies have been conducted: 
i. In 2021, against 1356 vacancies, 1355 candidates were recruited 
from 22 districts of J&K and Ladakh. 
ii. In the year 2022, special recruitment rally was conducted to 
recruit 400 tribals youths as Constable (GD) in CRPF from three 
districts of Chhattisgarh namely Bajpur , Dantwada , Sukma. 
2.125 Further approval has already been accorded to conduct special rally/drive to 
fill up 620 unfilled vacancies of Constable(GD) Examination, 2022 in the Border 
districts  of five states falling in the Area of Responsibility(AoR) of ITBP.    
Recommendation/Observation 
2.126 The Committee recommends that regular studies should be undertaken to 
prevent any kind of stagnation at various levels of promotion. Cadre Review of 
each Para -Military Force must be conducted in every five years without fail. A 
permanent committee should b e inplace for looking into the grievances.   In case 
there is stagnation in promotion at any level or there is no further scope of 
promotion, the option of giving an extra increment may be explored. (Para 2.106) 
Action Taken  
2.127 Ministry of Home Affairs has stated that, as per instructions contained in para 
4.4 and 5 of DoP&T OM No.1.11011/16/2022 -CRD dated 30.09.2022, cadre Review 
of various cadres in the forces are    conducted regularly after interval of every 05 
years as per functional needs in order to remove  stagnation in promotion by detailing 
internal committees. A well defined and robust Grievances redressal mechanism is 
already in place to look into the grievances of the force personnel and their 
grievances are redressed promptly. Moreover, it is  further added that DoP&T vide 
their OM No.35034/3/2008 -Estt(D) dated 19.09.2009 have also extended the 

53 
 
facilitates for grant of Modified Assured Career Progression (MACP)  to all the posts 
whether isolated or any other posts at a regular interval of 10, 2 0 and 30 years of 
continuous regular service in case no regular promotions are granted to them within 
these periods. Also in case of any stagnation in promotion at any level there are 
provisions to give the financial up-gradation under NFU, NFSG and DACP scheme. 
*** 
  

54 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 The Committee notes that it is quite evident from the table, the maximum 
number of officers recruited are from Technical and medical background. Above 70 
per cent of the recruits in the civil service by UPSC nowadays are from technical 
streams. Every year, hundreds of technocrats are thus being lost, who are likely to 
work in other specific areas which is also a requirement for the nation.   So, doctors 
and top technocrats are being lost who can perform as very good doctors and 
engineers.  The allurement to become civil servant is perhaps also adversely aff ecting 
other fields of working.   Hence, the Committee opines that it is high time to have a 
rethink about the whole process of recruitment for the Civil Service. (Para 2.7)          
Action Taken 
3.1 Union Public Service Commission has constituted Expert Committees in 
consultation with the Government from time to time in the past to assess the efficacy 
in selecting the most suitable candidates through the Civil Services Examination. 
Based on the recomm endations of such Committees, necessary changes have been 
carried out in scheme of Civil Services Examination accordingly. The last such 
Committee i.e. Baswan Committee, was constituted on 12 -08-2015 which submitted 
its report on 09 -08-2016. The Commission  conveyed its views on the 
recommendations of the Baswan Committee in March, 2017 to Department of 
Personnel and Training, for consideration. The Report of the Baswan Committee is 
under consideration in the DoPT. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.2 The Committee notes that the each recruitment test conducted by UPSC as of 
now, takes anywhere between six months to one year to complete. This long drawn 
process involves a lot of expenses for the competing candidates and also 
contributes to the erosion of human cap ital. In view of this, the Committee desires 

55 
 
to know whether UPSC is contemplating to make any change in the pattern of civil 
services examination to curtail the length of the examination cycle.      (Para 2.9)  
Action Taken 
3.3 It has been the constant endeavour of Union Public Service Commission  to 
compress the time -cycles of all its Examinations including the Civil Services 
Examination. The examination process involves several steps including 
Notification of Examination Rules a s well as reporting of vacancies by the 
Government. The Commission publishes the Calendar of Examinations well in 
advance, as per which these Examinations are conducted. 
3.4 As regards the Civil Services Examination, following are submitted: 
(a)       This Examination has following stages (i) Preliminary Examination 
(Objective type) for screening of candidates for the Civil Services (Main) 
Examination (ii) Civil Services (Main) Examination (Descriptive type) and (iii) 
Personality Test/Interview. A statement showing the time taken at different stages of 
the Examination during the period from 2017 –2021, i.e. from the stage of 
advertisement (Notification of the Examination) to declaration of final result is 
attached as Annexure I. 
 
(b)       As per the current  trend, number of applications for the Civil Services 
(Preliminary) Examination comes to over a million every year. The 2023 
Examination was held at 79 Centres (cities) across the country at 2,538 Venues to 
accommodate 10.27 lakh candidates. For ensuring s mooth conduct of this 
Examination, numerous activities are required to be completed by the Commission 
viz. (i) selection of Venues in each Centre; (ii) processing/ scrutiny of applications 
received in order to allow only eligible candidates; (iii) distribu tion of candidates 
(after availability of exact count on completion of application process) to these 
Venues; (iv) preparation and release of e -Admit Cards of the candidates; (v) 
preparation of Scannable Attendance Lists of candidates, printing and dispatch  of the 
same to the Venue Supervisors; (vi) packing/dispatch of OMR sheets/stationeries to 
the Venues; (vii) preparation/ despatch of sensitive material to the Centres; (viii) 
deployment of large number of examination functionaries at different levels to t hese 
centres and venues; (ix) release of funds to the Centres and Venues; (x) conduct of 
meetings with various stake holders like police, postal authorities, railway authorities, 
Centre Supervisors, Inspecting Officers etc.; (xi) issue of number of   letters from 
different levels to number of authorities etc. 

56 
 
(c)        All these processes are to be executed with extreme care following 
various checks &  counter-checks at different levels in coordination with the 
examination functionaries to rule out any possibility of any error/mistake at any 
stage. It would be seen from the attached statement that the time duration for such 
activities has been within the range of around 2.5 to 3 months. Hence, this much lead 
time is a bare minimum for successful conduct of Examination of this scale. It may, 
thus, be appreciated that there is hardly any scope for further compressing the time 
between the date of advertisem ent (notification) and date of holding the Civil 
Services (Preliminary) Examination owing to the reasons cited above. 
  
(d)       After taking due care and completing all the processes, presently result 
of the Preliminary Examination is declared within 12 days from the date of conduct 
of the Examination. Earlier, time taken to declare the result was somewhere between 
40-50 days. Again, for smooth conduct of the Main Examination, which is a 5 days 
affair having 9 descriptive type papers, the drills of arrang ement are almost the same 
as those of the Preliminary Examination except the level of scale involved. The 
average time gap between declaration of the result of the Preliminary Examination 
and conduct of the Main Examination is about 2 -3 months. At this sta ge, the 
Preliminary Examination Qualified Candidates are needed adequate time to prepare 
for the Main Examination because of the number of papers and their toughness level. 
Any attempt to reduce this gap may invite grievances from the candidates. Therefore , 
there is hardly any possibility to bring down this time gap of three months. 
 
(e)       The Civil Services (Main) Examination, being a 9 Papers -Examination 
of descriptive type, it takes more time for evaluation of answer scripts i.e. about more 
than two months as nearly 1.20 lakh scripts of different subjects are evaluated by 
different teams of experts. Therefore, at this stage also, there is little scope of 
reducing the time-line between the date of completion of the Main Examination and 
the declaration of its result. 
 
(f)        After declaration of result of the Main Examination, as per existing 
scheme, the successful candidates are required to fill up Detailed Application Form 
(DAF-II) for which, time is given to them. Once these  DAFs-II are received from 
them, the same are processed for generation of E -Summon Letter and scheduling of 
their Personality Tests. The Personality Tests are held at the UPSC, so the candidates 
are required to come to the UPSC for attending the same from their places of stay 
across the country. Therefore, a lead time is to be given to them for arranging their 
transport, necessary documents and stay in Delhi. As such, the Personality Tests 

57 
 
cannot be scheduled immediately after the declaration of result of t he Main 
Examination. Further, maximum 12 candidates are interviewed in a day by one 
Personality Test Board, which is the optimal number which cannot be increased in 
order to maintain the quality of the Personality Test process and awarding of marks to 
the candidates as per their skills and capabilities. Besides, these Personality Test 
Boards are chaired by the Hon’ble Members of the Commission. Hence, the number 
of such Boards depends on the availability of Hon’ble Members. Furthermore, the 
entire duration of the Personality Test process is dependent on this aspect as also on 
the number of candidates, which in turn depends on the number of vacancies to be 
filled up on the basis of the Examination. On completion of the Personality Tests, 
final result of the Civil Service Examination is declared within 4 days. As such, there 
is also hardly any scope of reducing the time -line for completion of Personality Test 
process. 
 
(g)       It may be seen that the time cycle for the Civil Services Examination 
has been opti mized to the extent possible despite increase in the number of 
candidates, Centres and Venues over the years after analysing the time taken in the 
pre-examination and post examination activities in detail. One of the most vital 
factors that go into the det ermination of the time schedule of an Examination is the 
need to maintain the utmost confidentiality and the integrity of the examination 
process. Various checks and balances have been integrated in the examination 
system, which have been gained through ye ars of experience to eliminate the risk to 
the confidentiality and integrity, so that the Examination is conducted in an utmost 
fair and transparent manner. 
3.5 Further, it may also be appreciated that the UPSC presently holds another 12 
Structured Examinations and, therefore, it takes due care to also keep the time cycle 
of these Examinations at the optimum level besides optimizing the time cycle of the 
Civil Services Examination. Further, the UPSC ensures that a judicious balance is 
maintained at all stag es of all its Examinations including the Civil Services 
Examination. 
3.6 Furthermore, this issue was also referred to the Baswan Committee. 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
3.7      The Committee earnestly recommends a comprehensive re -examination 
of civil services recruitment framework. The objective is to strike a careful 
balance between drawing exceptional talent into public administration and 
retaining the country’s finest doctors, engineers, and technocrats in the fields 

58 
 
where their skills are irreplaceable. At present, the examination cycle stretches 
across almost an entire year. This not only delays the entry of competent officers 
into service but also compels highly skilled professionals to step away from their 
core vocations for prolonged periods. The nation quietly loses valuable expertise 
in medicine, engineering, and other vital sectors. Therefore, the Committee 
believes the recruitment process must be rationalised and streamlined. Its 
duration should be curtailed. Stages of as sessment must be harmonised to 
improve efficiency, without compromising the integrity or quality of selection. 
Moreover, new and flexible pathways should be explored. Such mechanisms 
would allow technical and medical experts to contribute meaningfully to 
governance, while still advancing in their professions. This approach would 
ensure that the nation’s human capital is not only preserved but fully optimised.  
The Committee reiterates  DoPT to establish a clear timeline for implementation 
of the Baswan Commi ttee’s reforms by  forming a dedicated team to monitor 
progress in the direction of  exam restructuring. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.8 The Committee appreciates the UPSC and SSC for conducting the diligence 
exercises before publishing the answer keys. Howe ver, the Committee is of the 
view that this will become further more credible if the feedback of the candidates 
are taken through a dedicated portal and then keys are published. The Committee 
hopes that this process will be followed in future. Further, UPSC should explore the 
feasibility of declaring the answer key of Civil Services Preliminary exams after the 
Preliminary Exam stage is over and not after the declaration of final results of the 
Civil Services examination. Candidates should be allowed to raise objections at this 
stage only and on that basis any discrepancies related to the answer key of the 
Preliminary examination should be resolved.   This should be taken into account 
before publishing the result of candidates qualifying for the next stage, i. e. Civil 
Services Mains examination. (Para 2.39) 
Action Taken  
3.9 Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)  is already having an online 
Question Paper Representation Portal (QPRep ) in its website where candidates can 
submit their views on any aspect of a question. This portal remains active for an 
exam for a period of 7 days from the next date immediately after the conclusion of 
that exam. In respect of the release of the answer ke y, it is stated that the 
Commission releases the answer key of the Civil Services (Preliminary) 

59 
 
Examination (objective type) after completion of the entire process of the Civil 
Services Examination. This policy of the Commission is being followed in all 
Examinations of the Commission and it has been working smoothly. Further, 
candidates can make representations on the questions through the dedicated portal, 
as explained above.  As the above system of disclosing keys after the final result of 
the Examination  is working fine since inception and serving the larger public 
interest very well, no requirement is felt to change the same. Further, the issue of 
releasing answer keys is presently sub -judice in W.P. No. 8626/2023 filed by Shri 
Himanshu and others vs  UPSC & Others before the Hon’ble Delhi High Court. 
This case was last heard on 01.12.2023 and listed for next hearing on 21.05.2024. 
3.10 Staff Selection Commission (SSC)  has informed that   in order to ensure 
greater transparency in the examination - system, and in the interest of the 
candidates, the SSC already as the following process in the place: - (i) The tentative 
answer keys of all computer based examinations are uploaded on the Commission’s 
website soon after the conduct of the examination, affordin g the candidates with an 
opportunity to make representations/ challenges against discrepancies, if any, in 
Question Paper/ Tentative Answer Keys.; (ii) On receipt of the challenges, the 
Commission, through a panel of experts, exercises due diligence before  preparing 
the Final Answer keys. Thereafter, the result is declared on the basis of the Final 
Answer keys. The Final answer keys are also uploaded on the website of the 
Commission whereby the candidates are able to judge their performance in the 
examinations.; (iii) Marks secured by the candidates in various examinations 
conducted by the commission are also hosted on website for the information of 
individual candidates. 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
3.11 The Committee recommends that UPSC consider establishing a 
dedicated portal for collecting candidate feedback and objections on the 
provisional answer keys of the Preliminary Examination. It should aim to 
release these keys soon after the exam, following S SC’s transparent model, 
and provide a clear window of 7 to 10 days for raising objections. An expert 
panel should review all submissions before Mains results are announced, and 
final corrected answer keys should be published to help candidates understand 
the evaluation process. Additionally, UPSC and SSC must ensure that all 
related communication is timely and widely disseminated through official 
channels to keep all candidates informed. A uniform, standardised policy for 
handling answer keys across all UPS C examinations may be adopted for 

60 
 
clarity and consistency. The Committee also suggests that UPSC consider the 
outcome of the ongoing court case on this issue and review its approach 
accordingly. Benchmarking these practices against those of global public 
service commissions could further strengthen fairness and credibility. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.12 With respect to Railway Recruitment Board, the Committee emphasized that 
number of centers have to be increased for the candidates appearing for the 
examination. The examination centre should be within the zone where the 
candidate is residing, precisely within the State. (Para 2.52) 
Action Taken  
3.13 Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs) conduct examination covering 
different Geographical locations/ States all over the country even as far as all seven 
North-East States, Islands of Andaman & Nicobar as well as Lakshadweep &  
Kashmir valley in north. Due to large number of candidates i.e. more than one 
crore, it is not always possible to allot centres near the pla ce of residence of the 
candidates. However, in allotting of centre it is ensured that Persons with 
Benchmark Disabilities (PwBD) & female candidates are allotted centres near their 
residence. In the recent examinations to avoid long distance travel, it was  decided 
that as far as possible no candidates should travel more than 500 kilometers.  A 
massive recruitment exercise has been completed recently for empaneling 1,39,050 
candidates by conducting Computer Based Test (CBT) of approximately 2.37 crore 
candidates. CBT for Centralized Employment Notification (CEN) 01/2019 for Non-
Technical Popular Categories (NTPC) was conducted for 1.26 crore candidates in 
133 shifts in 68 days across 211 cities and 726 centres in 15 languages. Similarly, 
CBT for CEN-RRC 01/2019 (Level-1) was conducted for 1.11 crore candidates in 
99 shifts in 33 days across 191 cities and 551 centres in 15 languages. These 
processes were carried out with absolute fairness and transparency. 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
3.14 The Committee acknowledges the immense scale and effort involved in 
conducting examinations for large numbers of candidates across diverse 
regions; however, it stresses the need to further expand the number of 
examination centres, with a focus on allotting  centres within a candidate’s State 
or zone of residence wherever possible. While it appreciates the special 
provisions for PwBD and female candidates, the Committee recommends 

61 
 
extending similar consideration to all candidates, particularly those from rura l 
or remote areas, to reduce travel burdens. It also suggests that RRBs consider 
adopting a zonal preference -based allocation system during the application 
process. The Commission further recommends improved coordination with local 
authorities and private infrastructure providers to identify additional venues. 
These measures would not only ease logistical challenges but also  lower travel 
expenses, and promote equitable access to the recruitment process across all 
regions.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.15 The Committee advocates to examine the following in details by IBPS. 
(i)    An assessment of the cost for an applicant to reach to the 
examination centre from his house and pay the fee.   
(ii)      The strike rate for a candidate to get a job.   
(iii)      An assessment of the cost of an unemployed person to only apply 
and not get the job.   
(iv) The Committee notes that on an average approximately 95 per 
cent of the candidates who apply are not able to get selected and left 
without job. However, every one is being charged and mostly they are 
unemployed.  Hence, the Committee recommends that it would be fair 
and can be explored that the State or the Central Government bear part of 
that cost so that it does not burden the unemployed youth.  (Para 2.76)  
Action Taken  
3.16 With respect to Point (i) to (iv), Department of Financial Services has 
furnished following information/inputs 
i. Noted for information 
ii. It is at about 0.75%, as number of vacancies are less as compared 
to number of applicants competing. 
iii. Noted for examination 
iv. At present, no such proposal exists. 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
3.17 The Committee notes the limited response from the Department and urges 
that a more detailed and structured study be undertaken by IBPS, in 
coordination with the Department of Financial Services, to assess the financial 

62 
 
burden borne by unemployed youth who apply for competitive examinations but 
do not secure employment. In light of the extremely low strike rate of around 
0.75% and the fact that nearly all ap plicants, many of whom are unemployed, 
are charged examination fees and incur significant travel and other related 
expenses, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government  
may explore mechanisms to subsidise a portion of these costs. This could be done 
through direct financial assistance, fee waivers for certain categories, or 
establishing a common subsidy framework for unemployed candidates 
appearing in public recruitment processes. Such measures would reflect a more 
empathetic and inclusive approach to support  youth in their efforts to secure 
gainful employment and reduce the financial strain on economically vulnerable 
applicants. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.18 The Committee notes the travelling undertaken by the candidates to appear in 
the examination and advises RRBs and IBPS to analyze and assess from which 
areas they get a large number of applications. If from a particular State or area they 
are getting a large number of applications, then contemplate increasing the number 
of centers in that area so that the agencies which are being hired for conducting 
exams set up more centers. It should be planned in such a way that it would be 
convenient for candidates. They should not travel more than 100 kms. or 200 kms. 
Also, for candidates who are travelling from far away distances to sit in the 
examinations, it should be ensured that measures are taken to make the travel more 
humane and comfortable. Some special trains  may be run for the purpose. The 
Committee feels these measures would ease the burden of the candidates. (Para 
2.77) 
Action Taken  
3.19 Department of Financial Services  has informed that IBPS deci des upon the 
number of centers/ venues in any particular State according to the number of 
candidates expected in the examination, and endeavors to provide candidates their 
choice of center as close to their opted city as possible. If number from a particular 
area is larger than expected,  new centers are added. Even in relatively very 
inaccessible areas (e.g., Lakshadweep), test center is provided regardless of very 
low number of candidates. The number of grievances of candidates in this regard is 
minimal. 

63 
 
3.20 Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs) conduct examination covering different 
Geographical locations/ States all over the country even as far as all seven North -
East States, Islands of Andaman & Nicobar as well as Lakshadweep & Kashmir 
valley in north. Due to large number of candidates i.e. more than one crore, it is not 
always possible to allot centres near the place of residence of the candidates. 
However, in allotting of centre it is ensured that Persons with Benchmark 
Disabilities (PwBD) & female candidates are allotted centres near th eir residence. 
In the recent examinations to avoid long distance travel, it was decided that as far 
as possible no candidates should travel more than 500 kilometers. Moreover, 
Special Trains are operated as per requirements for ease of candidates. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.21 The Committee appreciates the efforts of IBPS and RRBs in expanding 
access of examination centres, including to remote and low -applicant areas. 
However, a more data -driven and proactive approach is needed. Recruitment 
agencies should identify high -application-density regions in advance and plan 
additional centres accordingly. This will help  in ensuring that candidates travel 
less than 100 kilometres for exams.  The Committee stresses the importance of 
making the process more candidate -friendly, especially for those from rural, 
remote, and economically weaker sections. It also recommends special transport 
arrangements—such as reserved coaches or special trains—in coordination with 
Indian Railways and State Transport Authorities. These should be planned well 
ahead of major exam dates. Information about such services must be widely 
publicised to help candidates plan their travel, reduce stress, and lower costs. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.22 The Committee suggests that a standard feedback module be prepared by the 
organizations which are responsible for conduct of the examinations. Once the 
students have completed the examination cycle, they may be given an option to fill 
in this standardized module. This module may contain various heads like syllabus, 
time taken to complete the exam, constraints faced, infrastructure issues like 
internet connectivity etc, logistical issu es and so on. This will help the 
organizations make the recruitm ent cycle even more streamlined and fast . (Para 
2.104) 
  

64 
 
Action Taken  
3.23 `Feedback' module is available on the webpage of the UPSC 
(i.e. https://www.upsc.gov.in), where  any person can record his/her views/ 
comments/ suggestions in respect of any examination of the Commission including 
the CAPF(AC) Examination, which is conducted by the Commission for 
recruitment to the posts of Assistant Commandants in CAPFs. This feedba ck 
window remains available on 24 X 7 basis. Further, the people can also make 
representation through emails and other modes as they deem appropriate.  
3.24 Staff Selection Commission follows a transparent system of examination and 
continuous feedback of t he examinees is an integral part of the system. As part of 
the process of the examination system, the answer keys of the questions are 
finalized after getting due feedback from the candidates. Continuous feedback is 
also received in the form of representations/ grievances/ other references etc. These 
inputs are considered and appropriate measures taken. Based on such feedback, the 
Commission has started the practice of providing a window for correction of online 
application forms. This has enabled the candi dates to rectify the mistakes, if any, 
committed by them during the filling up of online applications. 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
3.25 The Committee appreciates the existing feedback mechanisms of both 
UPSC and SSC . However, it  recommends a uniform, structured feedback 
module for all recruitment agencies, including UPSC, SSC, IBPS, and RRBs. 
This module should be mandatory at the end of each examination cycle and 
cover aspects such as syllabus relevance, question design, time ma nagement, 
infrastructure issues, language options, accessibility, logistics, and other 
constraints. Feedback should be collected in a consistent, analyzable format to 
enable regular assessment and improvement and the data should be periodically 
reviewed to enhance transparency and demonstrate responsiveness. A uniform 
framework would help identify systemic issues, improve the candidate 
experience, and streamline the recruitment process . The Committee also 
recommends that, in the event of an abrupt cancellat ion of an examination due 
to technical or procedural issues, appropriate steps should be taken to conduct a 
re-examination within three months, in the interest of the aspirants.                    
  
 
*** 

65 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
4.0 The Committee wants to know about the feedback mechanism and suggestions 
of candidates taking civil services and other examinations. Also, whether UPSC and 
SSC publish the key of civ il services preliminary examination before finalizing the 
result of prelims and selecting candidates for Mains. Whether UPSC invites 
objections from candidates and reviews the key before finalizing the result of 
preliminary examination. (Para 2.34) 
4.1 The Committee emphasizes on filling up of all vacancies on mission mode in 
consonance with the Government’s policy. The Committee recommends that there 
has to be a robust mechanism to monitor how many people are retiring from forces, 
how many vacancies cre ated and whether people have been appointed to the vacant 
posts, i.e. vacancies created should be filled regularly and backlogs to be avoided.  
All departments should be strictly directed at all places that they  send details of 
vacancies well in time to M HA and not take years and years to send the details of 
vacancies.  (Para 2.85) 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 