Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2012)
The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012
 
REPORT NO. 
54


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-106

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—5
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 6
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 7—16
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 17 —31
I. The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012 .......................................... 19—27
II. Comments of the Department of Personnel and Training on the  views/suggestions
contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on the
provisions of the Bill .................................................................................................. 28—30
III. List of Non-Official Witnesses .................................................................................. 31

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
*1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Amar Singh
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
@9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Arun Yadav
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri S. Semmalai
15. Shri Anirudhan Sampath
16. Shri Lalu Prasad
17. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
18. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
19. Shrimati Deepa Dashmunsi
20. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
21. Shri P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
22. Shri Kirti Jha Azad
23. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
24. Shri Pinaki Misra
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
27. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
28. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
29. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
* Nominated to be Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 4th May, 2012 .
@ Nominated to be the Member of Committee  w.e.f. 4th May, 2012.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
6. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
9. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
10. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
13. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
16. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
17. Shri Pinaki Misra
18. Shri S. Semmalai
19. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
20. Shrimati Meena Singh
21. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
22. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
23. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
24. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
@25. Vacant
26. Vacant
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
@ V acancy caused due to induction of Shrimati Chandresh Kumari in the Council of Minister w.e.f. 28 th October, 2011.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Fifty-Fourth Report on the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
2. In terms of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee, the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
* the Bill ( Annexure-I), as introduced in the Lok Sabha on
the 27 th April, 2012 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 29 th May, 2012 for examination and
report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communiqué
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, a press communiqué was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies on the
30
th June, 2012, in response to which Five memoranda containing suggestions were received, from
different organizations/individuals/( Annexure-II) etc. The Committee had internal discussion on the
provisions of the Bill in its Meeting held on 26 th November, 2012.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and
Training, Senior officers of Legislative Department on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on
9
th July, 2012. The Committee also heard the views of non-official witnesses in its meetings held on
12th October, 2012 (list at Annexure-III).
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Personnel and Training,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; highlighting the factors necessitating
the Government to introduce the Bill;
(ii) Seventeenth Report of the Committee on the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment)
Bill, 2006,
(iii) Two Hundred Fifteenth Report of Law Commission of India (December, 2008), and
(iv) Views/suggestions contained in the written memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/etc. on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions thereon.
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 11
th December, 2012.
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observation and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
11th December, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 49716) dated the 30 th May, 2012.

ACRONYMS
AT Act Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
CA T Central Administrative Tribunal
CJI Chief Justice of India
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training
SA T State Administrative Tribunal
JAT Joint Administrative Tribunal
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012 seeks to amend certain provisions of the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. The amendments sought to be carried out as also the background
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill which read as follows:–
“
***
2. Under existing provisions contained in section 6 of the Act, a person shall not be qualified
for appointment as Chairman unless he is or has been, a Judge of a High Court. The
Chairman and every other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal are appointed after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India by the President. The Chairman and every other
Member of the Administrative Tribunals for a State or of Joint Administrative Tribunal are
appointed by the President after consultation with the Governor of the concerned State. Section
8 of the Act provides that the condition of the service of the Chairman is same as applicable
to the Judges of the High Courts.
3. To make Judges of the Supreme Court eligible for appointment as Chairman, in the Central
Administrative Tribunal, the State Administrative Tribunal and any Joint Administrative Tribunal
and to bring uniformity in appointment of the Chairman and other Members of these
Tribunals, following amendments are proposed to be made in the Act, namely:—
(a) to amend sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Act so as to provide that a person shall
not be qualified for the appointment as Chairman unless he is, or has been, a judge
of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of the High Court;
(b) to substitute sub-sections (3) to (5) of section 6 of the Act with new sub-sections
so as to provide for consultation by the President with the Chief Justice of India
and the Governor of the respective States, in the case of State Administrative
Tribunal and Joint Administrative Tribunals in addition to consultation by the
President with the Chief Justice of India in the case of appointment of Chairman
and every other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal;
(c) to substitute section 10 of the Act so as to provide that the salary and allowances
payable to and the other terms and conditions of service including pensions, gratuity
and other retirement benefits, for the Chairman shall be the same as are applicable
to the Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of the High Court and
Members shall be eligible for such benefits as are applicable to a Judge of the High
Court;
(d) to amend section 25 of the Act so as to confer power upon a Member authorised
by the Chairman to transfer any case pending before one bench to any other bench
for disposal in addition to the Chairman having such power;
(e) to make consequential amendments in the Act.
***
”
2. The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 was enacted in pursuant to Article 323A of Constitution
to set up Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), State Administrative Tribunal (SAT) and Joint

2
Administrative Tribunal (JAT) to provide speedy and inexpensive justice to litigant Government servants
in service matters. There are Seventeen Benches and Thirty Three Divisional Benches of the CAT and
State Administrative Tribunals in six States (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, West
Bengal and Odisha). The Act was last amended in 2006. The Seventeenth Report of this Committee
(2008) deals with the said amendments to the Act proposed in 2006.
3. The Committee had detailed deliberations on the amendments sought to be carried out in the
Bill, which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
Clause-2
4. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to effect the following changes:–
(i) Revise eligibility condition for the post of Chairman of CAT, SAT and JAT from the
existing “Judge of the High Court” to the “Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice
of the High Court”; and
(ii) Provide for consultation with Chief Justice of India (CJI) by the President of India in
the matter of appointment of Chairman and Members of SAT and JAT.
5. Law Commission of India in its Two Hundred Fifteenth Report (2008) had recommended
elevation in the level of the Chairman of the CAT, SAT and the JAT from the existing “Judge of the
High Court” to that of “Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of the High Court”.
6. On an earlier occasion the Supreme Court had also observed that since the duties attached to
the post of Chairman, CAT require that the incumbent also has considerable expertise in administrative
matter, the Chairman of Administrative Tribunal should be a sitting/retired Judge of Supreme Court or
Chief Justice of High Court. In view of this, Government through the proposed Bill has sought to
revise the eligibility conditions for the position of Chairman of all the three categories of Tribunals to
that of sitting/retired Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court.
7. The Committee noted that in the past several retired Chief Justice of High Court had become
Chairman of CAT/SAT.
8. The President of Chandigarh Bar Association in his written memoranda in response to Press
Release, submitted that appointment of a Judge of Supreme Court as Chairman of CAT was not
justified as the judgment of CAT were subject to review by Division Bench of the High Court. Similar
views were expressed by retired judicial members of CAT in their oral submission before the
Committee.
9. The Ministry of Personnel in their comments on the aforesaid objection stated that the status
of Members of CAT/SAT/JAT is equivalent to that of a High Court Judge and, therefore, it is desirable
that the Chairman should be senior to the members. In support of their argument, they referred to
Para 8.3 of Two Hundred Fifteenth Report of Law Commission of India (2008) which read as follows:-
“A Judge, sitting or retired, is eligible to be appointed as Chairman in view of the provisions
contained in Section 6 of the Act of 1985. However, by tradition and practice, considering the
importance of functions entrusted to the Tribunal, a Chief Justice of High Court, sitting or
retired, is appointed as Chairman. The first seven Chairmen appointed since 1985 were all
sitting or former Chief Justices of High Courts. Only for a brief period, two Chairmen
thereafter were not Chief Justices of High Courts. Presently, the Chairman is also former Chief
Justice. It is, however, learnt that an order by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India on the
administrative side has been passed that the post of Chairman of the Tribunal would be always
occupied by a sitting or former Chief Justice of High Court. A suitable amendment in section
6 of the Act of 1985 can be made to make only a sitting or former Chief Justice of High Court
or Judge of the Supreme Court to be qualified for appointment as Chairman.”

3
10. In the given situation, the Committee takes note of the two landmark judgments related to
Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 which deals with exclusion of jurisdiction of
courts except the Supreme Court of India under Article 136 of the Constitution thereby implying that
the appeals from the Tribunal shall lie with the Supreme Court. These are (i) S.P. Sampath Kumar
Vs. Union of India (AIR 1989 SC 1185) and (ii) L.Chandra Kumar Vs. Union of India (AIR, 1997
SC 1125). In the case of S.P.Sampath Kumar, the Supreme Court held that Section 28 of the AT Act
which excludes the jurisdiction of the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution is
not unconstitutional. But, in the later case of L.Chandra Kumar, the Supreme Court held that the writ
jurisdiction of the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 constitutes basic structure of the constitution
and cannot be extinguished by a legislation. Following these judicial pronouncements by the Apex
Court, the decisions of the Tribunal are being heard in appeal in the Double Benches of the High Court
within whose jurisdiction the Tribunal fell. With these developments the initial intention of streamlining
adjudication in service matters has received some setback.
11. The Committee also took note of the fact that the Law Commission of India in its Two
Hundred Fifteenth Report had not only recommended for elevation of level and status of Chairman of
CAT, SAT, JAT to a Judge of Supreme Court (in Para 8.3) but also recommended for revision of
L. Chandra Kumar case by a larger Bench of Supreme Court.
12. Para 8.5 of the said report states as follows:
“The Law Commission is of the opinion that in view of the circumstances stated in previous
chapters, the subject definitely requires the attention of the Government of India and the State
Governments and the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar’s case
requires reconsideration by a large Bench of the Supreme Court in the interest of the
Government servants, both Central and the State, to achieve the object of the Act, namely,
speedy and less expensive justice. If this proposal is taken up in the right perspective, it will
not only reduce the heavy expenditure by way of fees etc. to the counsel and also the time.”
13. The Committee through its Questionnaire dated 17 th October, 2012 while ascertaining
appropriateness in term of judicial discipline for allowing revision of the Judgment of a Judge of
Supreme Court (as Chairman of CAT/SAT) by a Division Bench of High Court had desired to know
from the DoPT whether the decision of Supreme Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar case needs
to be reviewed by the Supreme Court in the event of enactment of proposed Legislation. In response
to the said query, the Department of Personnel and Training have commented as follows:
“The proposed amendment to the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 is based on the advice/
recommendations of the Chief Justice of India and 215 th report of the Law Commission.
As per the original scheme of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, under Section 28 the
appeal against orders of Central Administrative Tribunal lies with the Supreme Court. The
same changed in 1997 after the judgement of Supreme Court in L.Chandra Kumar’ s case.
Though, the Section 28 remains the same. Now, due to this judgement writ jurisdiction of High
Courts is invoked in respect of orders passed by CAT. As per the opinion of Ministry of Law
and Justice no review petition could be filed. In a recent judgement in the case of Namit
Sharma VS. Union of India (WP(C) No. 210/2012) the Supreme Court vide order dated
13.09.2012 has inter-alia held that the Chief Information Commissioner at the Centre or State
level shall only be a person who is or has been a Chief Justice of the High Court or Judge
of the Supreme Court of India. Thus the same issue of orders of Judge of Supreme Court being
challenged before High Court would arise in the case of Information Commission also.
This point raised by the Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding the judgement of CAT/
SAT pronounced by a judge of Supreme Court in the capacity of Chairman being reviewed by
High Court appears valid for Information Commissioners also and it is proposed to be further
examined in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice.”

4
14. The Committee takes note of the recommendations of the Law Commission, the
decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the two cases referred to above as well
as the recommendations of this Committee as contained in its Seventeenth Report on the
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Committee is of the considered opinion
that the amendment in Section 6(1) of the AT Act, 1985 which is being proposed through the
Bill in hand would lead to a dichotomy where the decisions of the CAT/SAT/JAT which is
proposed to be headed by a sitting/retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of
the High Court would be taken up in appeal in the High Court. The Committee also takes note
of the recommendations of the Law Commission which has recommended raising the level of
the Chairman of CAT/SAT/JAT and also the revision of the judgement of the Supreme Court
in L. Chandrakumar case by a larger Bench. In view of this, the Committee is of the
considered view that the Ministry of Personnel should in the first instance explore the
possibility of approaching Supreme Court for revision of its decision in L.Chandrakumar case
and the action of elevating the level and status of the Chairman of CAT/SAT/JAT be taken
only thereafter. The proposed amendment in Section 6(1) of the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985, can be accepted only in case it is ensured that the decisions of CAT/SAT/JAT are
made appealable in the Supreme Court. The Committee has arrived at this conclusion because
the Members unanimously feel that the tendency on the part of the judicial officers to seek
such posts needs to be discouraged.
15. The Committee was informed that the sub-Sections (4) and (5) of Section 6 of the AT Act
do not specifically provide for consultation of Chief Justice of India (CJI) by the President of India
for appointment of Chairman and Members of a SAT or a JAT. Sub-Section (3) of Section 6, however,
mentions about the consultation of CJI by the President for appointment of Chairman and members
of CAT. Owing to equality in the status of members of CAT with that of SAT or JAT, there has been
a practice of consulting the CJI in matters of appointment of Chairman as well as Members of SAT
and JAT. Further, Rule 5 (iii) of Administrative Tribunal (Procedure for Appointment of Members)
Rules, 2011, framed under the AT Act , categorically mentions about such a consultation of the CJI.
But, Sub-Sections (4) and (5) of the Section 6 which deal with the appointment of Chairman and
Members of SAT and JAT, respectively, does not specifically provide about consultation with the CJI.
The Ministry of Personnel in their background note on the Bill pointed out that while examining the
proposal for appointment of Chairman of SAT of Kerala, the CJI had directed the Government to
amend relevant provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act before sending another proposal for
appointment of Chairman and members of the SATs.
16. The Committee feels that amendment proposed to sub-sections (4) and (5) of Section 6
of the AT Act are aimed to rectify genuine omissions. Accordingly, the Committee endorses the
amendment proposed in sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) of Section of 6 of the AT Act.
Clauses-3 and 4
17. Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill seek to bring about the following changes in the AT Act, 1985:
(i) Upward revision of salaries, allowances and change in the conditions of service of
Chairman of Administrative Tribunals in view of amendment proposed to Section 6 (1)
of the AT Act through clause 2 of the Bill; and
(ii) Deleting sub-Section (3) of Section 8 of the AT Act and placing its provisions under
Section 10 of the Act in a revised format.
18. The amendment proposed at (i) above is linked with the amendment to Section 6(1) of the
AT Act, 1985 aimed towards raising the level and status of the Chairman of CAT, SAT and JAT.

5
19. As regards the amendment proposed at (ii) above, Section 8(3) of the AT Act provides that
the conditions of service of Chairman and Members shall be the same as applicable to Judge of the
High Court. Section 10 of the AT Act deals with the salary and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairman and Members of the Tribunals. The Ministry of Personnel in
their background note has stated that Section 8(3) should ideally have been placed under Section 10
which deals with the condition of service of Chairman and Members of Administrative Tribunals.
Accordingly, the Bill seeks to delete the provisions of sub-Section (3) of Section 8 and recast the same
under Section 10 and also to reflect the upward revision in salary, allowance, pension, gratuity and
other retirement benefits in the case of Chairman, consequent upon amendment proposed under clause
2 of the bill.
20. The Committee has no objection in so far as the deletion of Section 8(3) of the AT Act
and placing its provisions under Section 10 which is the more appropriate Section under which
such provisions should have been placed. However, the Committee finds that the upward
revision of salary, allowance, pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits in the case of
Chairman of CAT, SAT and JAT is directly related to the amendments sought under
Clause 2 of the Bill which has since been dealt with by the Committee in paras 4 to 15 above.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that action in terms of clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill
related to the upward revision of salary, allowances, etc. in the case of Chairman should follow
the outcome of the Committee’s recommendations in relation to Section 6(1) of the AT Act.
Clause-5
21. Clause 5 of the Bill proposes amendment to the proviso to Section 10 (A) of the AT Act which
provides for reappointment of existing members in terms of Section 8 of the Act. Section 6 of the
AT Act deals with the qualification for appointment as Chairman and Member of the Administrative
Tribunals. The Ministry of Personnel in their background note on the Bill have pointed out that the
reference to Section 6 has “inadvertently being left out in the proviso”. The amendment vide
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to include reference to Section 6 also in the proviso to Section 10(A) of
the AT Act
22. The Committee takes note of the fact that the amendment suggested vide clause 5 of
the Bill seeks to add the words “Section 8” in the proviso to Section 10(A). The amendment
being with an objective to rectify a drafting error, the Committee recommends that the same
may be carried out.
Clause-6
23. Clause 6 of the Bill proposes amendment to Section 25 of the AT Act. Through this amendment
it is proposed to empower the Members of the Tribunals also to transfer any case on an authorization
by the Chairman. The existing provisions of the said Section 25 vests this power only with the
Chairman.
24. The Committee accepts the amendment proposed in Clause 6 of the Bill and it hopes
that it would facilitate speedy disposal of cases. The Committee recommends, accordingly.

6
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee takes note of the recommendations of the Law Commission, the
decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the two cases referred to above as well
as the recommendations of this Committee as contained in its Seventeenth Report on the
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Committee is of the considered opinion
that the amendment in Section 6(1) of the AT Act, 1985 which is being proposed through the
Bill in hand would lead to a dichotomy where the decisions of the CAT/SAT/JAT which is
proposed to be headed by a sitting/retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of
the High Court would be taken up in appeal in the High Court. The Committee also takes note
of the recommendations of the Law Commission which has recommended raising the level of
the Chairman of CAT/SAT/JAT and also the revision of the judgement of the Supreme Court
in L. Chandrakumar case by a larger Bench. In view of this, the Committee is of the
considered view that the Ministry of Personnel should in the first instance explore the
possibility of approaching Supreme Court for revision of its decision in L. Chandrakumar case
and the action of elevating the level and status of the Chairman of CAT/SAT/JAT be taken
only thereafter. The proposed amendment in Section 6(1) of the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985, can be accepted only in case it is ensured that the decisions of CAT/SAT/JAT are
made appealable in the Supreme Court. The Committee has arrived at this conclusion because
the Members unanimously feel that the tendency on the part of the judicial officers to seek
such posts needs to be discouraged. [Para 14]
2. The Committee feels that amendment proposed to sub-Sections (4) and (5) of Section
6 of the AT Act are aimed to rectify genuine omissions. Accordingly, the Committee endorses
the amendment proposed in sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) of Section of 6 of the AT Act.
[Para 16]
3. The Committee has no objection in so far as the deletion of Section 8(3) of the AT Act
and placing its provisions under Section 10 which is the more appropriate Section under which
such provisions should have been placed. However, the Committee finds that the upward
revision of salary, allowance, pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits in the case of
Chairman of CAT, SAT and JAT is directly related to the amendments sought under
Clause 2 of the Bill which has since been dealt with by the Committee in paras 4 to 15 above.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that action in terms of clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill
related to the upward revision of salary, allowances, etc. in the case of Chairman should follow
the outcome of the Committee’s recommendations in relation to Section 6(1) of the AT Act.
[Para 20]
4. The Committee takes note of the fact that the amendment suggested vide clause 5 of
the Bill seeks to add the words “Section 8” in the proviso to Section 10(A). The amendment
being with an objective to rectify a drafting error, the Committee recommends that the same
may be carried out. [Para 22]
5. The Committee accepts the amendment proposed in Clause 6 of the Bill and it hopes
that it would facilitate speedy disposal of cases. The Committee recommends, accordingly.
[Para 24]

MINUTES

9
XXVII
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9 th July, 2012, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Shri S. Semmalai
7. Shri Anirudhan Sampath
8. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
9. Shri N.S.V . Chittan
10. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
11. Shri P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
12. Shri Pinaki Misra
13. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri P.K. Misra, Secretary; and
2. Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary.

10
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and also
welcomed the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training who was invited to make a presentation
before the Committee on the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012. In his presentation, the
Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training apprised the Committee that the Bill seeks, inter-alia,
to amend sub-clause (1) of Section 6 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 so as to provide that
a person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairman unless he is or has been, a Judge of the
Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of the High Court. He also stated that the Bill proposes to amend
Section 25 of the Act so as to confer power upon a Member authorized by the Chairman to transfer
any case pending before one Bench to any other Bench for disposal, in addition to the Chairman
having such power.
3. Some of the Members of the Committee while appreciating to the objectives of the Bill, opined
that the Bill could have taken care of improving the efficacy and efficiency of the Administrative
Tribunals also. The Committee also noted the rationale behind keeping the retirement age for the post
of Chairman/Member CAT at 68 and 65, respectively.
4. The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by the Committee. The Chairman, then
asked the Secretary to send in writing the replies to the questions which were not replied to, during
the meeting.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 4.32 
P.M.

11
I
FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 12 th October, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
5. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
6. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
7. Shri Pinaki Misra
8. Shri S. Semmalai
9. Shri S.D “Shariq”
10. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
11. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shri B.M.S. Rana, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. ***
B. The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012
I. Non-official Witnesses
1. Shrimati Shyama Dogra, Member (Judicial, Retd.) CAT, Chandigarh; and
2. Ms. Meera Chhibber, Member (Judicial, Retd.), CAT, New Delhi.
11
*** Others related matter.

12
II. Representatives of Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India
1. Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary; and
2. Shrimati Mona Singh, Director.
III. Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government
of India
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary;
2. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Assistant, Legislative Counsel.
2. The Chairman extended a hearty welcome to the Members of the Committee on their being
re-nominated/nominated to the Committee and expressed hope that the Committee would be immensely
benefited from their wide experience while transacting its business during its current tenure. He then
welcomed all of them to the first sitting of the newly constituted Committee. Thereafter, he appraised
the Members of the Subjects/Bills pending with the Committee and briefly recapitulated the progress
made on those Subjects and Bills by the previous Committee.
***
3.0 * * *
3.1 * * *
3.2 * * *
3.3 * * *
4.0 * * *
4.1 * * *
Deposition of non-official witnesses on the Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2012
5.0 Thereafter, the Committee heard views of non-official witnesses on the Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2012. The witnesses who were ex-Members of the CAT started with two issues
which predominantly emanated from their personal grievances. The first point was that the present
legislation prescribes an upper age limit of 65 years for the Member, CAT The Act also puts a
restriction on two terms of five years each during which any person may function as Member, CAT
The witnesses pointed out that they were picked up as Member, CAT from the Bar and they were
much less than 65 years of age after completing two terms. According to them, they were being
discriminated against Member of CAT selected from the Bar or Administrative Members of the CAT
selected from Government Departments who normally are appointed Member, CAT after their
superannuation and continue upto the age of 65 years. The witnesses also pointed out that there was
no pension scheme for Member, CAT selected from the Bench even after working as Member, CAT
for 10 years.
51 Coming to the provision of the Bill, it was pointed by them that by enhancing the status of
Chairman of CAT/SAT to the level of Judge of Supreme Court and Chief Justice of High Court from
that of the Judge of High Court might lead to an anomalous situation because the judgements of the
CAT are being scrutinised by the Division Bench of High Court under Extra Ordinary Jurisdiction of
High Court, particularly, after pronouncement of judgement of L. Chandra Kumar case by Supreme
Court in 1997.
*** Relate to other matters.

13
5.2 Responding on the issue, the representatives of the Department of Personnel and Training
stated that the request for increasing the status of Presiding Officers of CAT and SAT emanated from
the recommendation of the Law Commission as contained in its 215 th Report as also the observations
of the Supreme Court. There were, however, no directions from the Supreme Court to the Government
to increase the status of Presiding Officers of the CAT and SAT. The representatives of Legislative
Department also referred to the recommendations of the Law Commission. They, however, also
mentioned about the need to review the judgement in the case of L. Chandra Kumar by a larger Bench
of Supreme Court.
5.3 The Members noted that Government has moved the proposed legislation for increasing the
status of Presiding Officers of CAT and SAT without approaching the Supreme Court for review of
its decision in L. Chandra Kumar’s case. If the proposed amendment is carried through, it would
definitely lead to an anomalous situation leading to scrutiny of decisions of retired judges of Supreme
Court by a Division Bench of High Court
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6 . ***
7. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the discussion was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

14
II
SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 26 th November, 2012, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
5. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. He made a special mention of the
Members inducted in the newly constituted Committee and attending meeting for the first time. He
then requested the Members to take up for consideration its draft 54
th Report on ‘The Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012.’
2. The Committee considered the draft Report and felt that the issue of the decisions of the CAT/
SAT/JAT which is proposed to be headed by a sitting/retired Judge of Supreme Court or a Chief
Justice of a High Court, being taken up in appeal, in the High Court may lead to a dichotomous
14

15
situation. Some Members were of the opinion that appointment of a person from the judiciary as the
Chairman in the CAT/SAT/JAT not only limits the eligibility criteria but also creates a channel for post
retirement appointment for the Judges. The Committee decided to meet again for considering the draft
report at a greater length.
3. * * *
4. A verbatim record of the Meeting was kept.
5. The Meeting adjourned at 3.25 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 11 th December, 2012, in Committee Room ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
9. Shri S. Semmalai
10. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then
took up for consideration its draft Fifty-fourth Report on the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment)
Bill, 2012. The Members expressed their views on the draft Report and adopted the same with some
minor modifications.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri Jesudasu Seelam and in
his absence Shri Parimal Nathwani to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar
and in his absence Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha, on
Monday, the 17
th December, 2012.
4. The meeting adjourned at 3.45 P.M.
16

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE -I
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
27 April, 2012
Bill No. 50 of 2012
THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act,  1985.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 6 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “a Judge of a High
Court”, the words “a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief
Justice of a High Court” shall be substituted;
19
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 6.
13 of 1985.

20
(b) for sub-sections (3), (4) and (5), the following sub-
sections shall respectively be substituted, namely:—
“(3) The Chairman and every other Member of the
Central Administrative Tribunal shall be appointed by the
President after consultation with the Chief Justice of
India.
(4) The Chairman and every other Member of an
Administrative Tribunal for a State shall be appointed by
the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of
India and the Governor of the concerned State.
(5) Subject to the terms of the agreement between
the participating State Governments published under sub-
section (3) of section 4, the Chairman and every other
Member of a Joint Administrative Tribunal shall be
appointed by the President after consultation with the
Chief Justice of India and the Governors of the concerned
States.”.
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, sub-section (3) shall be
omitted.
4. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“10. The salaries and allowances payable to and other
terms and conditions of service including pension, gratuity
and other retirement benefits of, —
(a) the Chairman shall be the same as applicable
to a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice
of a High Court, as the case may be, depending the
office actually held by him; and
(b) a Member shall be the same as applicable
to a Judge of the High Court:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor
the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman
or Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment:
Provided further that where a serving Government
officer is appointed as a Member, he shall be deemed to
have retired from the service to which he belonged on the
date on which he assumed the charge of the Member but
his subsequent service as Member shall, at his option, be
reckoned as a post-retirement re-employment counting for
pension and other retirement benefits in the service to
which he belonged.”.
Amendment of
section 8.
Substitution of
new section for
section 10.
Salaries,
allowances and
other terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairman and
Members.

21
5. In section 10A of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the
word and figure “section 8”, the words and figures “sections 6 and
8” shall be substituted.
6. In section 25 of the principal Act, for the words “the
Chairman may transfer any case”, the words “the Chairman or a
Member authorised by him in this behalf may transfer any case” shall
be substituted.
Amendment of
section 10A.
Amendment of
section 25.

22
22
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In pursuance of article 323A of the Constitution, the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985 (the Act) was enacted. Administrative Tribunals
have been set up under the Act for adjudication or trial of disputes and
complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of
persons appointed to Public Services and posts in connection with the
affairs of the Union or any State or any local or other authority within
the territory of India or under the control of Government of India or
in corporations owned or controlled by the Government.
2. Under existing provisions contained in section 6 of the Act,
a person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairman unless he
is or has been, a Judge of a High Court. The Chairman and every
other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal are appointed
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India by the President. The
Chairman and every other Member of the Administrative Tribunals for
a State or of Joint Administrative Tribunal are appointed by the
President after consultation with the Governor of the concerned State.
Section 8 of the Act provides that the condition of the service of the
Chairman is same as applicable to the Judges of the High Courts.
3. To make Judges of the Supreme Court eligible for appointment
as Chairman, in the Central Administrative Tribunal, the State
Administrative Tribunal and any Joint Administrative Tribunal and to
bring uniformity in appointment of the Chairman and other Members
of these Tribunals, following amendments are proposed to be made in
the Act, namely:—
(a) to amend sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of the Act so
as to provide that a person shall not be qualified for the
appointment as Chairman unless he is, or has been, a judge of
the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of the High Court;
(b) to substitute sub-sections ( 3) to ( 5) of section 6 of
the Act with new sub-sections so as to provide for consultation
by the President with the Chief Justice of India and the Governor
of the respective States, in the case of State Administrative
Tribunal and Joint Administrative Tribunals in addition to
consultation by the President with the Chief Justice of India in
the case of appointment of Chairman and every other Member
of the Central Administrative Tribunal;
(c) to substitute section 10 of the Act so as to provide
that the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms
and conditions of service including pensions, gratuity and other
retirement benefits, for the Chairman shall be the same as are
applicable to the Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief

23
Justice of the High Court and Members shall be eligible for
such bensefits as are applicable to a Judge of the High Court;
(d) to amend section 25 of the Act so as to confer power
upon a Member authorised by the Chairman to transfer any
case pending before one bench to any other bench for disposal
in addition to the Chairman having such power;
(e) to make consequential amendments in the Act.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW D ELHI; V . NARAYANASAMY
The 9th April, 2012.

24
24
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
All the expenses towards the Central Administrative Tribunal are
borne by the Central Government and in respect of State Administrative
Tribunal the same are borne by the respective State Government. The
Bill involves financial implications as and when new Chairmen are
appointed on expiry of the term of office of the existing Chairmen
since such new Chairmen will be entitled to the service conditions as
admissible to a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of
a High Court, as the case may be. The additional expenditure in this
regard would be rupees 1.56 lakh per annum towards salary and
sumptuary allowance and rupees 1 lakh for appointment (approximately)
per Chairman.

25
25
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE A DMINISTRATIVE  T RIBUNALS  A CT, 1985
(13 OF 1985)
* *** *
6. ( 1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the
Chairman unless he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court:
Provided that a person appointed as Vice-Chairman before the
commencement of this Act shall be qualified for appointment as
Chairman if such person has held the office of the Vice-Chairman at
least for a period of two years.
* *** *
(3) The Chairman and every other Member of the Central
Administrative Tribunal shall be appointed after consultation with the
Chief Justice of India by the President.
(4) Subject to the provision of sub-section (3), the Chairman
and every other member of an Administrative Tribunal for a State shall
be appointed by the President after consultation with the Governor of
the concerned State.
(5) The Chairman and every other Member of a Joint
Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (3) and subject to the terms of the agreement between the
participating State Governments published under sub-section (3) of
section 4 of the principal Act, be appointed by the President after
consultation with the Governors of the concerned States.
Explanation.—In computing for the purpose of this section, the
period during which a person has held any post under the Central or
State Government, there shall be included the period during which he
has held any other post under the Central or State Government
(including an office under this Act) carrying the same scale of pay as
that of first mentioned post on a higher scale of pay.
* *** *
8. (1)* * * * *
(3) The conditions of service of Chairman and Members shall
be the same as applicable to Judges of the High Court.
* *** *
Term of office.
Qualifications
for appointment
as Chairman,
Vice-Chairman
and other
members.

26
10. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms
and conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement
benefits) of, the Chairman, and other Members shall be such as may
be prescribed by the Central Government: Provided that neither the
salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairman, or other Member shall be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment:
Provided further that where a serving Government officer is
appointed as a Member, he shall be deemed to have retired from the
service to which he belonged on the date on which he assumed the
charge of the Member but his subsequent service as Member shall, at
his option, be reckoned as a post-retirement re-employment counting
for pension and other retirement benefits in the service to which he
belonged.
10A. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Member of a Tribunal
appointed before the commencement of the Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Act, 2006 shall continue to be governed by the provisions
of the Act, and the rules made thereunder as if the Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 had not come into force:
Provided that, however, such Chairman and the Members
appointed before the coming into force of Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Act, 2006, may on completion of their term or attainment
of the age of sixty-five or sixty-two years, as the case may be,
whichever is earlier may, if eligible in terms of section 8 as amended
by the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 be considered
for a fresh appointment in accordance with the selection procedure
laid down for such appointments subject to the condition that the total
term in office of the Chairman shall not exceed five years and that of
the Members, ten years.
* *** *
25. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to
the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be
held, or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may
transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other
Bench.
* *** *
Salaries and
allowances and
other terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and
other Members.
Saving terms and
conditions of
service of Vice-
Chairman. 1 of 2007.
1 of 2007.
Power of
Chairman to
transfer cases
from one Bench
to another.

27
27
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State for
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions )

28
ANNEXURE-II
Department of Personnel and Training
Part-I: COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
Clause No. 2
28
Sl. No.
1.
Name of organization/
individual
Shri D.R. Sharma,
Advocate,
President,
Chandigarh CAT Bar
Association
Comments/Suggestions
(i) Suggested that appointment
of a judge of Supreme
Court as Chairman is not
justified in CAT as the
judgement of CAT are
subject to review of High
Courts.
Response of Government
The proposal of amendment in
the A T Act to the effect that
only Chief Justice of a High Court
or Judge of a Supreme Court
(Retired/Sitting) will be eligible
for appointment as Chairman of
Administrative Tribunal is based
on the recommendations of the
Law Commission in para 8.3 of
its 215
th  report and
recommendations of the Chief
Justice of India. This amendment
is proposed because the status
of all Members is equivalent to a
High Court Judge and it is
therefore desirable that Chairman
should be senior to the Members.

29
Part-II: OTHER ISSUES NOT COVERED BY THE BILL
Sl. No.
1
1.
Name of organization/
individual
2
Shri D.R Sharma,
Advocate, President,
Chandigarh CAT Bar
Association.
Comments/Suggestions
3
(i) Suggested that
Administrative Members in
the establishment of
Tribunals may be done
away with and CAT
benches to be constituted
from amongst Judicial
Members only.
(ii) There is a need for fixing
quota for members of Bar
to be appointed as Judicial
Members. Negligible
appointment of Judicial
Member/s has been from
the members of Bar/
Advocates.
(iii) To do away with the tenure
system of appointment of
members of Bar/Advocates
as Judicial Members.
Response of Government
4
Administrative Members are
appointed in the Administrative
Tribunals as they have a vast
experience of service matters of
employees which help the
Tribunals in adjudication of cases
which involve nothing but the
service matters only.
Of the 67 posts of Member in
the Central Administrative
Tribunal, 34 posts of Member
(including one post of Chairman,
CAT) are earmarked for Judicial
Members. Hence, there is equal
opportunity for the Members of
Bar/Advocates in the matter of
appointment of Judicial Members
in the Administrative Tribunals. A
high level Committee under the
Chairmanship of a Judge of the
Supreme Court (nominated by the
CJI) selects the Members for the
CAT. A considerable number of
Advocates have been appointed
as Member (Judicial) in the
Central Administrative Tribunal as
well as State Administrative
Tribunals.
The Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 is uniformly applicable
to all the Members whether
appointed from the Judiciary or
from the Bar. It may not be
appropriate to have different
tenures/service conditions for
different modes of appointment.

30
1
2.
3.
4.
5.
2
Shri Mithilesh Kumar
Singh, Advocate and
44 other Advocates.
Ms. Manjula Das,
Judicial Member, CAT,
Guwahati Bench.
Ms. Shyama Dogra,
Judicial Member, CAT,
Chandigarh Bench.
Shri G . Santhappa,
Judicial Member, CAT,
Madras Bench.
3
(i) Suggested that the
Administrative Tribunals
ACT as amended in 2007
is again required to be
amended so that the total
term in the office for the
Members should be
prescribed up to the age of
65 years irrespective of their
entry age.
(i) Suggested that the
Administrative Tribunals
ACT as amended in 2007
is again required to be
amended so that the total
term in the office for the
Members should be
prescribed up to the age of
65 years irrespective of their
entry age.
(i) Suggested that sub-section
(i) and (ii) of Section 8,
proviso to Section 10A and
clause (2) of Section 12 of
the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 may be deleted
so that the Judicial
Members appointed from
the Bar should be able to
feel sense of security and
perform their duties more
vigorously.
(i) Suggested that Section 8(2)
of the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985, to be
replaced by the sentence “A
Member shall hold office as
such from the date on
which he enters upon his
office till he attains the age
of 68 years”.
4
The Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 is uniformly applicable
to all the Members whether
appointed from the Judiciary or
from the Bar. It may not be
appropriate to have different
tenures/service conditions for
different modes of appointment.
Same as above.
Same as above.
Same as above.

31
ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Shrimati Shyama Dogra, Member (Judicial, Retd.) CAT, Chandigarh; and
2. Ms. Meera Chhibber, Member (Judicial, Retd.) CAT, New Delhi
31

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.