PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                   40 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
FORTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE PERSONAL LAWS (AMENDMENT)  
                                                   BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
AUGUST, 2010/SHRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
FORTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE PERSONAL LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2010 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
                                 AUGUST, 2010/SHRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
   
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ...........................................................................................  (iii) (iv) 
3. R EPORT .........................................................................................................  1-6 
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ....................... 7-12 
5. A NNEXURE – ....................................................................................................... 13-41 
A. The Personal Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010 .................................................... 15-20 
B. Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice   
 (Legislative Department) on the views/suggestion   
contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/  
organisations/experts on the provisions of the Bill   
21-41 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan   ----------        Chairperson 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 3. Shri Shanta ram Laxman Naik 
 4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 5. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
 6. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh 
 8. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
 9. Shri H. K. Dua 
 10. Vacant 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Shri Bhajan Lal 
 12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
 13. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi 
 14. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
 15. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda 
 16. Dr. Monazir Hassan 
 17. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
 18. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari 
 19. Shri Lalu Prasad 
 20. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
 21. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan 
 22. Shri Devji M. Patel 
 23. Shri Harin Pathak 
 24. Shri S. Semmalai 
 25. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh 
 27. Dr. (Smt.) Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 28. Shri Manish Tewari 
 29. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 30. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
 31. Vacant 
 
 
 
 
 

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
  Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
  Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director 
  Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director 
  Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby 
present the Fortieth Report on The Personal Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Bill seeks to amend 
the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 so as to include the mother along with the father as a fit person to 
be appointed as guardian; and to amend the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 so as to 
remove the incapacity of a married woman to take in  adoption and so as to provide that the mother, 
with the consent of father and vice versa, shall have equal right to give in adoption of their children. 
2.   In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee, 
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
@ the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd 
April, 2010 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 23rd April, 2010 for examination and 
report. 
3.  Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communique 
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill. 
Accordingly, a press communique was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies, in 
response to which memoranda containing suggestions were received, from various organizations / 
individuals / experts, by the Committee. 
4.  The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of 
Law and Justice on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on 6th May, 2010. 
5.   The Committee, during its study visits to Mumbai, Bengaluru and Chennai from 13th to 19th 
June, 2010, heard the views of the State Governments of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu and 
other stakeholders such as Bar Associations, Employees’ Associations, individuals and institutions on 
the Bill. 
6.  While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information 
placed before it : – 
(i)  Background note on the Bill submitted by the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department); 
(ii) Views/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various 
organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the 
comments of the Legislative Department thereon;  
(iii) Views expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the 
stakeholders such as representatives of the Governments of the State, Bar Associations, 
State Bar Councils, Judicial officers/Employ ees Associations, practising Advocates etc.; 
and 
(iv) Other research material / documents related to the Bill. 
7.  The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 29th July, 2010. 
8.   For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 

 
  JAYANTHI NATARAJAN 
NEW DELHI; Chairperson, 
29
th
 July, 2010 Committee on Personnel 
   Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
   
 
@Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.47173) dated the 23rd April, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
1.  The Personal Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010 (Annexure-A) seeks to amend certain personal 
laws, namely, the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 
1956, so as to bring in gender equality therein in our society. 
2.  The Statement of Objects and Reasons, appended to the Bill reads as under :- 
  “As per the census held in 2001, the female population in India constitutes about 48.26 per cent 
of the total population of the country. The empowerment of women by various legislative as well as 
other measures is an avowed policy of the Governme nt and bringing complete equality for them in all 
spheres of life is, therefore, a matter of utmost c oncern. This objective and policy of the Government 
have also been reiterated in the President’s Addre ss to the first session of both Houses of Parliament 
held on the 4th June, 2009. The National Common Minimum Programme of the then Government 
(2004-09) also enunciated that complete legal equality for women in all spheres of life will be made a 
practical reality, especially by removing discriminatory legislation and by enacting new legislation 
that gives women, for instance, equal rights of ownership of assets like houses and land.  
  The Constitution of India guarantees equality of status and equality of opportunity to all 
citizens, irrespective of the fact, whether they are me n and women. It provides that the State shall not 
deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of 
India and prohibits discrimination solely on the gr ound of sex. There is a growing demand for making 
laws free from gender bias and to provide legal equality to women in all spheres of life. It directs that 
women shall have equal rights and privileges along with men and that the State may make special 
provision for the welfare of women. 
  With the above objectives in view, it is prop osed to amend certain personal laws, namely, the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, so as to bring 
in gender equality therein. Accordingly, it is proposed to make the following amendments, namely:- 
(a) to amend clause (b) of section 19 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 on the basis of 
the recommendation of the Law Commission of India contained in paragraph 6.83 of its 
Eighty-third Report on the Guardians and Ward s Act, 1890 so as to include the mother 
along with the father as a fit person to be appointed as guardian so that courts shall not 
appoint any other person as a guardian of minor if either of the parents is fit to be the 
guardian of such minor; 
(b) to amend section 8 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 so as to remove 
the incapacity of a married woman to take in adoption of a son or daughter merely on the 
basis of her marital status; 
(c) to amend section 9 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 so as to provide 
that the mother with the consent of the father and the father with the consent of the 
mother, shall have equal right to give in adoption of their children.  
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 

3.  The Personal Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced* in the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd 
April, 2010. It was referred@ by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to this Committee on 23rd April, 
2010 for examination and report. 
4.  In the background note furnished by the Ministry of Law and Justice, it has been stated that after 
preliminary examination, it was observed that the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 require amendments to remove the element of gender 
discrimination. The Law Commission of India, in its 83rd Report, has also made recommendations for 
such amendments in the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890. 
5.  It has further been stated that the Eighty-third Report on the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 of 
the Law Commission of India, vide paragraph 6.83, has recommended amendments in clause (b) of 
section 19 of the said Act to include mother along with the father for the purpose of removing the 
gender inequality. The said Report of the Law Commission of India was circulated to all the States 
and Union Territories of the Indian Union and comments from 32 States and Union Territories were 
received. They all have agreed to the recommendations of the Law Commission of India. 
6.  The Committee heard the presentation of the Secr etary, Legislative Department of the Ministry 
of Law and Justice on the Bill on 6th May, 2010. 
7.  In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/suggestions 
from desirous individuals/organisations on the Bill. Accordingly, a press release was issued inviting 
views/suggestions. In response to the press release published in major English and Hindi dailies and 
newspapers all over India on 10th May, 2010, a number of representations/memoranda were received. 
7.1.  The Committee forwarded the memoranda so received from the individuals and organisations to 
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) for their comments thereon. The list of these 
memoranda alongwith the gist of views and suggesti ons of the Ministry of Law and Justice is placed 
at Annexure- B. 
7.2.  The major points raised in the memoranda are summarized as follows: 
(i) This Bill is a most welcome step as such amendment in Personal Laws was long overdue. 
Considering the Constitutional commitment of the Government towards right to equality 
to both the sexes, the provisions Section 19 (b) of Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and 
Sections 8 and 9 of Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 are obviously and 
patently gender discriminatory and hence against the spirit of Constitution. It was high 
time that such discrimination should be removed. The proposed Amendment Bill does 
exactly that. It helps to make the law gender neutral and equal to both the sexes. 
(ii) The genesis of this Bill is right of equality among the sexes. In the Guardians and Wards 
Act, 1890, in certain circumstances, the Court is empowered to appoint guardians. A 
certain inequality was found and this Bill tries to address that. The father’s name was 
mentioned, but the mother’s name was not there. This Bill is including the mother’s name 
too. 
(iii) In the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Ac t, 1956, there are two provisions where we 
find that the rights of the husband and wife, mo ther and father, were unequal. One was in 

the case of adopting a child and the other was in the case of giving the child for adoption. 
The crux is that mother is being discriminated on the basis of the marital status. If she 
wants to give child for adoption, the father should not be alive, should be of unsound mind 
and should cease to be a Hindu. Similarly, if  she wants to adopt a child, she should be a 
divorcee, or widowed. Such condi tions are there. This Bill is  trying to give the mother 
equal rights similar to that of the father. 
(iv) Section 4(2) of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 should read that “guardian” means a 
person having the care of the person of a minor  or of his property or of both his person 
and property and includes both a man or a woman”. 
(v) An Explanation should be inserted to in the Guardians and Wards Act, to provide that 
“property” includes hereditary trusteeship. A new sub-section should be inserted to ensure 
that “the Court can make an appointment of a guardian conditional on the performance of 
a condition by the guardian.” 
(vi) Every adoption, whether it is a boy or girl, must have Court sanction at least of Civil 
Judge (Junior) Rank. 
(vii)  There must be a clause/provision for the child in the interest of justice that he/she must 
have a right to ratify and confirm what has been done in his/her interest and accept and/or 
reject on attaining the age of puberty and till then, status quo be maintained with regard to 
the property brought to the notice of the Court by any person having interest in the welfare 
of the child. 
(viii)  In view of removing ‘Gender Inequality’, stepping up to amend Sec 8 of Hindu Adoptions 
and Maintenance Act, 1956 is highly appreciable and commendable. 
(ix) Section 19(b) of the Guardians and Wards Act are violative of the equality clause of the 
Constitution, in as much as the mother of th e minor is relegated to an inferior position on 
ground of sex alone since her right, as a natura l guardian of the minor, is made cognizable 
only ‘after’ the father. Hence, the Section must be struck down as unconstitutional. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee on various provisions of the Bill 
1.  The principle of gender equality is enshrined in the Constitution of India in its fundamental 
rights. The Constitution not only grants equality to women, but also empowers the State to make 
special provisions for women. 
2.  The Committee is aware that in the past few decades, women have changed traditional 
assumptions about their roles and capabilities. In tune with this, it is necessary that the laws should 
also be dynamic in order to address the concerns and rights of women. 
3.  The Committee takes note of the majority view  expressed in the memo randa received by the 
Committee, that this Bill is a major step towards the empowerment of women which is an avowed 
policy of the Government and which is also a fulfillment of the Constitutional mandate of equality to 
both the sexes. 
4.  The Committee notes that in the recent times, there has been a sustained appeal for 
empowerment of women, with special emphasis on her right to equal treatment by law. The 
Committee feels that it is inevitable that the Stat e should ensure that women are accorded an equal 
status by law. 
5.  During the deliberations on various provisions of the Bill, the Members of the Committee 
emphasized upon the need for affirmative statutory measures granting equal status to women by law in 
every sphere of life. 
6.  Therefore, the Committee is of the considered opinion that this Bill is an important 
legislation introduced for strengthening women’s rights. It feels that women have been deprived 
of equal rights especially in the area of person al law, even though, Constitutionally women are 
bestowed with equal rights. It is also of the vi ew that with the emancipation of women in all 
fields and women attaining a great deal of financial independence, it is high time that women are 
given equal rights in the public as well as p ersonal domain. The Committee strongly feels that 
personal laws cannot be excluded from the principles of gender equality and gender justice. 
Clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill 
7.  Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute clau se (b) of Section 19 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 with the following clause :- 
“(b) of a minor, other than a married female, whos e father or mother is living and is not, in the 
opinion of the court, unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or”. 
7.1.  As per Clause (b) of Section 19 of the above mentioned Act, in the case of a minor whose father 
is living and is not, in the opinion of the Court, unf it to be guardian of the person of the minor, the 
Court cannot appoint or declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is under the 
superintendence of a Court of Wards, or appoint or  declare a guatdian of the person. Thus it can be 
seen that there is no mention of the mother here. 
7.2.   The Committee is of the considered view that the mother should also be placed on an equal 
footing with the father in this regard i.e., in the right of guardianship. 

7.3.  The Committee notes that the proposed amendment will rectify this anomaly. 
7.4.  Clause 2 was adopted without suggesting any changes. 
8.  Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to substitute Section 8 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 
1956 with the following Section :- 
“8. Any female Hindu who is of sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to take a son or 
daughter in adoption: 
Provided that, if she has a husband living, she shall not adopt a son or daughter except with the 
consent of her husband unless the husband has completely and finally renounced the world or 
has ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a Court bf competent jurisdiction to be of 
unsound mind.” 
8.1.  Section 8 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 read with Section 7 of the Act 
would mean that a major, sound and married Hindu man can adopt a son or daughter with the consent 
of his wife; while a major, sound and married Hindu woman can adopt a son or daughter, only if, her 
marriage has been dissolved or her husband is dead or he has renounced the world or has ceased to be 
a Hindu or is of unsound mind. 
8.2.  The Committee is of the strong view that th e existing provision incapacitates a married 
woman from taking in adoption merely on the basis of her marital status, by rendering her right 
of adoption highly limited. She cannot exercise her right to take in ad option, even with the 
consent of her husband. 
8.3.  The Committee feels that th e proposed amendment will gi ve the married Hindu woman 
the same legal capacity as that of the man, to take in adoption. 
8.4.  Clause 3 was adopted without suggesting any changes. 
9.  Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (2) of Section 9 of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 with the following Section :- 
“(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4),  the father or the mother, if alive, shall have 
equal right to give a son or daughter in adoption: 
Provided that such right shall not be exercised by either of them save with the consent of the 
other unless one of them has completely and fina lly renounced the world or has ceased to be a 
Hindu or has been declared by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.” 
9.1.  As per sub section 2 of Section 9 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, the 
father, if alive, shall alone have the right to give in adoption and he shall exercise this right with the 
consent of the mother, unless she has renounced th e world or has ceased to be a Hindu or is of 
unsound mind. 
9.2.  The Committee notes that this Section allows the father to give in adoption with the consent of 
mother, whereas the mother cannot do so, even with the consent of father. 

9.3.  The Committee feels that the proposed ame ndment will negate the discriminatory nature 
of the existing provision, by giving the right to give in adoption to the mother, on the same terms 
as the father. 
10.  Clause 4 further seeks to omit sub-section (3) of Section 9 of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956. 
10.1.  Clause 4 was adopted without suggesting any changes. 
Long Title 
11.  The Long Title of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any changes. 
Enacting Formula 
12.  The Enacting Formula of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any changes. 
Short Title 
13.  The Short Title of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any changes. 
14.  The Committee unanimously recommends that the Bill be passed in its present form. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE  
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
XV  
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
  The Department Related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 6th May, 2010 in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan     ––      Chairperson 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shri Shanta ram Laxman Naik 
 3.  Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh 
 5.  Shri H.K. Dua 
  LOK SABHA  
 6. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
 7. Dr. Monazir Hassan 
 8. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari 
 9. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
 10. Shri S. Semmalai 
 11. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 12. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad  
 13. Shri Manish Tewari 
 14. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 15. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
  SECRETARIAT 
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director 
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
 1. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary; 
 2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary; and 
 3. Ms. Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 

2.  At the outset, Chairperson welcomed th e Members of the Committ ee and the Secretary, 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice. Then she requested the Secretary to make brief 
presentation on the Personal Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha. The 
Secretary, Legislative Department while briefing on  the salient features of the Bill, explained the 
background leading to the introduction of the Bill and deposed upon the constitutional guarantees of 
providing equality of status and equality of opportunity to all citizens, irrespective of their gender. The 
Bill proposes to amend clause(b) of Section 19 of  the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and Section 8 
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1856 so as to bring equality  therein. The Secretary 
apprised the Committee of his Ministry’s view on the Bill and stated that the genesis of this Bill is to 
ensure right to equality amongst the sexes. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on various 
issues arising out of the presentation. The Secr etary responded to some of the queries. The 
Chairperson gave direction to the Secretary to fu rnish written replies within two weeks time on the 
issues which were not responded to in the meeting. 
3.  * * * 
4.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5.  The Committee adjourned at 3.42 
P.M. 
 
***Relates to some other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
  The Department Related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 29th July, 2010 in Room No. ‘63’, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan     ––      Chairperson 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2.  Shri Shanta ram Laxman Naik 
 3.  Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 4.  Sardar Tarlochan Singh 
 5.  Shri H.K. Dua 
  LOK SABHA 
 6.  Shri Bhajan Lal 
 7.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
 8.  Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan 
 9.  Shri S. Semmalai 
 10.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 11.  Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh 
 12.  Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad  
 13.  Shri Manish Tewari 
 14.  Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 15.  Adv. P. T. Thomas (Idukki) 
  SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
2.  * * * 
3.   Thereafter, the Committee considered and ad opted its draft 40th and 41st Reports on (i) The 
Personal Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010; and (ii) Action Taken Replies of the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 23rd Report of the Committee on “Government’s 
Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground” respectively. The Committee authorised Shri 
Shantaram Laxman Naik and in his absence, Shri Tiruchi Siva to present both the reports in Rajya 
Sabha and Shri Manish Tewari and in his absence, Shri Shailendra Kumar to lay the said reports in 
Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 4
th August, 2010. 
4.  * * * 
5.  The Committee adjourned at 3.40 P.M. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - A 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
22 April, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new sect
section 8. 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. XXV of 2010 
THE PERSONAL LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956. 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:- 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. This Act may be called the Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 
2010. 
 CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT TO THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890 
2.  In section 19 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, for 
clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely :–  
 “(b) of a minor, other than a married female, whose father or 
mother is living and is not, in the opinion of the court, unfit to be 
guardian of the person of the minor, or”. 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO HIE HINDU ADOPTIONS AND MAINTENANCE ACT, 
1956 
3.  In the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act), for section 8, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 19 of 
Act 8 of 1890. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 of 1956. 

Capacity of a female Hi
in adoption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 
9
 “8. Any female Hindu who is of sound mind and is not a 
minor has the capacity to take a son or daughter in adoption : 
 Provided that, if she has a husband living, she shall not adopt 
a son or daughter except with the consent of her husband unless the 
husband has completely and finally renounced the world or has 
ceased to be a Hindu or has be en declared by a court of 10 
competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.”. 
4.  In the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, in section 9,–– 
 ( i) for sub-section ( 2); the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely :– 
 “( 2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 4), the father or 
the mother, if alive, shall have equal right to give a son or daughter 
in adoption:  
 Provided that such right shall not be exercised by either of 
them save with the consent of the other unless one of them has 
completely and finally renounced the world or has ceased to be a 
Hindu or has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to 
be of unsound mind.”; 
 (ii) sub-section ( 3) shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
  As per the census held in 2001, the female population in India constitutes about 48.26 per cent 
of the total population of the country. The empowerment of women by various legislative as well as 
other measures is an avowed policy of the Governme nt and bringing complete equality for them in all 
spheres of life is, therefore, a matter of utmost c oncern. This objective and policy of the Government 
have also been reiterated in the President’s Addre ss to the first session of both Houses of Parliament 
held on the 4th June, 2009. The National Common Minimum Programme of the then Government 
(2004-2009) also enunciated that complete legal equality for women in all spheres of life will be made 
a practical reality, especially by removing discriminatory legislation and by enacting new legislation 
that gives women, for instance, equal rights of ownership of assets like houses and land. 
2.   The Constitution of India guarantees equality  of status and equality of opportunity to all 
citizens, irrespective of the fact, whether they are me n and women. It provides that the State shall not 
deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of 
India and prohibits discrimination solely on the gr ound of sex. There is a growing demand for making 
laws free from gender bias and to provide legal equality to women in all spheres of life. It directs that 
women shall have equal rights and privileges along with men and that the State may make special 
provision for the welfare of women. 
3.   With the above objectives in view, it is pr oposed to amend certain personal laws, namely, the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, so as to bring 
in gender equality therein. Accordingly, it is proposed to make the following amendments, namely:– 
(a)  to amend clause ( b) of section 19 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 on the basis of 
the recommendation of the law Commission of India contained in paragraph 6.83 of its 
Eighty-third Report on the Guardians and Ward s Act, 1890 so as to include the mother 
along with the father as a fit person to be appointed as guardian so that courts shall not 
appoint any other person as a guardian of minor if either of the parents is fit to be the 
guardian of such minor; 
(b)   to amend section 8 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 so as to remove 
the incapacity of a married woman to take in adoption of a son or daughter merely on the 
basis of her marital status; 
(c)  to amend section 9 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 so as to provide 
that the mother with the consent of the father and the father with the consent of the 
mother, shall have equal right to give in adoption of their children. 
4.   The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
NEW DELHI;    M. VEERAPPA MOILY. 
The 16th April, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guardian not to be appoint
Court in certain cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capacity of a female 
Hindu to take in 
adoption 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Persons capable of giving 
adoptions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1989  
(8 of 1890) 
* * * * * 
19.  Nothing in this Chapter shall authorise the 
Court to appoint or declare a guardian of the property 
of a minor whose property is under the superintendence 
of a Court of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian 
of the person– 
* * * * * 
(b) of a minor whose father is living and is not, in the 
opinion of the Court, unfit to be guardian of the person 
of the minor, or 
* * * * * 
–––––––– 
E
XTRACTS FROM THE HINDU ADOPTIONS AND 
MAINTENANCE ACT, 1956 
(78 OF 1956) 
* * * * * 
8. Any female Hindu– 
(a) who is of sound mind, 
(b) who is not a minor, and 
(c) who is not married, or if married, whose marriage 
has been dissolved or whose husband is dead or has 
completely and finally renounced the world or has 
ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a court of 
competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind, has the 
capacity to take a son or daughter in adoption. 
9. ( 1)* * * * * 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) and 
sub-section (4), the father, if alive, shall alone have the 
right to give in adoption, but such right shall not be 
exercised save with the cons ent of the mother unless 
the mother has completely and finally renounced the 
world or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared 
 

by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound 
mind. 
(3) The mother may give the child in adoption if the 
father is dead or has completely and finally renounced 
the world or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been 
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of 
unsound mind. 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA  SABHA 
–––––– 
A 
BIIL 
further to amend the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the Hindu  
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956. 
–––––– 
(Shri M. Veerappa Moily, Minister of Law and Justice) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE - B 
COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGILATIVE DEPARTMENT)  
ON THE VIEWS/SUGGESTION CONTAINED IN MEMORANDA SUBMITED  
BY INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS/EXPERTS ON THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL 
Part – 1: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Memo  
No. 
Name of organization/ individual Comments/ suggestions
 Response of Govt. 
1 2 3 4 5 
1. 1. Mrs. Uma Ramanathan  & Justice R.S. 
Ramanathan, Madurai Bench of the 
Madras High Court, Madurai. 
The proposed amendments are 
absolutely necessary. 
No comments are required. 
2. 2. Justice R.K. Mahajan (retd.), 
Allahabad High Court 
Analysed the provisions of the Bill, but 
no specific comments/ suggestions 
offered. 
No comments are required. 
3. 3. Shri Amit Kumar Das, Advocate, High 
Court Calcutta, Barrackpore, Pin-
700122, West Bengal 
Suggestions with regard to section 8 of 
the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956: 
(a) Amendment : Any female 
Hindu, “who has attained 21 
years and” - On attaining 21 
years a female is mentally and 
physically above matured. 
 
 
(b) The word “Capacity” needs 
elucidation: It should not have the 
over riding effect over section 11 of 
the Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) The age difference between the 
adopted and the adopter should be 
atleast 18 years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 11 of the Hindu 
Adoption and Maintenance 
Act, 1956 lays down 
various conditions for a 
valid adoption. If the 
adoption is by a male and 
the person to be adopted is 
a female, the adoptive 
father should be at least 21 
years older than the person 
to be adopted. Similarly, if 
the adoption is by a female 
and the person to be 
adopted is a male, the 
adoptive mother should be 
atleast 21 years older than 

 
Suggestions with regard to section 8 
of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 : 
Section 19(b) is little ambiguous 
because, there is no “explanation” or 
“marginal notes” about the word 
“unfit”. 
 
the person to be adopted. 
The aforesaid general 
conditions are applicable 
in addition to the other 
conditions and also the 
stipulations as proposed 
vide the proposed new 
section 8 of the Act. Hence 
the stipulation of 21 years 
as suggested is not 
acceptable. Further, the 
suggestion regarding 
physical maturity 
contained in the 
memorandum is not a 
consideration in any law 
relating to adoption. 
The capacity of a male 
Hindu to take in adoption 
is provided in section 7 
and the capacity of a 
female Hindu to take in 
adoption is provided in 
section 8 of the Act. 
Hence, the word 
“capacity” as used in 
section 11 is to be 
understood in that context 
and no separate elucidation 
as sought in the 
memorandum is required 
to be provided. Hence, 
suggestion is not 
acceptable. 
Section 11 of the Act 
stipulates the age 
difference between the 
adopted and the adopter if 
they are of opposite 
gender. The Legislative 
Department considers that 
the position of the law is 
sound enough. 

The term “unfit” has not 
been specifically explained 
in the original Act. Further, 
the Guardian and Wards 
Act, 1890 adequately 
provides as to who is a fit 
person to be a guardian of 
the minor. Hence there is no 
need to explain the word 
“unfit”. 
4. 4. Shri Yashwantpuri Goswami, 
Advocate, Chittorgarh, Rajasthan 
Parents must be physically and 
mentally sound before taking or giving 
in adoption.  
Mental soundness of parents 
before taking in adoption 
has already been provided 
in sections 7 and 8 of the 
Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956. 
Further, the suggestion as to 
physical soundness is no 
consideration in any law 
relating to adoption and, 
hence, not acceptable. 
5. 5. Shri R.N. Prabhakar, Advocate, High 
Court & Supreme Court, New Delhi 
(a) to amend clause (b) of section 19 
of the Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 so as to include the mother, it 
should be ‘the natural mother’ 
alongwith the father as a fit person to 
be appointed as guardian so that 
courts shall not appoint any other 
person as a guardian of minor if 
either of the parents is fit to be the 
guardian of such minor. 
(b) to amend section 8 of the Hindu 
Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 
so as to remove the incapacity of a 
married woman to take in adoption of 
a son or daughter merely on the basis 
of her marital status; It must be with 
the prior consent of the nearest next 
blood relationship of the minor and 
with the previous permission of the 
court who shall be satisfied about the 
welfare of the minor. 
The term ‘father’ or 
‘mother’ implies natural 
father and natural mother 
and there is no need to 
specify the same. Moreover, 
the suggestion is not gender 
neutral in as much as no 
similar suggestion has been 
made in respect of father.  
 
The purpose of the proposed 
amendment is to remove 
gender inequality and 
hence, the incapacity of 
woman to take in adoption 
on the basis of her marital 
status is proposed to be 
removed. The suggestions 
for taking prior consent of 
nearest next blood 
relationship of the minor 
and previous permission of 

 
 
 
 
(c) to amend section 8 of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 
so as to provide that mother ‘it should 
be the natural mother’ with the consent 
of the father and vice-versa, subject to 
the prior permission of the court, shall 
have equal right to give in adoption of 
their children. 
the court are out of context 
and, hence, no action is 
called for. 
 
There is no legislative intent 
to restrict to ‘natural 
mother’ or ‘natural father’ 
as suggested. 
6. 6. Ms. Asha Bhatnagar, Navi Mumbai. Amendment is not in favour of the 
married  woman. Her remarriage may 
be in danger  position if her husband 
does not like this.  There should be 
consent of the new husband also, 
which should be added. 
There is no merit in this 
suggestion as the new 
husband comes within the 
purview of the proposed 
section 8 of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956. 
7. 7. Shri Sant Ram, Rohtak. The proposed amendment to section 8 
of Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956 is highly appreciable and 
commendable. 
No comments are required. 
8. 8. Justice R.K. Mahajan (retd.),   
Allahabad High Court. 
Analysed the provisions of the Bill, but 
no specific comments/suggestions 
offered. 
No comments are required. 
(Memorandum No.8 is only 
a copy of Memorandum 
No.2). 
9. 9. Not mentioned (a)  The comments are appreciative of 
the proposed amendments. 
(b)  In case consent is not there the 
adoption should be taken back. 
Moreover, a check on the welfare of 
the child can be kept for a 
considerable period of time, which 
may differ from cases to cases. 
 
 
(c) Section 9 should be amended and 
making adoption legalized giving 
equal rights to both father and mother 
with each others consent is perfect. 
No comments are required. 
 
Section 6 provides for 
requisites of a valid 
adoption. Consent of the 
spouse is one of the 
requirements to take in 
adoption. If consent is not 
there, the adoption will not 
be valid in law. 
The term ‘consent’ implies 
free consent without there 
being any element of 
coercion or influence. 

Consent, here should be taken care is 
free of coercion and influence. 
10. 10. Not mentioned 1. Suggestions with respect to section 
19(b) of the Guardians and Wards 
Act, 1890 –– 
(a) Only Natural mother should act as 
guardians. 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) In case of Step mother, the 
maternal grandmother should act as 
guardians till child is of 18 year age. 
 
(c) The court should appoint a 
guardian in case both the natural 
mother and maternal grand mother 
both are not living. 
 
 
 
 
Suggestions with respect to section 8 
of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956- 
 
Only the natural mother should have 
the right to give a child in adoption. 
Suggestions with respect to section 9 
of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956- 
This is very good amendment. It woul
d 
have been better if unmarried women 
above the age of 35 years should be 
 
 
This suggestion is against 
the present proposal to 
remove gender inequality 
and, therefore, not 
acceptable. Taking away 
the right of a father to be a 
natural guardian is not 
acceptable. 
As the appointment of 
guardian is done by a 
court, the suggestion needs 
no legislative provision. 
 
If natural mother is dead 
and father is living, he 
shall be the guardian under 
the law. So long as the 
father is not unfit to be a 
guardian, there is no scope 
for the court to appoint a 
guardian. 
This suggestion is against 
the present proposal to 
remove gender inequality 
and therefore, not 
acceptable. 
As minimum difference in 
age for adopting a minor of 
the opposite gender has 
already been provided in 
section 11 of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956. All the 
conditions laid down under 
the Act are required to be 

allowed to take adoption only. complied with. Hence, no 
stipulation of age is called 
for. 
11. 11. Shri Arun Gupta, Chandigarh 1.  Remove the incapacity of a 
married man to adopt based on his 
marital status. 
 
 
2. Specific language must be 
introduced in the Bill to ensure that 
the shared parenting must be first 
option that must be attempted by the 
court and in case that fails other 
remedies must be sought. 
As married man is not 
incapacitated to adopt on 
the basis of his marital 
status, the question does 
not arise. 
As the children will be 
under the care and 
protection of both father and 
mother no legal provision 
for this effect is necessary. 
12. 12. Not mentioned. Appreciated the proposed amendments 
in the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
and the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956. 
No comments. 
13. 14. Save Indian Family Foundation Recommendations on the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 
1956- 
(a) Remove the incapacity of a 
married man to adopt based 
on his marital status. Even 
single men must be able to 
adopt. 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Make section 18 of the Act gender 
neutral by replacing all references to 
“wife” and “husband” with “spouse”. 
 
 
 
As married man is not 
incapacitated to adopt on 
the basis of his marital 
status, the question does not 
arise. A single man is also 
eligible to adopt only if a 
man has a wife living, then 
he will not be able to adopt 
withdut her consent. 
 
The suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 
14. 17. Shri Arun Dhamija, Panipat (Haryana) b. Make section 18 of the Act gender 
neutral by replacing all references to 
“wife” and “husband” with “spouse”. 
Suggestion has been made to amend 
section 8( c) of the Hindu Adoptions 
The scope of the proposed 
amendment in the Bill is to 
remove the gender 
inequality only. There is no 
proposal to change any 

and Maintenance Act, 1956 by 
substituting the words “or marriage has 
been dissolved by court” with the 
“words “Whose husband can not be 
found after reasonable enquiry and 
efforts, with the leave and satisfaction 
of court about efforts and enquiry 
made by woman who has no relative o
r 
issue to look after her, can adopt a 
child with the leave of the court. And 
such child will be considered to be 
legitimate child of the woman.”. 
other policy aspect now. 
15. 18. Shri Kamal K. Vikram, President, 
Bhavya Foundation 
Recommendations on the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 
1956– 
(a) Remove the incapacity of a 
married man to adopt based on his 
marital status. Even  single men must 
be able to adopt. 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Make section 18 of the Act gender 
neutral by replacing all references to 
“wife” and “husband” with “spouse”. 
 
 
 
As married man is not 
incapacitated to adopt on 
the basis of his marital 
status, the question does not 
arise. A single man is also 
eligible to adopt only if a 
man has a wife living, then 
he will not be able to adopt 
without her consent. 
 
This-is another way of 
carrying out the 
amendment. Hence, no 
comments. 
16. 19. Shri Wasif Ali, Treasurer,  
Save Family Foundation 
The have agreed and whole heartedly  
supported the proposed Bill. 
No comments are required. 
 
  
   
   
   
 
 
 

OTHER ISSUES NOT COVERED BY THE BILL 
Part : II 
Sl. 
No. 
Memo  
No. 
Name of organization/ individual Comments/ suggestions
 Response of Govt. 
1 2 3 4 5 
1. 1. Mrs. Uma Ramanathan  
and Justice R.S. Ramanathan,  
Madurai Bench of the Madras  High 
Court, Madurai. 
1. Need for a unified code on the law 
of adoptions and guardianship. 
The suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 
2.   2. The Guardian and Wards Act 
defines the guardian as one who has 
custody of the minor. There is a need 
for clarification on this issue also. 
Further, this Act does not speak about 
adoption and so the area of private 
adoption is now guided only by the 
principles laid down by the Apex 
Court. Adoption procedures and 
mode has to be detained. 
3. In the light of Order XXXII Rule 
15 C.P.C. ability to protect one’s 
interest and the nature of the 
guardianship has to be gone into. 
Also the need to codify the law with 
respect to guardianship issues when a 
parent is not domiciled in India is 
also to be considered as there are 
large scale ramifications today due to 
the international work space available 
to all. 
 
As the subject matter 
“adoption” and “adoption 
procedures” are the 
administrative concern of 
the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development, 
Legislative Department 
has no comments to make 
in this regard. 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
3. 3. Shri Amit Kumar Das, Advocate, High 
Court Calcutta, Barrackpore, Pin-
700122, West Bengal 
Suggestions with regard to section 9 
of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956: 
(a) Background of the person giving 
adoption needs to be checked 
thoroughly. Recently it was reported 
in Media about ‘dubious people 
giving adoption to especially foreign 
Suggestions (a) to (e) 
being outside the scope of 
the present proposal, 
hence, no comments are 
called for. 
 
 
At present adoption takes 
place by acts of parties 

clients. 
(b) Every adoption whether it is a boy 
or girl must have Court Sanction at 
least of Civil Judge (Junior) rank. 
(c) Background and credentials of the 
adoption whether Indian or Foreigner 
needs to be checked and cross-
checked. 
 
 
(d) Welfare of the child in these cases 
are of Paramount importance even if 
it is given by the father or mother. 
(e) Regular feedback atleast in every 6 
months has to be submitted to the 
Local P.S. in whose jurisdiction the 
child is staying is to be submitted and 
there should  be a provision to 
physically checking his/her welfare by 
social Organisations or NGO until he/ 
she reaches 15 years of age. 
inter vivo. Mediation of the 
court does not appear to be 
necessary. 
Sufficient safeguards have 
been provided vide 
sections 6 to 11 of the 
Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956. As 
regards foreigners, 
adoptions by them are not 
covered within the scheme 
of the said Act. 
Section 17 of the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 and section 13 of the 
Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship Act, 1956 
specifically provide for 
welfare of minor to be 
paramount consideration in 
appointing guardian of 
minor. As regards 
adoption, the father and 
mother are presumed to act 
for welfare of the minor. In 
the absence of a minor’s 
father and mother, sub-
section 5 of section 9 
provides that before 
granting  permission to 
guardian, the court shall  
be satisfied that adoption 
will be for the welfare of 
the child. 
The suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 
4. 5. Shri R.N. Prabhakar, Advocate, High 
Court & Supreme Court, New Delhi 
There must be a clause/ provision for 
the child in the interest of Justice that 
he/ she must have a right to ratify and 
The suggestion has no 
bearing on the proposed Bill 
as the intention of the 

confirm what has been done in his/ her 
interest and accept and/or reject on 
attaining the age of puberty and till 
then status quo be maintained with 
regard to the property brought to the 
notice of the court by any person 
having interest in the welfare of the 
child. 
proposal is to remove 
gender inequality only. 
5. 13. Prof. H.C. Dholakia, Former Member, 
Law Commission of India 
Suggested to enact a model law on 
marriage, divorce, succession, 
adoption and other secular matters as 
consensus on Uniform Civil Code 
seems to be almost impossible. 
The suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 
6. 14. Save Indian Family Foundation Recommendation on Guardians and 
Wards Act, 1890- 
1. Child custody issues to be disposed 
off within 6 months of the date of 
application, or at least visitation be 
granted to the noncustodian parent 
(fathers generally) in two hearings or 
three months whichever is earlier 
from the date of application and the 
granted visitation be of such nature so 
that it can build a sustainable parent - 
child relationship between the child 
(ren) and the non-custodian parent. 
2. Primary importance must be given 
to child’s custody. The Judicial 
process must decide and dispose the 
child custody cases before allowing 
any other relief to any party. 
3. Equal consideration must be given 
to the presence and involvement of a 
father in a child’s upbringing not only 
as a name but also as the natural 
guardian. Fathers must be given a fair 
chance to win custody cases without 
any prejudice and share custody must 
be norm and not an exception. The 
courts must stop treating fathers as 
sperm donors and sperms and ATM 
machine for the child’s expenses. 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
Father is a natural 
Guardian within the 
scheme of the Act. 
However, other 
suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 

Emotional relations with fathers must 
be given equal importance to 
financial relation with fathers. 
4. Judicial process must enhance the 
role of child psychologists and panel 
of experts to clarify issues such as 
custody, finance, education and 
children’s upbringing before 
proceeding with the divorce/ 
separation. 
5. Child interviews must be scarcely 
conducted and must be limited to 
only very complex cases that too only 
after the child has been allowed to 
spend nearly equal and quality time 
with both the parents and such 
interviews be limited to adolescents 
only. The interview must be viewed 
only as a guiding evidence and not a 
primary one. 
6. Children below the age of even 
years should not be exposed to choice 
making between the parents as the 
process itself is cruelty to the child. 
Making a child choose between 
parents is inhuman against the rights 
of the child. 
7. The “Parental Alienation” shall be 
considered as a serious crime and 
parents indulging in parental 
alienation shall not be given primary 
custody in any case as it brings in a 
lot mental distress to the child and 
alienated parent. That “Parental 
alienation” occurs when one parent 
disallows the ot her parent from 
communicating with their children. 
The dominant parent then 
brainwashes the child against the 
other parent, assuring the child that it 
is all right to ignore the other parent. 
8. Orientation programs for judges of 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 

family courts to be conducted by 
psychologists to sensitize them to 
child related issues. 
9. The courts should have a liberal 
view on men accused of allegations 
under section 498a of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860) while deciding their 
child custody cases. An allegedly bad 
husband need not be a bad father and 
as the father is the natural guardian of 
the child the misfortune of the child’s 
welfare. Moreover the misuse of 498a 
by women being a known fact coupled 
with its low conviction rate, the mere 
presence of the allegations under 
section 498a of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) should not act as .a 
deterrent towards passing custody 
(interim or full)/ visitation orders in 
favor of the fathers if the situation so 
warrants. 
The suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 
7. 15 Abhimanyu Veer Singh, Coordinator 
and Spokesperson for Gender 
Human Rights Society (Reg.) 
1. The suggestion with respect to 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
relates to inheritance of property by 
the child or the woman and other 
related issues. 
2. With regard to section of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 
1956, it is suggested that – 
(a) right of adoption should be 
allowed to both spouses even if they 
are living separately for significant 
time; 
 
(b) Irrespective of the other partner’s 
objection, after 7 years of separation 
a husband and wife should be 
allowed to adopt. 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
The law does not prohibit 
adoption on the ground of 
separation. It is for the 
spouses to arrive at an 
agreement in case they 
seek to adopt a child. No 
doubt, the provisions of the 
Guardians and Wards Act,. 
1890 would, be available 
to get himself or herself 
appointed as guardian of 
the person or property of 
the child concerned. 
The law does not prohibit 
adoption on the ground of 

 
3. with regard to section 9 of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, 
it is suggested that the change is 
unnecessary. 
separation. It is for the 
spouses to arrive at an 
agreement in case they 
seek to adopt a child. No 
doubt, the provisions of the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 would be available to 
get himself or herself 
appointed as guardian of 
the person or property of 
the child concerned.  
Comments are not required.
8. 16. Public Interest Legal Support and 
Research Centre 
The suggestions have been 
summarized which include – 
1. with regard to Personal Laws 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 – 
(a)  Amendment of Statement of 
Objects and Reasons; 
(b)  amendment of long title; 
(c) amendment of commencements 
clause. 
2. with regard to Guardians and 
Wards Act, 1890 – 
(a) amendments to section 4 (2); 
(b) amendment to section 7; 
(c) amendment to section 17; 
(d) amendment to section 19(2) as 
under: 
(i) insertion of clau se (al) to provide 
as under:- 
“(al) of a minor who is a married 
male and whose wife is not, in the 
opinion of the courts, unfit to be 
guardian of his person and property;”; 
(ii) insertion of sub-section (2) to 
provide as under : 
“(2) Notwithstanding anything 
As regards insertion of 
Clause (al) as proposed is 
concerned, the same is 
against the law which 
prohibits child marriages. 
Therefore, such insertion is 
not warranted. 
The suggestion is outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 
 
 
The suggestion is outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 
The suggestion is outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 

contained in this Act, in appointing a 
guardian under this Act, the Court 
shall not discriminate on grounds of 
sex or gender; and shall keep in mind 
the best interest of the child.”. 
3. with regard to Guardians and 
Wards Act, 1890, it is suggested to 
amend section 5 to insert sub-section 
(3). 
4. It is also suggested to amend section 
6(a) and 6( c) of the Hindu Minority 
and Guardianship Act, 1956. 
9. 18. Shri Kamal K. Vikram, President, 
Bhavya Foundation 
Recommendation on Guardians and 
Wards Act, 1890– 
1. Child custody issues to be disposed 
off within 6 months of the date of 
application, or at least visitation be 
granted to the noncustodian parent 
(fathers generally) in two hearings or 
three months whichever is earlier 
from the date of application and the 
granted visitation be of such nature so 
that it can build a sustainable parent - 
child relationship between the child 
(ren) and the non-custodian parent. 
2. Primary importance must be given 
to child’s custody. The Judicial 
process must decide and dispose the 
child custody cases before allowing 
any other relief to any party. 
3. Equal consideration must be given 
to the presence and involvement of a 
father in a child’s upbringing not only 
as a name but also as the natural 
guardian. Fathers must be given a fair 
chance to win custody cases without 
any prejuidce and share custody must 
be norm and not an exception. The 
courts must stop treating fathers as 
sperm donors and sperms and ATM 
machine for the child's expenses. 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
Father is a natural 
Guardian within the 
scheme of the Act. 
However, other 
suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments. 
 

Emotional relations with fathers must 
be given equal importance to 
financial relation with fathers. 
4. Judicial process must enhance the 
role of child psychologists and panel 
of experts to clarify issues such as 
custody, finance, education and 
children’s upbringing before 
proceeding with the divorce/ 
separation. 
5. Child interviews must be scarcely 
conducted and must be limited to 
only very complex cases that too only 
after the child has been allowed to 
spend nearly equal and quality time 
with both the parents and such 
interviews be limited to adolescents 
only. The interview must be viewed 
only as a guiding evidence and not a 
primary one. 
6. Children below the age of seven 
years  should not be exposed to 
choice making  between the parents 
as the process itself cruelty to the 
child. Making a child choose between 
parents is inhuman against the rights 
of the child. 
7. The “Parental Alienation” shall be 
considered as a serious crime and 
parents indulging in parental 
alienation shall not be given primary 
custody in any case as it brings in a 
lot mental distress to the child and 
alienated parent. That “Parental 
alienation” occurs when one parent 
disallows the other, parent from 
communicating with their children. 
The dominant parent then 
brainwashes the child against the 
other parent, assuring the child that it 
is all right to ignore the other parent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required.  
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 

8. Orientation programs for judges of 
family courts to be conducted by 
psychologists to sensitize them to 
child related issues. 
9. The courts should have a liberal 
view on men accused of allegations 
under section 498a of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860) while deciding their 
child custody cases. An allegedly bad 
husband need not be a bad father and 
as the father is the natural guardian of 
the child the misfortune of the child’s 
welfare. Moreover the misuse of 498a 
by women being a known fact coupled 
with its low conviction rate, the mere 
presence of the allegations under 
section 498a of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) should not act as a 
deterrent towards passing custody 
(interim or full)/ visitation orders in 
favor of the fathers if the situation so 
warrants. 
comments are required. 
 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
10. 20. Shri Sandeep Bhartia, President, 
Gender Human Rights Society 
(Regd.) 
1. The suggestion with respect to 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
relates to inheritance of property by 
the child or the woman and other 
related issues. 
2. With regard to section 8 of the 
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956, it is suggested that- 
(a) right of adoption should be 
allowed to both spouses even if they 
are living separately for significant 
time;  
(b) Irrespective of the other partner’s 
objection, after 7 years of separation 
a husband and wife should be 
allowed to adopt.  
 
3. with regard to section 9 of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, 
it is suggested that the change is 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
The law does not prohibit 
adoption on the ground of 
separation. It is for the 
spouses to arrive at an 
agreement in case they 
seek to adopt a child. No 
doubt, the provisions of the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 would be available to 
get himself or herself 
appointed as guardian of 
the person or property of 
the child concerned. 
Comments are not required.

unnecessary. 
11. 21. CRISP (Children’s Rights Initiative 
for Shared Parenting), Gurgaon 
1. With regard to the Guardians and 
Wards Act, 1890, it is suggested that 
the child must have equal rights on 
the ancestral proper ty and income of 
the mother if she is appointed the 
primary guardian. The child should 
be given equal access time and 
finance wise to both the parents, 
irrespective of who is the guardian. 
2. With regard to section 8 of the 
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956, it has been suggested to 
allow husbands to adopt even while 
separated. 
3. With regard to section 9 of the 
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956, it is suggested that the laws 
relating to Dowry harassment under 
section 498A, Protection of Women 
against Domestic Violence Act, 2005, 
section 125 of Criminal Procedure 
Code, 1973 and other maintenance 
laws should be made gender neutral 
first. 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
 
 
 
 
The law does not prohibit 
adoption on the ground of 
separation. It is for the 
spouses to arrive at an 
agreement in case they 
seek to adopt a child. No 
doubt, the provisions of the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 would be available to 
get himself or herself 
appointed as guardian of 
the person or property of 
the child concerned. 
The suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 
12. 22. Maharashtra Judicial Academy & 
Indian Mediation Centre & Training 
Institute, Uttan Bhayandar (W), 
Thane Distt. 
1.  Amendment is proposed in section 
6(a) of the Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship Act, 1956 on line with 
the proposed amendment in section 
19(b). 
2. section 11 (i) (ii) stipulates a 
prohibition on adoption of a child of 
the same gender, where the adoptive 
parents already have a child living at 
the time of adoption. Whereas section 
41(6)(b) of Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 
permits the adoption of the child of the 
The suggestions are 
outside the purview and 
scope of the present 
amendments. Hence, no 
comments are required. 
 
The suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of 
the present amendments. 
Hence, no comments are 
required. 

same sex, irrespective of the number of 
living biological sons or daughters. 
      
   