REPORT NO. 
62
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY SECOND REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2013)  
Status of Women in Government Employment and 
in Public Sector Undertakings with regard to the 
Service Conditions, Protection against exploitation, 
Incentives and other related Issues


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

C.S.(P&L)-123
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY SECOND REPORT
Status of Women in Government Employment and
in Public Sector Undertakings with regard to the
Service Conditions, Protection against exploitation,
Incentives and other related Issues
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i )-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (v)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—12
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ........................................................... 13—18
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 19 —24
7. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 25—29

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2009)
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
9. Shri H.K. Dua
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Bhajan Lal
12. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
13. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
14. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
15. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
16. Dr. Monazir Hassan
17. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
18. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
19. Shri Lalu Prasad
20. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
21. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
22. Shri Devji M. Patel
23. Shri Harin Pathak
24. Shri S. Semmalai
25. Shri Shailendra Kumar
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad
28. Shri Manish Tewari
29. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
30. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
31. Vacant

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2010)
*1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shri Amar Singh
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri O.T. Lepcha
^8. Vacant
@9. Vacant
&10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
13. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Dr. Monazir Hassan
16. Shri Shailendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
18. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
19. Ms. Meenakshi Natarajan
20. Shri Devji M. Patel
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Lalu Prasad
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
25. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
26. Shri Manish Tewari
27. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
28. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
#29. Vacant
$30. Vacant
%31. Vacant
* Nominated as Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 26 th July, 2011.
^ Vacancy caused due to passing away of Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy w.e.f. 7 th December , 2010.
@ V acancy caused due to induction of Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan in the Council of Minister w.e.f. 12 th July, 2011.
& Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik w.e.f. 28 th July, 2011.
# Vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Arjun Munda from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 26 th February, 2011.
$ Vacancy caused due to passing away of Shri Bhajan Lal w.e.f. 3 rd June, 2011.
% Vacancy existing since the constitution of the Committee on 31 st August, 2010.

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2011)
*1. Shri Shantaram Naik  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Amar Singh
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
@9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
#10. Ms. Anu Aga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Arun Yadav
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri S. Semmalai
15. Shri Anirudhan Sampath
16. Shri Lalu Prasad
17. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
18. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
19. Shrimati Deepa Dashmunsi
20. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
21. Shri P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
22. Shri Kirti Jha Azad
23. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
24. Shri Pinaki Misra
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
27. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
28. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
29. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
* Nominated to be Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 4 th May, 2012 vice resignation by Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi.
@ Nominated to be the Member of Committee w.e.f. 4 th May, 2012.
# Nominated to be the Member of Committee w.e.f. 21 st May, 2012.

(iv)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2012)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
5. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani
@#10. Ms. Anu Aga
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
13. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
16. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
17. Shri Pinaki Misra
18. Shri S. Semmalai
19. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
20. Shrimati Meena Singh
21. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
22. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
23. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
24. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
*25. Shri T. R. Baalu
*26. Shri S. S. Ramasubbu
*27. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
*28. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
*29. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chaterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
@ Vacancy caused due to induction of  Shri Jesudas Seelam in the Council of Minister w.e.f. 19 th June, 2013.
# Nominated to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 27 th August, 2013.
* Nominated to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1 st May, 2013 .

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee to submit this Report
on its behalf, do hereby present its Sixty-second Report on the Status of Women in Government
Employment and in Public Sector Undertakings with regard to the Service Conditions, Protection
against exploitation, Incentives and other related Issues. The Committee identified the subject in 2010
for examination and report.
2. The Committee, during its study visits to Mumbai, Bangaluru and Chennai; Kolkata, Shillong,
Guwahati and Imphal; Goa and Kochi; and Bhubaneswar and Port Blair from 12
th to 19 th June, 2010;
3rd to 9 th June, 2012; and 2 nd to 5 th January, 2013 and 15 th to 19 th February, 2013 respectively, held
discussions with Public Sector Undertakings and Banks on the subject. The Secretary, Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions made a presentation on the subject before the Committee
on 19
th August, 2013.
3. While considering the subject, the Committee also took note of the following documents/
information which was placed before it:–
(i) Background note on the subject submitted by Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training);
(ii) Presentation made by the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
on the subject before the Committee on 19 th August, 2013.
(iii) W ritten replies furnished by the PSUs and Banks to the questionnaire on the subject; and
(iv) Other research material/documents related to the subject.
4. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 29 th August, 2013.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendation of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
29th August, 2013 Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee
Bhadrapada  5, 1935 ( Saka) on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

ACRONYMS
CCL – Child Care Leave
CPC – Central Pay Commission
CPGRAMS – Centralized Public Grievance Redress And Monitoring System
DoPT – Department of Personnel and Training
DPCs – Departmental Promotion Committees
Estt. – Establishment
GOI – Government of India
HRA – House Rent Allowance
IPA – Indian Ports Association
OM – Office Memorandum
RDOs – Rural Development Officers
SBT – State Bank of Travancore
SCs – Scheduled Castes
SCI – Shipping Corporation of India
SCPC – Sixth Central Pay Commission
SSC – Staff Selection Commission
STs – Scheduled Tribes
WIPS – W omen in Public Sector
(vi)

1
REPORT
With the change in the outlook of the society and the increasing importance given to education
of girls and women, by the society and the Government, the presence of women in the workforce
in India has considerably increased. The increasing strength of the women employees has contributed
to a positive change in the work environment and has gradually helped in the change of traditional
deep-seated prejudices/stereo types. The technological changes adopted in the work environment has
also increased the participation of women workforce enabling them to contribute to the building of the
nation. The role of Indian women in the job sector is somewhat unique in that while they perform
their professional responsibilities, they equally take care of their domestic roles also. The Government,
as an ideal employer, has made several provisions to enable women employees to work in a very
congenial atmosphere.
1.1 Article 16 of the Constitution provides right to equality of opportunity and employment in
public offices to all citizens. Article 16(1) of the Constitution prohibits discrimination in matters relating
to employment or appointment to an office under the State. Article 16(2) provides that no citizen shall,
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them be
ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State. In view
of these constitutional provisions women have equal opportunities to get selected for any Office under
the State provided they fulfill the basic requirements of the job as laid down in the relevant
Recruitment Rules which apply to both sexes equally and also relate only to the expertise necessary
for performing the specific functions of the job. Government instructions exist that appointing
authorities should ensure that there is no discrimination against women candidates on grounds of sex
in the matter of selection made by the various Bodies/Boards concerned with selection of candidates.
1.2 It is in this background that the Committee identified the subject “Status of Women in
Government Employment and in Public Sector Undertakings with regard to the Service Conditions,
Protection against exploitation, Incentives and other related Issues” in 2010 for examination and report.
1.3 In the background note furnished by the Department of Personnel and Training on the subject,
it has been stated that there are special provisions for the benefit of women employees. These range
across maternity benefits, child care leave, child adoption leave, special allowance to women with
disability, provision of crèche facility, posting of husband and wife at the same station, special priority
for working women in allotment of residential accommodation, protection of women at the workplace,
age relaxation for appointment, special dispensation for women officers of North East Cadre, and
change of Cadre in the case of marriage of All India Service Officers.
1.4 In order to have a deeper and effective perspective on the subject, the Committee undertook
study visits also. The Committee, during its study visits to Mumbai, Bangaluru and Chennai; Kolkata,
Shillong, Guwahati and Imphal; Goa and Kochi; and Bhubaneswar and Port Blair from 12 th to
19th June, 2010; 3 rd to 9 th June, 2012; 2 nd to 5 th January, 2013 and 15 th to 19 th February, 2013
respectively, held discussions with Public Sector Undertakings, Trusts and Banks on the subject, the
names of which are given in Annexure-I.
1.5 A standard questionnaire on the subject was prepared by the Secretariat and it was circulated
to the organizations with whom the Committee interacted with, and the organisations henceforth
furnished replies to the questionnaire.
1.6 The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions made a presentation on
the subject before the Committee on 19 th August, 2013.

2
1.7 The major issues considered by the Committee, the response received from the organisations
thereon, the replies furnished by DoPT and the recommendations/observations of the Committee in this
regard, are as follows:–
Ratio of Women to Men Employees
2.0 In the background note furnished by the Department of Personnel and Training, it has been
stated that according to the Sixth Central Pay Commission (SCPC), as per the Census of Central
Government Employees, 2001, women constitute 7.53% of the total Central Government Employees.
As on 31.03.2004, this percentage was 9.68. The Department of Personnel and Training had initiated
100 days Action Plan for increasing recruitment of women and collected data. As per the Census
of Central Government Employees, 2012, released by the Directorate General of Employment
and Training, the percentage of women employees out of the total Government employees was
10.04 per cent as on 31.03.2009.
2.1 The Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, while making a presentation on the subject
before the Committee, stated that all Government Departments have been instructed to ensure that all
advertisements or circulars for recruitment should invariably mention prominently that “Government strives
to have a work force which reflects gender balance and women candidates are encouraged to apply”.
2.2 As per the written reply furnished by DoPT, the steps/measures taken as part of the 100 days
Action Plan on the issue of ‘Concerted effort to increase representation of women in Central
Government jobs’, are as under:–
(a) Instructions were issued to all Ministries/Departments on 03.07.2009 that all recruitment
advertisements will contain a reference that Government strives to have a workforce
which reflects gender balance and women candidates are encouraged to apply. This is
being done by UPSC and SSC.
(b) Instructions issued to all Ministries/Departments on 08.07.2009 that all recruitment Boards
for more than ten vacancies will mandatorily have a woman Member.
(c) Instructions issued on 15.07.2009 that women candidates have been exempted from
payment of fee in examinations conducted by UPSC/SSC.
(d) Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Ministry of Urban Development were
requested on 15.07.2009 to make provision of transport facilities to working women for
major work places. Ministry of Urban Development informed on 07.10.2009 about the
various transport facilities provided by DTC and Delhi Metro to women.
(e) On 18.06.2009, Ministry of Women and Child Development was requested to prepare
schemes for providing free coaching to women candidates for civil services and other
such examinations.
(f) To accelerate/enhance provision of crèche facilities near work places, the matter was
taken up Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Labour and Employment
and Department of Public Enterprises. No feedback received from M/o WCD. Ministry
of Labour has instructed its offices that such facilities are already required to be provided
under provisions of various Acts, viz., Factories Act, Plantation Workers Act etc. Department
of Public Enterprises issued instructions on 17.08.2009 that the setting up of crèche
facilities in PSUs will be mandatory.
(g) Department of Personnel and Training had uploaded in its web site information about the
existing facilities available to women employees for creation of awareness amongst
general public.

3
(h) Instructions on posting of women at the place of employment of husband were reviewed
and modified instructions issued on 30.09.2009 making it mandatory when both spouses
are in the same service or Department and posts are available.
2.3 The Committee could infer from the presentation made by the Secretary, DoPT on the subject
that, though Railways is the biggest employer in the country, the percentage of women employees in
Railways is only 6.43%. The percentage of civilian women work force in the Defence is about
10.79%.
2.4 While interacting with the various Organisations, the Committee noticed the fact that in certain
sectors of employment such as Oil, Coal, Ports, etc. the strength of women work force is very less
compared to that in other sectors such as Banking. The Committee recognizes the dissuading factors
such as unfriendly working conditions associated with jobs in such sectors.
2.5 The Committee appreciates that in Kolkata Port Trust, guidelines were framed in 1998 for
ensuring proper working conditions for women employees (Annexure-II). The Committee endorses
such initiatives and desires that other organisations may also adopt such best practices in order
to instill confidence in the minds of incumbent and prospective women employees.
2.6 The Department of Personnel and Training, in its written reply furnished to the Committee in
August, 2013 has stated that instructions were issued by DoPT to all Ministries/ Departments on
08.07.2009 that all recruitment Boards for more than ten vacancies will mandatorily have a woman
Member.
2.7 The Committee applauds the policy followed in Oil India Ltd. that, in order to ensure
fairness in selection of women, a lady officer is invariably associated in the Selection Committee
wherever a women candidate is involved. However , the Committee is skeptical as to whether
the above mentioned instruction is adhered to religiously by all organisations/Departments. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the DoPT should ensure that the organisations/
Departments invariably follow this instruction.
2.8 The Committee is happy to note that in Shipping Corporation of India, with an aim to
encourage women candidates to join merchant navy, the SCI management has taken a step
forward by introducing scholarship programmes for women candidates and also giving age
relaxation.
2.9 The Committee took note of the fact that in one of the organisations (Union Bank of India),
eight branches were functioning, completely manned by ladies staff. Field functionaries had been
advised to form a consultative group comprising 4 to 5 women representing entrepreneurs, social
workers, prominent local women at Branch level as well as at Regional Office level for a better and
more effective interaction. The Committee was told that these groups were interacting with the
Branch/ Regional Office and were serving as a link between the Branch and the women in the area.
Field functionaries especially Branch Managers and RDOs had been advised to educate the villagers/
women folk during their study visits.
2.10 The Committee recognises the reality that women are under  represented in some
sectors of employment. It hopes that with the evolving times, more women would offer their
candidature in such sectors also, that are less explored and comparatively new avenues for
women. The Committee also hopes that the organisations would accordingly respond positively
to the increasing female presence in the work force.
2.11 The Committee underlines the need for further improvement in the facilities extended
to women employees and desires that the organisations should take pro-active steps to ensure
that safe and congenial working conditions and amenities are made available to the female

4
employees. The Committee, while appreciating the steps taken by the organisations to motivate
the women work force, desires that those organisations which are lagging behind in this
respect, should step up their efforts in this direction.
Separate working conditions for women
3.0 The Committee could gather from the background material furnished by DoPT (Report of
Sixth CPC) that previous Pay Commissions made recommendations for providing special facilities for
women in terms of introduction of flexi-time and flexi-place on trial basis, options for working half
time during the period that children are young etc. One of the demands of the staff side, made to
the Sixth Pay Commission, was that earlier recommendations of flexi-time, flexi-place as well as half
day working should be implemented and that the guidelines for posting of husband and wife at the
same station be made mandatory.
3.1 The Committee could also understand from the background note that, a number of countries
have provided facilities to working women by either providing for longer maternity leave or day-care
centres, staggered working hours to start and finish work early or late, restricting overtime and late
night working, part time leave of up to two hours a day till the child is 3 years old, child-care leave
which can be divided into periods for both parents to take care of the child alternately, spouse
maternity leave, etc.
3.2 The Committee, during its discussions with the various organisations, could infer that one of
the major reasons for attrition among female employees is, responsibilities within the household.  The
Committee believes that adopting a policy of flexible timings for women/ young mothers helps
in ensuring better balance between work and home. The Committee is of the view that if this
factor responsible for attrition is adequately addressed, it would help in retaining experienced
and skilled staff, preserving commitment and loyalty, minimizing the need for training and
capacity building of fresh recruits thereby, ensuring improved productivity and profitability.
3.3 The Committee was apprised by DoPT that the recommendation of the Sixth Central Pay
Commission regarding staggered working hours for women employees was not accepted by the
Government. The Committee could understand during its interactions with the organisations that
although separate working conditions do not exist for women on record, most of the organisations
do accommodate requests for grace time to attend to infants, kids etc., on case-to-case basis; while
some organisations have the policy of giving extra time of 15-30 minutes to young mothers to attend
to their infants.
3.4 Taking into account the above mentioned facts, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry may further explore the possibility of framing a policy on “staggered working hours”
or “work at home” for women employees. The Committee feels that collective bargaining is
vital and that the role of labour unions/Employees’ Associations in this regard is crucial.
3.5 The Committee recognizes the pertinent fact that less representation of women in decision
making positions has a major impact on their ability to demand and transform their work environments.
The Committee, therefore, underlines the need for women negotiators in the unions, while
negotiating bipartite, industrial agreements etc.
Promotional avenues/stagnation
4.0 The Committee noted that the percentage of women in the higher ranks in various organisations
is comparatively less and that stagnation was noteworthy in subordinate grades, especially in Banks.
4.1 The Committee could gather that the main factors responsible for this are (i) many women
do not opt for promotion in order to avoid transfers, (ii) some are not willing to take up additional

5
responsibilities which come along with promotion, (iii) unavoidable family commitments, (iv) non-
fulfillment of the required eligibility criteria, (v) unsatisfactory postings in terms of safety, quality of
life etc.
4.2 The Committee takes cognisance of the steps taken by some organisations to encourage
women employees to participate in the promotion exercise such as, as far as possible, on promotion
from clerical to officers’ cadre and in different scales in officers’ cadre, the female employee is posted
in the same Central/Region (Dena Bank). In UCO Bank, women officers are exempted from inter-zone
transfer on promotion up to a certain level. The Committee appreciates such steps and impresses
upon the Ministry to explore the possibility of evolving such policy/guidelines in other
organisations as well, in order to decrease stagnation in the field of promotions for women
employees.
Maternity benefits, Child Care Leave
5.0 The Committee noted that many organisations grant maternity leave of 180 days, whereas,
some grant only 90 days, 84 days or 135 days. The Committee could deduce that this discrepancy
is due to the fact that while some organisations are guided by the DoPT guidelines, some are governed
by industry level settlements, bi-partite agreements etc.
5.1 The Committee impress upon the Ministry to ensure that grant of maternity leave of
180 days be uniform in all the Government Departments and the organisations /bodies under
its control.
5.2 The Secretary, DoPT apprised the Committee during his presentation on the subject, that the
benefit of CCL has been extended to all civilian female industrial employees of Government of India
w.e.f. 1
st September, 2008.
5.3 However, the Committee is not happy to note that majority of the organisations do grant CCL,
but without pay. In one of the organisations (Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.), CCL was granted to female
executives only and that the extension of the same facility for non-executive women employees was
under consideration when the Committee met the representatives of MCL. During its interactions with
one of the organisations (Cochin Shipyard Ltd.), the Committee was informed that CCL was not
granted since there was no specific direction from Department of Public Enterprises. The Committee
was also told that the policy was discontinued in Mormugao Port Trust as per the directives of IPA.
5.4 The Committee could surmise that many women employees hesitate to avail CCL, if it is
granted, without pay. Keeping in view the noble objective behind the policy of granting CCL with
pay, the Committee desires that the Ministry should take account of the inconsistency in the
policy followed by various organisations and that the benefit of the decision to grant CCL of
730 days with pay, should be granted, to the women employees in all sectors, across the board.
Attrition of women employees
6.0 The Committee could infer from the replies furnished by the organisations that the main
reasons for attrition of women employees are domestic compulsions, better job prospects, pursuing
higher education, quitting jobs after marriage etc.
6.1 The Committee took note of the steps taken by some organisations, that, in the event
of a woman employee submitting her application for resignation, an informal exit interaction
is facilitated to ascertain the reason for the resignation and to counsel the employee, before
such application is processed. The Committee suggests that such an approach need to be
followed by each organisation. The Government should issue relevant instructions in this
regard.

6
Awareness among women employees
7.0 The Committee could gather from the written reply furnished by DoPT that the Department
of Personnel and Training had uploaded in its web site information about the existing facilities available
to women employees for creation of awareness amongst general public and that specific instructions
will also be issued to all Ministries/Departments.
7.1 The Committee emphasizes the need to give more publicity to the facilities available to
women employees so that more women are encouraged to prefer/join public employment.
7.2 The Committee is pleased to note that the organisations have taken various steps to make the
women employees aware of their rights and of the guidelines, policies, facilities etc. available for the
benefit of women employees. The Committee was apprised that such information is circulated widely,
displayed on Notice boards and hoisted on the website and that regular updation is also done. The
Committee could also gather that discussions, seminars, lectures, awareness programmes etc. are
organised periodically.
7.3 The Committee desires that adequate awareness generation programmes about minimum
wages, rights, welfare schemes, opportunities available under various schemes/initiatives of
Government agencies etc. should be conducted by the organisations.  The Committee is of the
considered view that women employees may also be given legal aid, if necessary.
7.4 The Committee could gather that in many organisations, Women’s Cell/Association/Club, Mahila
Samiti are functioning. However, the Women in Public Sector (WIPS) forum is functioning only in
a few organisations. The Committee feels that the WIPS Cell should be constituted in all
organisations and that the organisations should nominate their employees for State/Regional
level WIPS seminars, meetings etc.
7.5 The Committee took note of the initiatives taken by some organisations to conduct projects for
the benefit of women employees, and also involving helpless widows, destitute women etc. from the
nearby areas, through Self Help Groups under the financial assistance from the organisations. The
Committee considers that such programmes are an integral part of the Corporate Social
Responsibility of the organisations, and applauds such efforts made by the organisations to
fulfill such responsibility.
7.6 The Committee stresses upon the need for adequate avenues to be made available for
the women employees, in order to facilitate experience sharing, confidence building etc. The
Committee is happy to note that in an organisation (State Bank of India), an Aspiration and
Social Networking site for Bank employees has been set up wherein they can freely exchange
views. The Committee also appreciates the initiatives taken by some organisations for facilitating
free exchange of views of employees via intranet and wishes that other organisations may also
follow suit.
Grievances redressal machinery
8.0 The Committee could surmise from the discussions held with the representatives of various
organisations that the nature of grievances raised by women employees were broadly regarding
transfer, promotion, accommodation, inadequate infrastructure, harsh treatment by superiors, inadequate
medical facilities etc.
8.1 The Committee could also derive that in many organisations, complaints raised by women are
given priority. In majority of the organisations, there was a well laid out procedure for grievances
redressal which was time bound and which would escalate to the higher authority, if it is not redressed
within the stipulated time limit. The Committee appreciates such initiatives and is of the opinion
that time is of the essence of the grievances redressal mechanism.

7
8.2 The Committee could understand that in some organisations, complaints could be lodged
online; in one of the organisations, they had earmarked a weekly grievance day; in some, grievances
could be given in a sealed envelope to the competent Authority, Employee satisfaction enhancement cell
etc.; some organisations have an open door policy wherein all employees are given equal opportunity
to discuss issues that are pertaining to their work conditions, with the management.
8.3 The Committee could take note that in one organisation (Life Insurance Corporation), in
accordance with the National Commission for W omen Act, 1990 a Women’s Cell has been set up in
the Central Office to attend to the grievances of female employees and a Lady Officer has been
appointed as the Liaison Officer of the Cell. Grievances relating to discrimination or atrocities against
women employees and all matters relating to deprivation of women’s rights and non-compliance of
policy decision can be taken up with this Cell.
8.4 The Committee commends such steps taken by organisations to reach out to their
women employees. The Committee recommends that during the process of redressal of
complaints by a woman employee, at least one woman should be involved in the process. The
Committee also feels that the nomination of a woman and in Departmental Promotion
Committees(DPCs) and Selection Committees is desirable.
8.5 The Committee further recommends that if any case of supercession of any women
employee in the matters of promotion is pending, the cause of such supercession should be
investigated on priority basis by the competent authority.
8.6 The Committee was informed that in one of the organisations (Cochin Port Trust), grievances
are also received through CPGRAMS, time bound disposal is ensured and final reply is sent to
Government of India also. The Committee noted that SBT, Bhubaneswar has an online Staff Grievances
Redressal Scheme and cadre based data is available of women employees on a centralized platform,
along with the status of grievance/complaints. The Committee could gather that in NALCO, there
exists a formal scheme for grievance handling, with time limits prescribed for different steps and that
a Complaint Register is maintained under the SAHAY ATA Scheme. The Committee understands that in
Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., the system adopted for redressal of grievances is that of centralized system
of receiving complaints and resolving it through Single Window System at Corporate office and areas.
The Committee appreciates such initiatives.
8.7 Some of the Members of the Committee, while highlighting the importance of the role of Lady
Welfare Officers in addressing the grievances/issues of the women employees, opined that the posting
of Lady Welfare Officers in all organisations/Departments should be made statutory. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should examine this suggestion and take urgent
action in this regard.
Guidelines on sexual harassment at workplace
9.0 The Committee could infer from the background note furnished by the Department of
Personnel and Training that Rule 3C of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964 prohibits
sexual harassment of working women. Rule 21, thereof, stipulates restriction regarding harassment of
a Government servant. It has further been stated that detailed Instructions have been laid down on
the Complaint Mechanism for dealing with cases of sexual harassment of working women and to
create awareness in this regard particularly amongst working women and that so far (2010), 28
Departments/Ministries have conveyed that they have complied with the aforementioned guidelines.
9.1 The Committee noted that in Bank of Maharashtra, following the Visakha verdict, and GOI
guidelines, Bank of Maharashtra Officer Employees’ (Conduct) Regulations 1976 were amended and
a new regulation no. 24A (Prevention of sexual harassment of working women) was incorporated in

8
August, 2000 which was widely circulated to employees. The breach of any of the provisions of
Regulation 24A, constitutes a misconduct punishable under the Bank of Maharashtra Officer Employees’
(Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 and similar provision has been incorporated in the Bipartite
Settlement, to make any kind of sexual harassment, a gross misconduct. The Committee also took note
of the procedure adopted in Goa Shipyard Ltd. for disposal of complaints of sexual harassment
(Annexure-III).
9.2 The Committee also noted that all organisations with which it interacted, have constituted the
Committee for inquiry into complaints of sexual harassment. The Committee, however, noted that the
action taken on complaints was not satisfactory. The Committee feels that merely transferring the
delinquent employee to a different branch/station is not an adequate redressal and that strict
disciplinary action should be taken in case the accused if found guilty. The Committee
emphasizes upon the need to take strong action under the disciplinary Rules, in addition to
transfer. The punishment has to be a deterrent for prospective offenders. The Committee
however advises the organisations to be careful against those who make false allegations.
9.3 The Committee observes that the Sexual Harassment of Women at Work Place
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 has been enacted after fifteen years of
pronouncement of Vishakha judgement by Supreme Court. The Committee would have been
happy, if the appropriate legislation were enacted soon after the pronouncement of Vishakha
judgement by the Apex Court. Instead of getting a law enacted, the Government had been
following the guidelines given by Supreme Court for more than a decade and thereby,
indirectly approving the law making power of the judiciary on a sensitive issue of harassment
of female employees at work place, which is not an acceptable situation. The Committee
desires that the State Governments may now be asked to implement the law enacted by
Parliament on the sexual harassment of female employees at work place in letter and spirit.
9.4 Another vital aspect, which the Committee feels significant is to ensure that the
aggrieved woman feels safe and comfortable to approach the Protection Officer appointed
under the Prevention of Domestic Violence Act, 2005. The Committee recommends for the
mandatory appointment of lady Protection Officers. The Committee desires that this factor
should be invariably kept in mind while appointing Protection Officers.
9.5 The Committee also recommends that any harassment of female employees other than
sexual in nature, like passing of objectionable remarks during office hours by using vituperative
language combined with expression of highly rude and abusive behaviour, while giving directions
and orders for any work, should also be taken into cognizance by the competent authority very
seriously, if such harassment causes severe mental pressure. The Committee also feels that
the erring superior officer should be punished with appropriate penal action on priority basis
alongwith adverse entry in his/her confidential report dossier.
9.6 The Committee strongly feels that a nodal officer/Committee should be appointed/
designated in every organisation to monitor effective implementation of Government of India
guidelines on this matter. The Committee also desires that the requirement of an outside
Member in the Committee should be strictly followed and that complaints should be disposed
in a time bound manner.
9.7 The Committee, however, could gather from its interactions with the representatives of the
organisations that in some organisations, the Complaints Committee did not have a third party as a
Member. The Committee is of the view that the presence of a third party in the Committee
is necessary in order to prevent the possibility of any pressure or influence, on the proceedings
or on any party to the proceedings, from any quarter.  The Committee, therefore, desires that
the requirement of an outside Member in the Committee should be strictly followed.

9
9.8 Further, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the
organisations that they should mandatorily furnish a quarterly/yearly status report, on the
outcome of the complaints of sexual harassment, to the concerned Ministry/Department.
9.9 The Committee appreciates that in one of the organisations (SBI, Port Blair), a
Compendium on prevention of sexual harassment of women employees at workplace has been
published and circulated.
Women employees with disabilities
10.0 The Committee could gather from the material furnished by DoPT that as a Special allowance
to women with disability, a female Government employee is paid Rs. 1,000/- per month as Special
Allowance for child care for the period commencing with birth of the child upto the date the child
is two years old upto a maximum of two children.
10.1 The Committee was informed that some organisations grant double Travelling Allowance to
employees with disabilities; in some organisations, reimbursement of expenses incurred to buy equipments
such as hearing aid, dark glasses, prosthesis, calipers, crutches, brail wrist watches, motorized tricycle
etc. is given; some organisations provided wooden ramps, ramps with railings, modified toilets,
separate vehicle parking facilities, postings near home etc. However, the Committee noted that some
organisations did not provide any special allowance or other facilities. The Committee, therefore,
desires that the Ministry should take necessary action in this regard, in co ordination with the
Ministry of Social Justice and empowerment. The Committee also emphasizes upon the dire
need for disability friendly measures, such as ramps, modified toilets, parking etc. in all
organisations.
10.2 The Committee could understand that in one of the organisations (Dena Bank), provision exists
that special Casual Leave upto a limit of 10 days in a year can be sanctioned for differently abled
employees for participating in Conferences, workshop, seminars and training related to disability and
development related programmes organised at National/State level agencies to be specified by Ministry
of Social Justice and Empowerment.
Crèche, Play School
11.0 During its interactions with the representatives of various organisations, the Committee could
gather that some of the organisations have creche/play school facility. Some organisations which have
not provided such facility at the workplace, have provided that in the township of the organisation.
The Committee was informed that in one organisation (Hindustan Newsprint Ltd.), such facility would
be benefitting the grandchildren also. The Committee feels that such facilities help in aiding the
employee to keep a good balance between family and work responsibilities.
Residential accommodation
12.0 The Committee was informed by the Secretary, DoPT that the Directorate of Estates maintains
a separate pool for married/single women in allotment of Government accommodation.
12.1 In respect of separate ladies’ pool in residential accommodation, the Committee could gather
that the organisations did not have a separate pool for women employees. However, in majority of the
organisations, adequate residential accommodation was available or HRA was granted by the organisations.
Some of the organisations responded that in case of a request made by a woman employee, priority
is given to the same. The Committee feels that the residential accommodation facilities available
to women employees needs to be improved. It may not be out of place to mention that such
facilities often motivate the people to join those organisations.

10
Transport Facility
13.0 The Committee could understand from its interactions with the organisations that in case of
early morning and late night shifts attended by female employees, necessary transport facility was
arranged for them and that adequate security arrangements are also made. The Committee impresses
upon the organisations to ensure the proper transport facilities to its employees particularly
the women, while commuting to and from place of work beyond office hours. The important
aspect of their security may invariably be ensured to enable women employees to reach their
place of residence safely.
Separate rest rooms
14.0 The Committee could gather that in most of the organisations, separate rest rooms were
provided for women employees. However, some of the organisations did not have such a provision.
The Committee emphasizes upon the need for separate rest rooms for women employees and
also desires that proper recreational facilities etc. should be made available to them.
Medical Check up
15.0 The Committee noted that in almost all the organisations, adequate facilities had been provided
for medical check up and for conducting diagnostic/screening tests/procedures. The Committee also
noted that Bank of Baroda engaged a professional Counselor under “Paramarsh” at five centres viz.,
Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, Ahmedabad and Pune for counseling of employees, including women
employees and their family members to overcome psychological problems.
15.1 The Committee wishes that such facilities have to be of desired level and also feels the
need for the Health Surveillance programmes, seminars, lectures, camps etc. to be organised
by the organisations to create awareness about health issues, women health, immunization etc.
Higher Education and Training
16.0 The Committee could gather that majority of the organisations encouraged the women employees
to go in for higher education. The Committee noted that in one of the organisations (HPCL), various
e-learning programs with online certification courses and a knowledge kiosk for Nuggets on various
functional topics were launched by the Corporation.
16.1 The Committee feels that the incentives extended by the organisations such as cash
incentive, increment, promotion to next higher grade, educational loan for financing the
course, reimbursement of course fees, concession in educational loan etc., on successful
completion of the course would go a long way in helping the women to enhance their
capabilities. The Committee also agrees that the organisations should grant study leave for
pursuing higher education.
16.2 Taking it forward, the Committee recommends that women employees should be sent
for more and more training programmes inland and abroad by the organisations. The Committee
hopes that such programmes would contribute to skill development and capacity building of the
employees and also contribute to organisational growth.
Single mothers/single women
17.0 The Committee could infer from the discussions it held with the representatives of the
organisations that there is lack of empathy and a suitable policy for accommodating the needs of the
women employees who are single mothers/single women. The Committee noted that though some

11
organisations apprised the Committee that preferential treatment was given to them, such as desired
posting etc. The response of the organisations was not however encouraging.
17.1 The Committee strongly feels that more supportive measures are needed for women
workers specially, the single mothers and, therefore, it recommends that this issue should be
given adequate attention and a proper policy should be framed in this regard.
17.2 While expressing concern about the welfare of single women who have been recruited in
Government jobs, Members of the Committee were of the view that when such women are given
postings, it should be mandatorily ensured that they are placed at stations closest to their hometown/
place of their choice. The Committee, accordingly, desires that this pertinent factor should be
kept in mind by the organisations/Departments while giving postings.
Same station posting to couples
18.0 The Committee, while interacting with the representatives of various organisations, could gather
that many of the organisations have adopted the policy of ensuring posting of husband and wife at
same station to the extent possible.
18.1 As per the information furnished by DoPT, Government has issued instructions to its offices
to ensure that posting of husband and wife are at same station so as to ensure leading of a normal
family life and ensuring education and welfare of children. Also, in case of a woman officer, whose
husband is posted under the Government of India, the cooling off period may be waived upto six
months so as to ensure that she gets posting at the same station where her husband is posted.
18.2 The Committee could gather from the reply furnished by DoPT that instructions on posting
of women at the place of employment of husband were reviewed and modified instructions issued on
30.09.2009 making it mandatory when both spouses are in the same service or Department and posts
are available. However, the Committee understands that such instruction is not invariably
adhered to and, therefore, desires that the Ministry may explore the feasibility of lending
statutory support to the same.
18.3 The Members of the Committee expressed their concern about non-compliance of the above
stated instructions particularly, in cases where either of the spouses is a Central Government employee
and the other is a State Government employee. In this regard, the Committee desires that the
organisation/Department should, to the extent possible, as a welfare measure, ensure that the
couple is posted at the same station.
Framing of Recruitment rules
19.0 The Committee, while discussing the vacancies existing in various Centrally Sponsored Schemes,
affirmed the need for a greater role to be played by the Central Government, in the form of issuing
guidelines to the State Governments for framing Recruitment rules. The Committee desires that this
aspect may be looked into and appropriate action many  be taken in this  regard.
Reservation for women in Jobs
20.0 In the background note furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that apart from the
reservation permissible under Article 16(4) in favour of backward classes of citizens, no reservations
are permissible except on the grounds of reasonable classification based on the criteria of efficient
functioning and proper discharge of the duties of Government service.
20.1 The Committee appreciated the 100 days programme, aimed at making concerted efforts to
increase the representation of women in Central Government jobs. The Committee also appreciated the

12
policy of age relaxation for appointment of widows, divorced woman and woman judicially separated
from their husbands and who were not remarried were allowed age concession up to the age of 35
years (40 years for member of SCs/STs) for posts of Group C&D filed through SSC/Employment
Exchange (O.M. No. 15012/6/98-Estt.(D) dated 21.12.1998). The Committee was also appreciative of
the special dispensation for women officers of North East cadre.
20.2 The Committee, during its interface with various organisations, could surmise that only
some organisations complied with the Government guidelines dated 21
st December, 1998
mentioned above. The Committee strongly feels that non-compliance is not tolerable and
recommends that the Department of Personnel and Training should ensure that its guidelines
are followed scrupulously.
20.3 The Committee would like to impress upon the Departments/ Organizations to ensure
that whenever vacancies are advertised, women employees in their respective offices, who
fulfill the requirements for the post, are encouraged to apply against the recruitment
advertisements.
20.4 While majority of the organisations welcomed the idea of reservation for women in employment,
some opined that it may not exceed 50% and some were of the view that since women were already
in the employment sector especially in Banks even though there exists no such reservation, such a
move is not called for.
20.5 The Committee impress upon the Government and its organisations not to wait for
specific reservation for women. Government should rather motivate its bodies to take all
proactive measures so that more and more number of women come forward to make use of
the employment opportunities.
20.6 The Committee is constrained to note that the presence of women employees in
Government organizations is far from satisfactory. It is disheartening to observe that it is
significantly low, i.e., 10.04% as per the 2012 census of Central Government employees. It is
miserably low in certain sectors, particularly those having units in semi-urban/rural areas and
the sectors that entail physical labour and have hazardous working environment. The Committee
strongly feels that measures to handle such a situation can be evolved at ground level only
so that women workers feel motivated to be part of those organizations too.
20.7 It is high time that policies are envisioned, framed and implemented in order to meet
the objective of inclusion of women’s perspective in all developmental processes, as catalysts,
participants and recipients. The Committee would like to stress upon the need for special
emphasis to be given by the Government to capacity building of women, in order to ensure
that women are adequately represented in employment. The Committee, further, underlines
the need for more attention, affirmative action and welfare measures in this direction.

13
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
Ratio of Women to Men Employees
1. The Committee endorses such initiatives and desires that other organisations may also
adopt such best practices in order to instill confidence in the minds of incumbent and
prospective women employees. [Para 2.5]
2. The Committee applauds the policy followed in Oil India Ltd. that, in order to ensure
fairness in selection of women, a lady officer is invariably associated in the Selection Committee
wherever a women candidate is involved. However , the Committee is skeptical as to whether
the above mentioned instruction is adhered to religiously by all organisations/Departments. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the DoPT should ensure that the organisations/
Departments invariably follow this instruction. [Para 2.7]
3. The Committee is happy to note that in Shipping Corporation of India, with an aim to
encourage women candidates to join merchant navy, the SCI management has taken a step
forward by introducing scholarship programmes for women candidates and also giving age
relaxation. [Para 2.8]
4. The Committee recognises the reality that women are under  represented in some
sectors of employment. It hopes that with the evolving times, more women would offer their
candidature in such sectors also, that are less explored and comparatively new avenues for
women. The Committee also hopes that the organisations would accordingly respond positively
to the increasing female presence in the work force. [Para 2.10]
5. The Committee underlines the need for further improvement in the facilities extended
to women employees and desires that the organisations should take pro-active steps to ensure
that safe and congenial working conditions and amenities are made available to the female
employees. The Committee, while appreciating the steps taken by the organisations to motivate
the women work force, desires that those organisations which are lagging behind in this
respect, should step up their efforts in this direction. [Para 2.11]
Separate working conditions for women
6. The Committee believes that adopting a policy of flexible timings for women/ young
mothers helps in ensuring better balance between work and home. The Committee is of the
view that if this factor responsible for attrition is adequately addressed, it would help in
retaining experienced and skilled staff, preserving commitment and loyalty, minimizing the
need for training and capacity building of fresh recruits thereby, ensuring improved productivity
and profitability. [Para 3.2]
7. Taking into account the above mentioned facts, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry may further explore the possibility of framing a policy on “staggered working hours”
or “work at home” for women employees. The Committee feels that collective bargaining is
vital and that the role of labour unions/Employees’ Associations in this regard is crucial.
[Para 3.4]
8. The Committee, therefore, underlines the need for women negotiators in the unions,
while negotiating bipartite, industrial agreements etc. [Para 3.5]
13

14
Promotional avenues/stagnation
9. The Committee appreciates such steps and impresses upon the Ministry to explore the
possibility of evolving such policy/guidelines in other organisations as well, in order to decrease
stagnation in the field of promotions for women employees. [Para 4.2]
Maternity benefits, Child Care Leave
10. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to ensure that grant of maternity leave of
180 days be uniform in all the Government Departments and the organisations/bodies under
its control. [Para 5.1]
11. Keeping in view the noble objective behind the policy of granting CCL with pay, the
Committee desires that the Ministry should take account of the inconsistency in the policy
followed by various organisations and that the benefit of the decision to grant CCL of 730
days with pay, should be granted, to the women employees in all sectors, across the board.
[Para 5.4]
Attrition of women employees
12. The Committee took note of the steps taken by some organisations, that, in the event
of a woman employee submitting her application for resignation, an informal exit interaction
is facilitated to ascertain the reason for the resignation and to counsel the employee, before
such application is processed. The Committee suggests that such an approach need to be
followed by each organisation. The Government should issue relevant instructions in this
regard. [Para 6.1]
Awareness among women employees
13. The Committee emphasizes the need to give more publicity to the facilities available to
women employees so that more women are encouraged to prefer/join public employment.
[Para 7.1]
14. The Committee desires that adequate awareness generation programmes about minimum
wages, rights, welfare schemes, opportunities available under various schemes/initiatives of
Government agencies etc. should be conducted by the organisations. The Committee is of the
considered view that women employees may also be given legal aid, if necessary. [Para 7.3]
15. The Committee feels that the WIPS Cell should be constituted in all organisations and
that the organisations should nominate their employees for State/Regional level WIPS seminars,
meetings etc. [Para 7.4]
16. The Committee considers that such programmes are an integral part of the Corporate
Social Responsibility of the organisations, and applauds such efforts made by the organisations
to fulfill such responsibility. [Para 7.5]
17. The Committee stresses upon the need for adequate avenues to be made available for
the women employees, in order to facilitate experience sharing, confidence building etc. The
Committee is happy to note that in an organisation (State Bank of India), an Aspiration and
Social Networking site for Bank employees has been set up wherein they can freely exchange
views. The Committee also appreciates the initiatives taken by some organisations for facilitating
free exchange of views of employees via intranet and wishes that other organisations may also
follow suit. [Para 7.6]

15
Grievances redressal machinery
18. The Committee appreciates such initiatives and is of the opinion that time is of the
essence of the grievances redressal mechanism. [Para 8.1]
19. The Committee commends such steps taken by organisations to reach out to their
women employees. The Committee recommends that during the process of redressal of
complaints by a woman employee, at least one woman should be involved in the process. The
Committee also feels that the nomination of a woman and in Departmental Promotion
Committees(DPCs) and Selection Committees is desirable. [Para 8.4]
20. The Committee further recommends that if any case of supercession of any women
employee in the matters of promotion is pending, the cause of such supercession should be
investigated on priority basis by the competent authority. [Para 8.5]
21. The Committee appreciates such initiatives. [Para 8.6]
22. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should examine this suggestion
and take urgent action in this regard. [Para 8.7]
Guidelines on sexual harassment at workplace
23. The Committee feels that merely transferring the delinquent employee to a different
branch/station is not an adequate redressal and that strict disciplinary action should be taken
in case the accused if found guilty. The Committee emphasizes upon the need to take strong
action under the disciplinary Rules, in addition to transfer. The punishment has to be a
deterrent for prospective offenders. The Committee however advises the organisations to be
careful against those who make false allegations. [Para 9.2]
24. The Committee observes that the Sexual Harassment of Women at Work Place
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 has been enacted after fifteen years of
pronouncement of Vishakha judgement by Supreme Court. The Committee would have been
happy, if the appropriate legislation were enacted soon after the pronouncement of Vishakha
judgement by the Apex Court. Instead of getting a law enacted, the Government had been
following the guidelines given by Supreme Court for more than a decade and thereby,
indirectly approving the law making power of the judiciary on a sensitive issue of harassment
of female employees at work place, which is not an acceptable situation. The Committee
desires that the State Governments may now be asked to implement the law enacted by
Parliament on the sexual harassment of female employees at work place in letter and spirit.
[Para 9.3]
25. Another vital aspect, which the Committee feels significant is to ensure that the
aggrieved woman feels safe and comfortable to approach the Protection Officer appointed
under the Prevention of Domestic Violence Act, 2005. The Committee recommends for the
mandatory appointment of lady Protection Officers. The Committee desires that this factor
should be invariably kept in mind while appointing Protection Officers. [Para 9.4.]
26. The Committee also recommends that any harassment of female employees other than
sexual in nature, like passing of objectionable remarks during office hours by using vituperative
language combined with expression of highly rude and abusive behaviour, while giving directions
and orders for any work, should also be taken into cognizance by the competent authority very
seriously, if such harassment causes severe mental pressure. The Committee also feels that
the erring superior officer should be punished with appropriate penal action on priority basis
alongwith adverse entry in his/her confidential report dossier. [Para 9.5]

16
27. The Committee strongly feels that a nodal officer/Committee should be appointed/
designated in every organisation to monitor effective implementation of Government of India
guidelines on this matter. The Committee also desires that the requirement of an outside
Member in the Committee should be strictly followed and that complaints should be disposed
in a time bound manner. [Para 9.6]
28. The Committee is of the view that the presence of a third party in the Committee is
necessary in order to prevent the possibility of any pressure or influence, on the proceedings
or on any party to the proceedings, from any quarter.  The Committee, therefore, desires that
the requirement of an outside Member in the Committee should be strictly followed. [Para 9.7]
29. Further, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the
organisations that they should mandatorily furnish a quarterly/yearly status report, on the
outcome of the complaints of sexual harassment, to the concerned Ministry/Department.
[Para 9.8]
30. The Committee appreciates that in one of the organisations (SBI, Port Blair), a
Compendium on prevention of sexual harassment of women employees at workplace has been
published and circulated. [Para 9.9]
Women employees with disabilities
31. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry should take necessary action in
this regard, in co-ordination with the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. The
Committee also emphasizes upon the dire need for disability friendly measures, such as ramps,
modified toilets, parking etc. in all organisations. [Para 10.1]
Crèche, Play School
32. The Committee feels that such facilities help in aiding the employee to keep a good
balance between family and work responsibilities. [Para 11.0]
Residential accommodation
33. The Committee feels that the residential accommodation facilities available to women
employees needs to be improved. It may not be out of place to mention that such facilities
often motivate the people to join those organisations. [Para 12.1]
Transport Facility
34. The Committee impresses upon the organisations to ensure the proper transport
facilities to its employees particularly the women, while commuting to and from place of work
beyond office hours. The important aspect of their security may invariably be ensured to
enable women employees to reach their place of residence safely. [Para 13.0]
Separate rest rooms
35. The Committee emphasizes upon the need for separate rest rooms for women employees
and also desires that proper recreational facilities etc. should be made available to them.
[Para 14.0]
Medical Check up
36. The Committee wishes that such facilities have to be of desired level and also feels the

17
need for the Health Surveillance programmes, seminars, lectures, camps etc. to be organised
by the organisations to create awareness about health issues, women health, immunization etc.
[Para 15.1]
Higher Education and Training
37. The Committee feels that the incentives extended by the organisations such as cash
incentive, increment, promotion to next higher grade, educational loan for financing the
course, reimbursement of course fees, concession in educational loan etc., on successful
completion of the course would go a long way in helping the women to enhance their
capabilities. The Committee also agrees that the organisations should grant study leave for
pursuing higher education. [Para 16.1]
38. Taking it forward, the Committee recommends that women employees should be sent
for more and more training programmes inland and abroad by the organisations. The Committee
hopes that such programmes would contribute to skill development and capacity building of the
employees and also contribute to organisational growth. [Para 16.2]
Single mothers/single women
39. The Committee strongly feels that more supportive measures are needed for women
workers specially, the single mothers and, therefore, it recommends that this issue should be
given adequate attention and a proper policy should be framed in this regard. [Para 17.1]
40. The Committee, accordingly, desires that this pertinent factor should be kept in mind
by the organisations/Departments while giving postings. [Para 17.2]
Same station posting to couples
41. However, the Committee understands that such instruction is not invariably adhered to
and, therefore, desires that the Ministry may explore the feasibility of lending statutory
support to the same. [Para 18.2]
42. In this regard, the Committee desires that the organisation/Department should, to the
extent possible, as a welfare measure, ensure that the couple is posted at the same station.
[Para 18.3]
Framing of Recruitment rules
43. The Committee desires that this aspect may be looked into and appropriate action may
be taken in this regard. [Para 19.0]
Reservation for women in Jobs
44. The Committee, during its interface with various organisations, could surmise that only
some organisations complied with the Government guidelines dated 21
st December, 1998
mentioned above. The Committee strongly feels that non-compliance is not tolerable and
recommends that the Department of Personnel and Training should ensure that its guidelines
are followed scrupulously. [Para 20.2]
45. The Committee would like to impress upon the Departments/ Organizations to ensure
that whenever vacancies are advertised, women employees in their respective offices, who
fulfill the requirements for the post, are encouraged to apply against the recruitment
advertisements. [Para 20.3]

18
46. The Committee impress upon the Government and its organisations not to wait for
specific reservation for women. Government should rather motivate its bodies to take all
proactive measures so that more and more number of women come forward to make use of
the employment opportunities. [Para 20.5]
47. The Committee is constrained to note that the presence of women employees in
Government organizations is far from satisfactory. It is disheartening to observe that it is
significantly low, i.e., 10.04% as per the 2012 census of Central Government employees. It is
miserably low in certain sectors, particularly those having units in semi-urban/rural areas and
the sectors that entail physical labour and have hazardous working environment. The Committee
strongly feels that measures to handle such a situation can be evolved at ground level only
so that women workers feel motivated to be part of those organizations too. [Para 20.6]
48. It is high time that policies are envisioned, framed and implemented in order to meet
the objective of inclusion of women’s perspective in all developmental processes, as catalysts,
participants and recipients. The Committee would like to stress upon the need for special
emphasis to be given by the Government to capacity building of women, in order to ensure
that women are adequately represented in employment. The Committee, further, underlines
the need for more attention, affirmative action and welfare measures in this direction.
[Para 20.7]

19
ANNEXURES

21
ANNEXURE-I
LIST OF ORGANISATIONS HEARD BY THE COMMITTEE DURING ITS STUDY VISITS
1. Bank of Baroda
2. Bank of India
3. Bank of Maharashtra
4. Central Bank of India
5. Dena Bank
6. Union Bank of India
7. Corporation Bank
8. State Bank of Mysore
9. Vijaya Bank
10. Syndicate Bank
11. Canara Bank
12. Indian Bank
13. Indian Overseas Bank
14. United Bank of India
15. Allahabad Bank
16. UCO Bank
17. State Bank of India
18. State Bank of Travancore
19. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
20. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
21. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
22. Bongaigaon Refinery and Petrochemicals Limited
23. Oil India Limited
24. Kochi Refineries Limited
25. Mumbai Port Trust
26. Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust
27. Shipping Corporation of India
28. Chennai Port Trust
29. Tuticorin Port Trust
30. Kolkata Port Trust

22
31. Mormugao Port Trust
32. Cochin Port Trust
33. Paradip Port Trust
34. Life Insurance Corporation of India
35. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
36. Industrial Development Bank of India
37. Bharat Electronics Limited
38. Bharat Earth Movers Limited
39. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
40. Karnataka Antibiotics Limited
41. Indian Telephone Industries Limited
42. Neyveli Lignite Corporation
43. Coal India Ltd.
44. North Eastern Electric Power Corporation
45. North Eastern Hill University
46. Assam Ashok Hotel Corporation Limited
47. Brahmaputra Board
48. Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited
49. North Eastern Handlooms and Handicrafts Development Corporation
50. Goa Shipyard Ltd.
51. Cochin Shipyard Ltd.
52. Coir Board
53. Hindustan Newsprint Ltd.
54. The Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore Ltd.
55. NALCO
56. Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.
57. Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd.
58. SAIL (Rourkela Steel Plant)
59. Andaman Nicobar Forest and Plantation Corporation Ltd.
60. Andaman Nicobar Island Integrated Development Corporation Ltd.

23
23
ANNEXURE-II
The following guidelines were framed by Kolkata Port Trust in 1998 for ensuring proper
working conditions for women employees:–
(i) If in any exigency of work, any women employee is asked to stay in office (or go to
some other office in course of official duty) by her superior officer, after office hours
or come to office on a holiday, prior written order/approval of the concerned Head of
the Department is required to be obtained and a copy thereof given to the concerned
women employee. She should be informed of the duration of the stay beyond her usual
working hours and provision for transport, if any, for her return journey home.
(ii) In Dock areas, women employees may not be asked to stay in office beyond their usual
office hours as far as possible. In case, a woman employee is required to work beyond
normal office hours, efforts should be made to provide her transport up to a convenient
point.
(iii) W omen employees sent out of station on temporary duty should be provided with full
assistance in the matter of booking of tickets for journey and accommodation at the
place of temporary duty.
(iv) Transport arrangement to and from Railway Station/Airport as also place of temporary
duty should be provided. All Heads of Departments should devise a Code of Conduct for
maintaining the dignity of all women employees under their control. In cases where there
are lapses on the part of a women employee, she should not be reprimanded in front
of juniors, superiors and colleagues. The intention is not to obstruct the fabric of
discipline but to maintain the dignity of women employees so that they are treated with
the courtesy due to them as women and as employee of KoPT.
(v) Female Peons should not be asked to fetch cigarettes/pans/similar articles by male
employees.
(vi) Training to be imparted to women employees about their rights in society and various
provisions made by the Government regarding protection of women’s rights.
(vii) Changing room adjacent to toilet should be earmarked for women employees. The toilet
and changing room should be properly ventilated, lighted, maintained and well equipped.
Toilets should be cleaned twice daily, whitewashed every year and provided with
adequate furniture, bucket, mugs, waste disposal baskets, mirrors, etc.

24
ANNEXURE-III
GOA SHIPYARD LIMITED
Brief description of the procedure adopted for disposal of complaints of sexual harassment
(i) Any women employee who has a complaint of sexual harassment as defined in the CDA Rules
applicable to officers and in the certified standing orders applicable to Workmen/Staff, and any
other rules/orders issued by the Management from time to time may forward a confidential
complaint to the Chief General Manager (Pers. and Admn.). This complaint will immediately
be forwarded by the Chief General Manager (Pers. and Admn.) to the Chairperson of the
Complaints Committee within two working days of receipt of the complaint. The Chairperson
will forthwith call a meeting of members of the committee at the earliest, but not later than
5 working days from the receipt of the complaint. The complainant is also permitted to explain
her complaint in confidence to the Committee.
(ii) The complainant may, if she chooses to, submit her written complaint directly to the
Chairperson, or approach the Chairperson in person, and submit/explain her complaint orally
and/or in writing. The Chairperson will call for a meeting of the Complaints Committee at the
earliest but not later than 5 working days from the date of receipt of the complaints. The
Chairperson will forward a copy of the written complaint/gist of the complaint to the Pers.
and Admn. Dept., if the complaint is received directly.
(iii) On receipt of the complaint as above the Committee will take action as under:-
The Committee will enquire into the complaint and will also provide the complaint with
counseling support. The Complaints Committee is also authorized to make preliminary enquiry
into the complaint by calling the person complained against and any witnesses to the incidents
of the complaint.
The Complaints Committee will ensure that the enquires are kept confidential and that no
bias or prejudice is caused to any of the persons involved.
On conclusion of the enquiry, which should be expeditious, and in any case not later than
15 days from the date of the first meeting, the Complaints Committee is to render its report
to the Chief General Manager (Pers. and Admin.) in a sealed envelope marked “Confidential”.
The report shall state whether, in the opinion of the Committee, any prima facie case exists
in the complaint.
Thereafter, the Pers. and Admin. Dept. will forward the report along with its comments
to the Disciplinary Authority, at the earliest but not later than 5 working days of receipt of the
report. The Disciplinary Authority will then decide the further course of action to be followed
under the Company’s rules applicable to Officers/Workmen/Staff.
The Pers. and Admin. Dept. will ensure that appropriate action is taken based on the
report and that it is followed up to its logical conclusion.
The Complaints Committee is required to make an annual report to the Ministry of
Defence, Dept. of Defence Production and Supplies, regarding the complaint/s received and
action taken by them. The P&A Dept. will also ensure that the Complaints Committee submits
the annual report to the Ministry.

MINUTES

27
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 19 th August, 2013 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhupender Yadav
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Shailendra Kumar
5. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
6. Shri S. Semmalai
7. Shrimati Meena Singh
8. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
9. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Department of Personnel and Training
(i) Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Mamta Kundra, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri J.A. Vaidyanathan, Director
2 . ***
3 . ***
*** Relate to some other matters.

28
Status of Women in Government Employment and in Public Sector Undertakings with regard
to the Service Conditions, Protection against exploitation, Incentives and other related Issues.
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of
Personnel and Training to the meeting. He then requested the Secretary, DoPT to make a presentation
on the subject “Status of Women in Government Employment and in Public Sector Undertakings with
regard to the Service Conditions, Protection against exploitation, Incentives and other related Issues”.
5. The Secretary, DoPT while making an introductory note on the subject, apprised the Committee
that the percentage of women in Government was 2.5% in 1971 and that it was about 10% in 2009.
He stated that the various women-friendly policy decisions taken by the Government are incorporated
in the relevant Rules for the benefit of women employees.
6. Thereafter, the representative of DoPT, while elaborating upon the subject, informed the
Committee that as per the Census of Central Government Employees, 2012 released by the Directorate
General of Employment and Training, the percentage of women employees out of the total Government
employees was 10.04 per cent as on 31.03.2009. She affirmed that DoPT has reiterated its guideline
that husband and wife should be posted as far as possible in one place and that such guidelines was
issued last in 2009.
7. The Chairman highlighted the discrepancies which exist in granting Child Care Leave and
Maternity Leave to women employees in various organizations. Some Members expressed concern that
the DoPT guidelines on posting of couples at same station is not invariably adhered to and were of
the view that when single women are recruited in Government jobs, it should be ensured that they
are placed at stations closest to their hometown/place of their choice. The witnesses responded to the
queries raised by the Members of the Committee.
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 4.37 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matter.

29
29
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 29 th August, 2013 in Room No. ‘67’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
3. Ms. Anu Aga
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
7. Shri S. Semmalai
8. Shri S.D.Shariq
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
13. Shri Abhjit Mukherjee
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed all the Members to the meeting. The Committee
then took up for consideration its draft Sixty-second report on the subject “Status of Women in
Government Employment and in Public Sector Undertakings with regard to the Service Conditions,
Protection against exploitation, Incentives and other related Issues”. The Members suggested some
changes which were suitably incorporated in the Report. The Committee then adopted the Report.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri. Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri. Shailendra Kumar and in his absence, Smt. Meena
Singh to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Friday, the 30
th August, 2013.
4. The meeting adjourned at 3.30 P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.