Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY SIXTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013
REPORT NO. 
66


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY SIXTH REPORT
The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-131

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (v)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—4
5. M INUTES  OF D ISSENT ............................................................................................................. 5
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 7—18
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 19 —49
A. The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013 ................................................ 21—25
B. Comments  of the Department of Personnel and Training on the views/suggestions
contained in Memoranda Submitted by Individuals/Organisations/Experts on the
Provisions of the Bill .................................................................................................. 26—39
C. List of Persons Heard by the Committee at Delhi and during its study visit ... 40—42
D. List of Reports Presented by the Committee .......................................................... 43—49

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2013)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Sixty-sixth Report on the Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013. The Bill seeks to
amend the Right to Information Act, 2005. (Annexure-A)
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
§  the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the
12th August, 2013 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 12 th September, 2013 for examination
and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee issued a press communiqué in
national and local newspapers and dailies, to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/
organisations on the provisions of the Bill. In response thereto, 39 memoranda containing suggestions
were received, from various organizations/individuals/experts, by the Committee. The views/suggestions
received by Committee in written memoranda alongwith comments of DoPT are at Annexure-B.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on the 27
th September, 2013. During its Study Visit
to Chennai, Mumbai and Jaipur from 3 rd to 10 th October, 2013 the Committee interacted with the
representatives of various Political Parties such as Nationalist Congress Party, Indian National Congress,
All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Communist Party of India,
Bharatiya Janata Party, Bahujan Samaj Party, Communist Party of India (Marxist), Shivsena, Maharashtra
Nav Nirman Sena, Samajwadi Party; representatives of NGOs such as Aruna Roy, Nikhil Dey and
other stakeholders on the Bill. The Committee also heard, amongst others, Shri Jagdeep Chhokar,
Shri Shekhar Singh, Shri Subash Chandra Agrawal; Shri Shailesh Gandhi, former CIC; Shri Nripendra
Misra, Public Interest Litigation; on the 6
th November, 2013 and Shri Nilotpal Basu, Communist Party
of India (Marxist) on the 27 th November, 2013 (detailed list at  Annexure-C ).
5. The Committee also sought the views of all National and State Political Parties on the Bill.
Nationalist Congress Party, Communist Party of India, Indian National Congress, Communist Party of
India (Marxist), Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam submitted their written comments thereon.
6. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Personnel and Training,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions;
(ii) Cabinet Note No. 1/13/2013-IR dated the 23
rd July, 2013;
(iii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Personnel and Training thereon;
(iv) Reply furnished by the Department of Personnel and Training to questionnaire on the
Bill;
§  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 51260) dated the 12 th September, 2013.

(v) Reply furnished by the Department of Legal Affairs to questionnaire on the Bill;
(vi) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the
stakeholders on the 6 th and 27 th November, 2013 and during its Study Visit;
(vii) Comments furnished by various recognized Political Parties on the Bill; and
(viii) Other research material/documents related to the Bill.
7. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 13 th December, 2013.
8. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
13th December, 2013 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice
(iv)

ACRONYMS
AICC All India Congress Committee
AIR All India Radio
BJP Bharatiya Janata Party
BSP Bahujan Samajwadi Party
CIC Central Information Commission
CPIO Central Public Information Officer
CPI(M) Communist Party of India (Marxist)
CPI Communist Party of India
DOPT Department of Personnel and Training
DMDK Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam
ECI Election Commission of India
INC Indian National Congress
IT Information Technology
MLA Member of Legislative Assembly
MP Member of Parliament
NCP Nationalist Congress Party
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
RTI Right to Information
(v)

1
REPORT
The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013  seeks to amend the Right to Information
Act, 2005 in order to nullify order of full Bench of Central Information Commission (CIC) of 3 rd June,
2013 (resting in File No. CIC/SM/C/2011/001386 and CIC/SM/C/2011/000838) bringing six national
political parties (AICC/INC, BJP, CPI(M), CPI, NCP and BSP) under the ambit of RTI Act by making
liberal interpretation of the term ‘public authority’ mentioned under Section 2(h) of the RTI Act.
2. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill mentions that the political parties
are not public authorities since they are neither established nor constituted by or under the Constitution
or any other law made by Parliament. They are rather registered/recognized under the Representation
of People Act, 1951 and Rules/Orders made or issued thereunder. Provisions of the Representation of
People Act, 1951 as well as the Income Tax Act, 1961 deal with transparency in the financial aspects
relating to the parties and their candidates. Declaring political parties as public authority under the RTI
Act would hamper their smooth internal functioning; party rivals may misuse the provisions of the RTI
Act adversely affecting the functioning of political parties. Moreover, the objective of the said Act is
not to include political parties under its ambit. Since the decision of CIC is binding upon the parties
in view of Section 19(7) of the RTI Act, the Statement of Objects and Reasons has also mentioned
that aforesaid amendment to keep political parties out of ambit of the RTI Act will have retrospective
effect from the date of decision of CIC, i.e., 3
rd June, 2013.
3. While passing the order the full Bench of the Central Information Commission set aside its
single Bench Order of 8 th July, 2009 in complaint No. CIC/MISC/2009/0001 and CIC/MISC/2009/0002
wherein that Commission could not agree that political parties could fall within the definition of public
authority as defined under Section 2 (h) of the RTI Act.
4. The CIC while arriving at its decision has primarily laid out following arguments:–
(i) Political parties can be said to have been constituted by their registration by Election
Commission of India (ECI), a fact akin to establishment or constitution of a body or
institution by an appropriate Government;
(ii) Su bstantial (indirect) financing of political parties by the Central Government in multiple
ways which includes allotment of land in Delhi and State capitals, Government
accommodation/bungalow on concessional rent in prime areas of Delhi, total exemption
of their donation from income tax under Section 13 A of Income Tax Act, 1961, free
air time on Doordarshan and All India Radio and free electoral rolls by Election Commission;
(iii) Performance of Public duties by the political parties. Being unique institution they wield
controlling influence directly or indirectly on the exercise of Government power in spite
of being non-governmental; and
(iv) Political parties enjoy constitutional and legal rights and liabilities.
5. The CIC has inter-alia directed six national political parties to designate Central Public
Information Officers (CPIO) and the Appellate Authorities at the Head Quarters within six weeks
period from the date of its order.
6. The Bill proposes insertion of an explanation to Section 2(h) of the Act to exclude all political
parties both recognized and registered from the ambit of public authority in relation to the RTI Act.
The Department of Legal Affairs in its opinion through the reply to the questionnaire to the Committee
has agreed that the ratio of the order of CIC dated the 3
rd June, 2013 may be applicable to 1444 odd

2
political parties including 52 national and state political parties, if criteria laid down by it is established
in their case.
7. The Committee noted the justification to the proposed amendment given in the Cabinet Note
No. 1/13/2013-IR dated the 23 rd July, 2013 to annul erroneous decision arrived at by CIC by liberal
interpretation of the term ‘public authority’ in relation to RTI Act:–
● Registration of political parties under Section 29 A of the RP Act, 1951 with Election
Commission of India cannot be construed as akin to establishment or constitution of body
or institution by an appropriate Government.
● Misuse of the Act by political rivals with malicious intention which may adversely affect
smooth functioning of political parties which is neither the object of the Act nor was
envisaged by Parliament under the Act.
Deposition of Secretary, DOPT
8. The Secretary, DOPT, which is nodal Ministry for the Act submitted that many Non-
Governmental Organizations
1 have been declared as public authority in relation to RTI Act on the
grounds of substantial financing by the appropriate Government, by the judiciary. He justified the
amendment to the Act on the ground that possible political misuse of the Act by political rivals which
would destabilize the political party which is not the objective of the Act. Existing provisions in the
RP Act, 1951 and the Income Tax Act, 1961 ensure transparency in the financial aspects of political
parties. He added that all information including financial information which are not exempted under
Section 8 of the Act needed to be shared if the order of CIC is not nullified.
Stand of Recognized Political Parties
9. All six national political parties expect CPI which were respondent to the CIC order of 3
rd
June, 2013 were categorical in their assertion that political parties are not public authority in relation
to RTI Act. The Committee sought views of all recognized national and state parties on the proposed
legislation. Till date INC, NCP, CPI, CPI(M) and Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam (DMDK) have
submitted their views which are in support of proposed amendment. However, the BJD through its
Member in the Committee, has categorically asserted that his party firmly opposes the proposed
amendment and fully supports the spirit and tenor of the CIC order.
10. By and large, the political parties are in favour of transparency in their financial matter in larger
public interest, which according to them, already exists.
Views of Civil Society
11. The Committee gathers from the evidence submitted to the Committee that the larger view of
the civil society is in opposition to the proposed amendment to RTI Act. They are of the view that
information relating to financial matter of political parties need to be shared with public as bulk
financing to political parties is under Rs.20,000 which is not reported to Election Commission of India
and Income Tax Authorities and is therefore unaccounted for. Some of the political parties have
reportedly been in receipt of contributions from foreign sources in contravention of Section 29B of
the RP Act, 1951 and corresponding provision in the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010.
While one Section is for transparency in functioning of political parties and sharing of information
relating to selection/rejection of the candidates, election strategies, etc. in addition to information
relating to financing of parties for the sake of good governance and electoral reforms, the other
1  Indian Olympic Association, Chandigarh, Lawn Tennis Association, Chandigarh Club, India International Centre, Delhi
Public School, Rohini.

3
section is interested only with the information relating to financing of political parties. However, all of
them suggested to the committee that amendment to RTI Act is unnecessary as inbuilt provisions to
give exemption to the information of competitive nature is provided under Section 8 of the Act. They
were of the view that the information which political parties have reasons to believe to affect its
internal functioning can be sought to be exempted. All of them have requested to the Committee to
recommend to Government to withdraw the Bill in larger public interest.
Opinion of Attorney General
12. Attorney General for India in his deposition has offered following opinion :–
● Proposed amendment to RTI Act excluding Political Parties from the definition of public
authority may not withstand constitutional challenge as it is creating a class within a class
without having any consideration to the principle of intelligible differentia having reasonable
nexus with objective of the Act (promotion of transparency and accountability).
● Political Parties are foundation of democracy and need to be given sufficient protection
from malicious and motivated application for which safeguards already exist under
Section 8 of the Act.
Instrumentality of Government vis-a-vis instrumentality of State
13. Representatives of some political parties submitted that political parties are neither instrumentality
of Government nor funded by the Government, therefore, they cannot be treated as public authorities
in relation to RTI Act. The Committee noted that preamble to the RTI Act clearly mentions that
Government and its instrumentalities are accountable to the governed for the sake of transparency and
accountability under RTI Act. Department of Legal Affairs in their replies to the questionnaire have
stated that instrumentality or agency of the Government is not restricted to entities created under or
by statute. A body upon which the Government has merely regulatory control could be instrument of
Government if that body is substantially financed by the appropriate Government either by direct or
indirect manner. The judgement of Supreme Court in the Thalappalam Service Cooperative Bank Ltd.
Vs. State of Kerala  delivered on 7
th October, 2013, may be referred to wherein even private
organizations (NGOs) which are substantially financed by the appropriate Government in direct or
indirect manner are also instrument of Government and public authorities in relation to RTI Act in view
of Section 2(h)(ii) of the Act. All bodies having deep and pervasive control of Government are
instrumentalities of State. Both instrumentalities of State and Government are public authorities in
relation to RTI Act.
Substantially financed by Appropriate Government
14.  Department of Legal Affairs in their reply to the questionnaire have submitted to the
Committee that funding from Consolidated Fund of India/State is not the sole criterion to determine
whether the body is substantially financed. Even financing in indirect manner i.e. grant of plot of land
at concessional rate, tax exemption are also other criteria to declare a body as instrument of
Government in relation to RTI Act.
15. It is clarified to the Committee that political parties are voluntarily association of individuals.
However, those cannot be construed as constituted or established under the law unless and until they
are registered under the Act(s) of Parliament/State Legislature. The Department of Legal Affairs have
submitted that there is no legal bar to any association of individuals without being registered with ECI
to contest election. Registration with Election Commission would enable political parties to get the
benefit of Part IV A of the Representation of People Act i.e. getting contribution in terms of Section
29 B of the RP Act, 1951.

4
16. The Committee also noted that following provisions in other existing laws ensure adequate
transparency in respect of financial matters of political parties and their candidates which have been
stressed as grounds for not bringing political parties under RTI Act:
● Declaration of contribution received in excess of Rs.20,000/- from any individual and
non-governmental companies to Election Commission which that Commission put on its
website (Section 29C of the RP Act, 1951, read with Rule 85B of the Conduct of Election
Rules, 1961).
● Declaration of assets and liabilities by elected candidates for a House of Parliament
(Section 75A of the RP Act, 1951).
● Maintenance of correct account of election expenditure of the candidate (Section 77 of
the RP Act, 1951).
● Lodging of account of election expenses by the candidate with District Election Officer
(Section 78 of the RP Act, 1951).
● Disqualification of the candidate for failing to lodge election expenses by Election
Commission (Section 10A of the RP Act, 1951).
● Penalty for filing false affidavit (Section 125A of the RP Act, 1951).
● Direction from Election Commission of India to political parties to submit their accounts
within 90 days after general election in case of Lok Sabha and 75 days in case of
Assembly elections (last issued on 21
st January, 2013).
● Inspection of accounts of candidate of political party and obtaining the same from ECI
on payment of nominal charges (Section 88 of the RP Act, 1951).
● Declaration of assets and liabilities to the Ethics Committee of House by the Members of
Parliament.
Recommendation/Observations of Committee
17. The Committee observes that the aspects of transparency of the financial matters of
the political parties are fully covered under the laws and mechanisms as referred to above.
18. The Committee understands that none of the six political parties, who happened to be
respondent to CIC Order of 3
rd June, 2013, challenged the order in the higher judiciary. That
was an option with those political parties, which they did not exercise, as the instant case is
a case of misinterpretation of a clear provision of law.
19. The present amendment has been brought by the Government with a view to resolve
the issue whether political parties are public authorities or not by specifically excluding them
from the RTI Act so as to completely avoid the scope of ambiguity. The Committee considers
that proposed amendment is a right step to address the issue once for all. Committee,
therefore, recommends for passing of the Bill.
20. In the course of deliberations, the Committee’s attention was drawn to the sustainability
of legislation in the court of law. In this connection, Committee noted the suggestions made
by Attorney General of India vis-a-vis Law Secretary. The Attorney General of India was
apprehensive that this law would not sustain the test of judicial scrutiny as it was creating a
class within a class without having any consideration to the principle of intelligible differentia
having reasonable nexus with objective of the Act, whereas the Law Secretary was of the view
that it was quite sustainable since Parliament has legislative competence to override the CIC
decision. The Committee, however, subscribes to the opinion expressed by the Law Secretary.
21. The Committee is of the strong view that laws should not be laid down through a
process of misinterpretation of clear provisions of law.

5
Minutes of Dissent submitted by Ms. Anu Aga
I consider political parties to be public authorities because they get substantive financial funding
from the Government of India. For example:
❷ Allotment of land in prime areas of the national and state capitals at subsidised rates.
❷ Allotment of bungalows at highly subsidized rates.
❷ Free airtime on Doordarshan and All India Radio during Lok Sabha and State Assembly
elections.
❷ Tax exemption on donations.
2. Political parties compete in elections to receive a mandate from the public to form the
Government and therefore they are very different from ordinary NGOs or media houses or indeed any
other private associations.
It is in the public interest that Political Parties disclose information about themselves to citizens
because parties are the most essential ingredient for the functioning of our democracy, they perform
a public duty, they have a public function and they have a legal basis.
3. There is concern among the Political Parties that if they come under the RTI Act their rivals
will use RTI applications to get critical information and their strategies. However, under the Section
8(1) (d), there is no obligation for any public authority to give to a citizen “information including
commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm the
competitive position of a third party”.
To further safeguard this concern, the Supreme Court or Central Information Commission itself
could issue a clarification with special reference to exempting a political party from voluntary
disclosure on matters that give its rivals/competitors information about its strategies.
4. There is currently very little transparency about the financial affairs of political parties. They
are only required to submit expense reports to the Election Commission during elections, and income
tax statements to the tax authorities. But more than 80% of their income is from “unknown” sources,
as was revealed in a recent RTI application. Their tax exempt status is contingent on their filing tax
returns. But non-filing attracts no penalty, nor recovery of taxes. The Election Commission can
register, but not de-register or penalize parties in any way. So it is very important that their finances
be disclosed via RTI framework.
Most importantly, if political parties are to play a critical role in improving governance, they
themselves must submit to higher standards of transparency and accountability. It is of utmost
importance that financing and expenses of parties be completely transparent.
Sd/-
(Anu Aga)
Member, Rajya Sabha
5

MINUTES

9
II
SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 27 th September, 2013 in Room No. G-074, Parliament
House Library, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Arjun Meghwal
9. Shri Pinaki Misra
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
13. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
I. ***
II. The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
● Department of Personnel and Training
1. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Secretary
2. Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Sandeep Jain, Director (IR)
*** Relates to some other matter.

10
● Legislative Department
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri. Udaya Kumara, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri. K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
The Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013
7. The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training and senior
officials of DoPT and Legislative Department to the meeting. He then requested the Secretary to make
a presentation on the Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
8. The Secretary, while making a power point presentation on the Bill, apprised the Committee
that in the past, in a series of decisions, the High Courts and the Central Information Commission held
a number of Non-Governmental Organizations as ‘Public authorities’ in relation to the Right to
Information Act, 2005 and that in its decision dated 3
rd June, 2013, the Central Information Commission
held that some Political Parties are ‘public authorities’ in relation to the RTI Act. He stated that on
examination of the said decision of the Central Information Commission, it was observed that the
Central Information Commission had made a very liberal interpretation of Section 2 (h) of the RTI Act.
He opined that Political Parties are not established or constituted by or under the Constitution or by
any other laws made by Parliament and that they are only registered under the Representation of the
People Act, 1951. He further stated that there are already provisions in the Representation of the
People Act, 1951, as well as in the Income Tax Act which ensure to necessary transparency regarding
financial aspects of a Political Party.
9. While responding to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee, the
representative of Department of Personnel & Training clarified that in response to an application under
the RTI Act, every information that is not exempted under Section 8 of the Act and which is available
with the ‘public authority’ has to be provided.
10. The Chairman and Members of the Committee expressed their reservations about the Central
Information Commission’s decision dated 3
rd June, 2013.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 4.32 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

11
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6 th November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
5. Shri T.R. Baalu
6. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
7. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Arjun Meghwal
10. Shri Pinaki Misra
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
13. Shri S. Semmalai
14. Shri S.D. Shariq
15. Shrimati Meena Singh
16. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
17. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
11

12
WITNESSES:
At 11.00 A.M.
1. Association for Democratic Reforms, New Delhi;
(i) Prof. Jagdeep Chhokar
(ii) Shri Anurag Mittal
(iii) Ms. Shivam Kapoor
2. National Campaign for People’s Right to Information, New Delhi;
(i) Ms. Anjali Bharadwaj
(ii) Shri Shekhar Singh
3. Shri Subash Chandra Agrawal, New Delhi;
4. (i) Adv. Om Prakash Saxena
(ii) Shri Neeraj Saxena              Ghaziabad;
(i) Shri Sanjeev Gupta
(ii) Shri Anuj Aggarwal
5. (i) Shri Kamlesh Shantilal Shah
(ii) Ms. Ankita Kamlesh Shah        
RTI Activists, Nagpur;
6. Shri K.K. Sharma, New Delhi;
7. Shri Kulamani Mishra, Odisha.
At 2.30 
P.M.
8. Shri Shailesh Gandhi, Former Chief Information Commissioner, Mumbai;
9. Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat, Delhi;
(i) Shri B.S. Sachdeva
(ii) Dr. Jaikishan
(iii) Shri P rabhat Gujral
10. Shri Ashok Mittal, Indian Council of Universities, Mathura;
11. Shri Nripendra Misra, Public Interest Litigation, Delhi;
12. Shri Sarabjit Roy, India Against Corruption, Jan Andolan and National Campaign for
Political Reform in India, New Delhi;
13. Adv. R.L. Saravanan, Chennai;
14. Shri V . Ramesan,  Potti Sreeramulu Foundation, Andhra Pradesh; and
15. (i) Shri Rahul Kadiyan
(ii) Ms. Swati Chawla
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department of Personnel and Training
Ms. Mamta Kundra, Joint Secretary.


13
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, witnesses and senior officers of the
Department of Personnel and Training to the meeting. He then requested Prof. Jagdeep Chhokar to
place before the Committee, his views on the Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
3. Prof. Jagdeep Chhokar, while tendering his views on the Bill, emphasized upon the vital role
played by political parties in the polity of our nation and the need to ensure transparency in the
functioning of political parties. He drew attention of the Committee to the 170 th Report of the Law
Commission of India titled “Reform of the Electoral Laws” wherein it was observed that democracy
and accountability must bind the political parties which are integral to parliamentary democracy.
4. Thereafter, Shrimati Anjali Bharadwaj voiced her concern about the proposed amendment to the
Right to Information Act and suggested that the apprehensions of political parties that disclosure of
information under the RTI Act may turn out to be harmful to them, can be taken care of, by the Rules
which can be framed under the Act. While elucidating upon the reasons as to why political parties
should come under the purview of the RTI Act, Shri Shekhar Singh opined that the political parties
are in receipt of public resources and that the public who have donated their money, given their hopes
and support to a political party, have the right to know whether that political party is living up to their
hopes and aspirations.
5. Shri Subash Chandra Agrawal, while allaying the apprehensions raised with respect to the CIC
decision dated 3
rd June, 2013 opined that Section 8(1) and 7(a) of the RTI Act, 2005 are sufficient
to address such concerns and that political parties need to give only that information which is available
with them. He expressed his views that if the public authorities earnestly comply with the provision
for suo-motu disclosure in the RTI Act, the number of applications filed under the statute would
decrease significantly.
6. Advocate Om Prakash Saxena pointed out some incongruities, which according to him, exist
in certain decisions of the Central Information Commission. Shri Kamlesh Shantilal Shah, while placing
on record his opposition to the proposed amendment, suggested that the best feasible alternative was
to challenge the impugned CIC decision in a Court of law.
7. Shri K.K. Sharma highlighted the instances of misuse of the RTI Act which came to his notice
during his tenure in the Delhi Government wherein many trivial and unrelated queries raised under the
Act, resulted in unnecessary wastage of manpower, time and resources. He put forth the proposal that
the public can seek information available with the Election Commission of India and State Election
Commission, rather than directly from the political parties. He suggested that the time period given in
the RTI Act to furnish information may be enhanced.
8. Shri Kulamani Mishra averred that the proposed amendment is an unnecessary attempt to
curtail the rights of the public to know and to act against the wrongdoing of political parties in their
financial management and inner party democracy.
9. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
(The Committee adjourned for lunch and re-assembled at 2.30 
P.M.)
10. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and senior officers of the Department of Personnel and
Training to the meeting. He then requested Shri Shailesh Gandhi to present his views on the Right to
Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013 before the Committee.
11. Shri Shailesh Gandhi, while highlighting the benefits of the RTI Act, stated that the concerns
raised about the impugned decision of CIC were unfounded and that it was high time that citizens are
accepted as the masters of the Government. He was of the view that challenging the CIC decision
in a Court of law was a better option than the proposed amendment.

14
12. Expressing his support to the CIC decision, Shri B.S. Sachdeva opined that if political parties
are excluded from the purview of the RTI Act, then NGOs would also register themselves as political
parties to enjoy such immunity. Shri Ashok Mittal, speaking on behalf of the private universities and
educational institutions, stated that though they did not receive financial support from the Government,
they had been brought under the ambit of the RTI Act, which according to him, was against the
intention of the Parliament while enacting the statute. He narrated a few instances wherein RTI Act
was allegedly misused by vested interests.
13. Shri Nripendra Misra pointed out that during the debates in the House on the RTI Bill in 2009,
the Government had assured that no amendments would be made unless there is wide public
consultation and that such consultation was not done for the proposed amendment. He stated that out
of the 1,450 registered political parties, only 112 of them submitted their annual financial statements
in 2012-13 and that only 56 political parties gave information about the donations received by them
in 2011-12. He raised doubts about the effectiveness of the relevant provisions of the Representation
of People Act, 1951 and the Income Tax Act, 1961 in ensuring financial transparency of political
parties.
14. Shri Sarabjit Roy disagreed with the CIC decision, both in its reasoning and in its processes.
He underscored the need for quick disposal of appeals pending with the CIC and the requirement of
the full CIC Bench to decide on vial matters, such as the decision dated 3
rd June, 2013. Advocate R.L.
Saravaranan, while voicing his opposition to the proposed amendment, based his submissions on the
premise that the Bill violates Article 14 of the Constitution, in that it treats political parties differently
from other registered associations.
15. While placing before the Committee, his views that political parties should not be made public
authorities, Shri Rahul Kadiyan stated that the CIC has, in fact, amended the RTI Act by bringing
political parties under its purview and also encroached upon the powers of the Election Commission
of India. Shri V . Ramesan, while opposing the proposed amendment, dismissed fears of misuse of the
RTI Act by political rivals.
16. The witnesses responded to the points put forward by the Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
17. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
18. The meeting adjourned at 4.21 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 13 th November, 2013.

15
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 27 th November, 2013 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri T.R. Baalu
8. Shir P.C. Gaddigoudar
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri Pinaki Misra
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
13. Smt. Meena Singh
14. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
15. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
16. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Communist Party of India (Marxist)
Shri Nilotpal Basu, former M.P. and Member of the Central Secretariat of the Party
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
Ms. Mamta Kundra, Joint Secretary
15

16
2. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and senior officers of the Department of Personnel and
Training to the meeting. He then requested Shri Nilotpal Basu to place before the Committee, the views
of Communist Party of India (Marxist) on the Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
3. Shri Nilotpal Basu drew the attention of the Committee to a decision of the Supreme Court
pronounced subsequent to the impugned order of the Central Information Commission dated 3
rd June,
2013. He stated in this regard that in Thalapalam Service Cooperative Bank Ltd. and Others vs. State
of Kerala  2013 STPL (Web) 818 SC, the Supreme Court has made it very clear that merely providing
subsidies, grants, exemptions, privileges, etc., as such, cannot be said to be providing funding to a
substantial extent unless the record shows that the funding was so substantial to the body which
practically runs by such funding and but for such funding, it would struggle to exist.
4. He was of the view that the RTI Act, 2005 as passed by Parliament, did not envisage the
political parties, but only Government or Government agencies which are mainly utilizing public funds,
to be within the ambit of the Act. He emphasized on the importance of transparency and accountability
of political parties and suggested that the political parties should suo motu  disclose financial details.
He also expressed the inability to identify all individuals who contribute for the political party, especially
in small amounts.
5. The witness responded to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee.
(The witness then withdrew)
6. The Committee then took up for consideration its draft Sixty-third and Sixty-fourth Reports
on the Rajasthan Legislative Council Bill, 2013 and the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013.
The Members expressed their views on the draft Reports and adopted the same with some minor
modifications.
7. The Committee then authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar and in his absence, Shri Abhijit
Mukherjee to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha, on Friday, the 6
th December, 2013.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 12.48 P.M.

17
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 13 th December, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
4. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Shri Pinaki Misra
7. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
8. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
9. Shrimati Meena Singh
10. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
11. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director
2. The Chairman extended a warm welcome to all the Members. The Committee then took up
for consideration its draft Sixty-sixth Report on the Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2013. The
Members expressed their views on the draft Report and adopted the same with some minor
modifications. Ms. Anu Aga submitted a Note of dissent. The Committee agreed to append appropriately
the same to the Report.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar and in his absence, Shri S.S.
Ramasubbu to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha, on Monday, the 16
th December, 2013.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman informed the Members that the Assam Legislative Council Bill, 2013
has been referred to the Committee on 11 th December, 2013 for examination and report within three
months. The Committee authorized the Secretariat to issue a Press Communique seeking views/
suggestions on the Bill from the public.
17

18
5. The Committee then reviewed the status of the pending subjects/Bills. The Committee decided
to visit Kolkata and Guwahati from 19 th to 23 rd January, 2014 in connection with the examination of
Bills viz., The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and Assam Legislative Council
Bill, 2013. The Committee accordingly, authorized the Chairman to seek necessary permission of
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for undertaking the said study visit.
6. The meeting adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.

19
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-A
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
07 May, 2012
Bill No. 1 12 of 2013
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information
(Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day
of June, 2013.
2. In section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause ( h), the
following Explanation  shall be inserted, namely:––
‘Explanation .—The expression “authority or body or
institution of self-government established or constituted” by
any law made by Parliament shall not include any association
or body of individuals registered or recognised as political
party under the Representation of the People Act, 1951.’.
3. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“32. Notwithstanding anything contained in any
judgment, decree or order of any court or commission, the
provisions of this Act, as amended by the Right to
21
Short title and
and commence-
ment.
22 of 2005. Amendment of
section 2.
Insertion of
new section 32.
43 of 1951.
Validation.

22
Information (Amendment) Act, 2013, shall have effect and
shall be deemed always to have effect, in the case of any
association or body of individuals registered or recognised
as political party under the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 or any other law for the time being in force and
the rules made or notifications issued thereunder.”.
43 of 1951.

23
23
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right to Information Act, 2005 was enacted by the
Government for setting out a framework for effectuating the right to
information for citizens and to secure access to information under the
control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and
accountability in the working of every public authority.
2. The Central Information Commission in one of its decision
dated 03.06.2013 has held that the political parties namely AICC/INC,
BJP, CPI (M), CPI, NCP and BSP are public authorities under section
2(h) of the said Act. The Government considers that the CIC has
made a liberal interpretation of section 2( h) of the said Act in its
decision. The political parties are neither established nor constituted by
or under the Constitution or by any other law made by Parliament.
Rather, they are registered or recognised under the Representation of
the People Act, 1951 and the rules/orders made or issued thereunder.
3. It has also been observed that there are already provisions in
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 as well as in the Income-
tax Act, 1961 which deals with the transparency in the financial
aspects of political parties and their candidates.
4. Declaring a political party as public authority under the RTI
Act would hamper its smooth internal working, which is not the
objective of the said Act and was not envisaged by Parliament under
the RTI Act. Further, the political rivals may misuse the provisions of
RTI Act, thereby adversely affecting the functioning of the political
parties.
5. In view of above, the Government has decided to amend the
RTI Act to keep the political parties out of the purview of the RTI
Act, with a view to remove the adverse effects of the said decision
of the CIC. It is also necessary to give retrospective effect to the
proposed amendment with effect from the date of the said decision of
CIC, that is, 3rd day of June, 2013.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; V . NARAYANASAMY
The 5th August, 2013.

24
24
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE R IGHT TO I NFORMATION A CT, 2005
(22 OF 2005)
* *** *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* *** *
(h) “public authority” means any authority or body or
institution or self-government established or constituted—
(a) by or under the Constitution;
(b) by any other law made by Parliament;
(c) by any other law made by State Legislature;
(d) by notification issued or order made by the
appropriate Government, and includes any—
(i) body owned, controlled or substantially financed;
(ii) non-Government organisation substantially
financed,
directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate
Government;
* *** *
Definitions.

25
25
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions )

26
ANNEXURE-B
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
(M/o Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions)
Part-I: Comments and Suggestions on the Bill
Sl. Memorandum Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. No. Organisation
12 3 4 5
1.
2.
3.
4.
1
2
3
4
Aloke Kumar,
Kolkata
Indian National
Congress
Communist Party
of India
Nationalist
Congress Party
No Law can be made to have
retrospective effect for the purpose
of setting aside any judgement of a
court that has provided justice to
any party in the case.
If political parties are not brought
under RTI Act NGOs would also
raise similar demand.
Political parties are instrumentalities
of the Government and they must
be accountable to the Government.
Support the proposal of political parties
out of ambit of RTI Act, 2005.
Availing of Free airtime during
election time cannot be treated as
substantial funding. However, ready
to reveal all required details
regarding Finonces of the party.
Support the proposal to keep political
parties out of ambit of RTI.
Being a legal issue, M/o Law and Justice may be consulted.
Since no such proposal has been received, this issue has
not been examined by this Ministry.
There are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
No Comments.
The transparency in financial aspects of the political parties
is taken care of by Representation of People Act, 1951 and
Income Tax Act, 1961.
No Comments.

27
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
5
6
7
8
11
CPI (Marxist)
T.K. Rangarajan,
M.P. (R.S.)
Baijayant ‘Jay’
Panda, M.P. (L.S.)
Subhash Chandra
Agarwal
Dr. T.V . Govindan
National Campaign
for People’s Right
to Information
Supports the proposal to keep
political parties out of ambit of RTI.
Powers of Election Commission
need to be enhanced to regulate the
affairs of political parties till then
Bill should not be passed.
Surrender Land, Free Airtime, IT
exemptions benefits etc. if political
parties do not want to come under
RTI Act.
Political parties are instrumentalities
of the Government and they must
be accountable to the Government.
Candidates of a political party are
required to declare their election
expenses to EC but are not audited.
Even if the EC is strengthened,
bringing political parties under RTI
Act is critical.
Political parties use public resources
and also hold information which is
of public importance and should be
disclosed.
On point that political rivals might
misuse the potential of RTI Act, a
public authority has to provide only
such information which is available
in material form.
No Comments.
This is for the Ministry of Law and Justice and Election
Commission to decide.
There are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
There are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the  transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
This is for the Ministry of Low and Justice and Election
Commission to decide.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People Act,
1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with the
transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.

28
12 3 4 5
12
13
14
Concerns of political prties may be
addressed by expanding the scope
of Section 8 of RTI Act.
Political parties should be under RTI
Act, 2005. The concern of political
parties may be addressed by
expanding the scope of Section 8
of RTI Act.
1. As they are notified by the Central
Election Commission and;
2. Enjoy the benefits of tax relief
on their income.
3. Limited exemptions could be
given to political parties by expanding
section 8 of the Act.
Political parties should be under RTI
Act, 2005.
Political parties perform public
functions to they must be included
in the definition of public authorities.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
The position of political parties is unique. They me neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There are
already provisions in the Representation of People Act, 1951
and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with the transparency
in the financial aspects of political parties. Since they work
in a competitive environment with other political parties,
there is every possibility of the misuse of RTI Act by the
political rivals. Thus, in the view of this Ministry, political
parties may be exempted from the purview of the RTI Act.
Section 2(h) of the Act does not provide for conditions such
as performance of public duly that make such authority or
body as a public authority for the purpose of the RTI Act.
10.
11.
12.
Prosenjit Das
Gupta, Kolkata
J.P. Shah, Gujarat
Association of
Transparency and
Anticorruption

29
Rohit Kumar and
Others KIIT
University
S.P. Manchanda,
Delhi
Shailesh Gandhi,
Former IC in CIC
Akhil Bhartiya
Grahak Panchayat
13.
14.
15.
16.
15
16
17
18
Political parties should not be
excluded from the RTI ambit to
save the democratic rights of
citizens, to ensure internal
democracy within the political parties
and to end the practice of betrayal
after the election.
There are enough provisions in
Section 8 to refuse information.
Further queries are not answerable
under RTI Act.
Disclosure u/s 4(1) (b) would
reduce the no. of RTI applications
filed with a political party.
CIC decision should have  been
challenged in court instead of
resulting to  amending the Law.
To obtain immunity from RTI NGOs
will register themselves as political
parties. The amendment violates the
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People Act,
1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with the
transparency in the financial aspects of political parties,
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals, Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution, There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals, Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
Since no such proposal has been received from NGOs, so
no comments can be offered on the issue.

30
12 3 4 5
17.
18.
19.
19
20
21
Ceejum Chandran,
Jamia Milia
Islamia
Senior Citizen
Forum Rohini
Mohnish Dange
fundamental rights of equality
(Article 14 of the Constitution).
Political parties perform public
functions, so they must come under
RTI.
RTI Act will bring transparency in
the functioning of political parties.
Politicians must be treated as
Government Servants.
Act should not be amended to
excluded political parties from the
ambit of Act.
Political parties are funded by
Government so they should be under
RTI Act.
Section 2(h) of the Act does not provide for conditions
such as performance of public duty that make such authority
or body as a public authority for the purpose of the RTI
Act. There are already provisions in the Representation of
the People Act, 1951 and Income Tax Act, 1961 which
deal with transparency in the financial aspects of political
parties.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties,
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.

31
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
20.
21.
22.
22
23
24
Ramakrishna
Gowda
Raj Kumar Jain,
Ferozpur, Punjab
Association for
Damocratic Rights
Act should not be amended to
excluded political parties from the
ambit of Act.
MPs enjoys salary allowances etc.
from Government exchequer they
are public servants and so is the
political parties.
Disclosure of information by political
parties would be in larger public
interest.
Transparency in the financial
aspects of political parties is very
low.
Election Commission do not
scrutinize on financial aspects of a
political party and has no power to
impose any penal action if parties
do not file their submissions.

32
Smooth functioning of political
parties will not be affected as
Section 8 provide enough
exemptions from disclosure.
Suo-motu disclosure by political
parties will reduce the no. of RTI
application filed with them.
Political parties are performing
public functions.
Proposed amendment will reduce
public participation in democracy and
will be against the preamble of the
Act.
Article 13(2) of the Constitution bars
the state and its instrumentalities
from making any law which
infringes the Fundamental Rights as
enshrined in the Constitution.
12 3 4 5
Section 2(h) of the Act does not provide for conditions
such as Performance of public duty that make such authority
or body as a public authority for the purpose of the RTI
Act.
This is a legal issue and M/o Law and Justice may be
consulted.

33
Part-II: Other Issues not Covered by the Bill
Sl. Memorandum Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. No. Organisation/
Individual
12 3 4 5
1.
2.
3.
9
10
25
Indian Council of
Universities
Neeraj Saxena,
Sanjeev Gupta and
Anuj Agrawal
Shafi Mohammad,
Hyderabad
Private universities and private
educational institutes should also be
kept out of RTI Act, 2005.
Media should be brought under RTI
Act.
Reasons for seeking information
must be made mandatory.
Time period for which information
could be asked must be fixed.
Mr. Saxena had made certain
complaints against the working of
Central Information Commission.
Bring news papers, media houses
also under the ambit of RTI
Act, 2005.
All these suggestions require an amendment to the RTI Act,
which the Government is not considering at present, other
than the proposed amendment.
The Central Information Commission is an independent
statutory body. The general superintendence, direction and
management of the affairs of the Central Information
Commission vests in the Chief Information Commissioner,
who is assisted by the Information Commissioners.
The suggestion requires an amendment to the RTI Act
which the Government is not considering at present, other
than the proposed amendment.

34
Comments and Suggestions on the Bill
Sl. Memorandum Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. No. Organisation
12 3 4 5
1.
2.
26
27
Consumer Unity
and Trust Society
(CUTS)
Ankita Shah
Political parties perform public
functions so they must be included
in the definition of public authorities.
Bringing the political parties under
RTI Act will enhance internal
democracy in the functioning of the
parties.
People are interested in the
functioning of political parties
including financial aspects.
Decision of the CIC should have
been challenged in the Court of Law
instead of Government resorting to
amending the Law.
Transparency will curb the use of
black money used by the political
parties.
Section 8 will take care of
competitive position of the political
parties.
Section 2(h) of the Act does not provide for conditions such
as performance of public duty that make such authority or
body as a public authority for the purpose of the RTI Act.
There are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of people
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with

35
Gaurav Gupta
Kalumani Mishra
Consumer Care
Society
G . Sundaram
R.L. Sarvanam
Financial aspect should be more
transparent.
Representative of People Act 1951
and Income Tax Act, 1961 are
toothless so far as financial aspects
of the political parties are concerned.
Political parties perform public
functions, so should be under RTI
Act.
In view of Para 1(c) of tenth
schedule of the Constitution, the
political parties are invariably
constituted under the constitution,
so should be public authorities.
Support the amendment.
Political parties should have
challenged the order of CIC in court
of Law instead of resorting to the
amendment in the Act.
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
The transparency in financial aspects of the political parties
is taken care of by Representation of People Act, 1951 and
Income Tax Act, 1961.
This is for the Ministry of Law and Justice, Election
Commission and Ministry of Finance to decide.
Section 2(h) of the Act does not provide for conditions
such as performance of public duty that make such authority
or body as a public authority for the purpose of the RTI
Act.
This is for the Ministry of Law and Justice to decide.
Individual political party is not constituted by the Constitution
of India.
No Comments
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People Act,
1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with the
transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
28
29
30
31
32

36
12 3 4 5
If political parties do not want to
come under RTI Act they should
surrender the benefit granted to
them.
Demands would come from other
quarters also for exemptions from
the RTI Act.
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
There are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since no such proposal has been received from Non-
Governmental organisations/bodies, the issue has not been
examined.

37
Comments and Suggestions on the Bill
Sl. Memorandum Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. No. Organisation
12 3 4 5
1.
2.
33
34
Akhil Bhartiya
Grahak Panchayat
TRAP
There are sufficient provisions under
sub-section of the RTI Act where
undesired queries can be declined.
NGOs will register themselves as
Political parties and enjoy immunity
from RTI Act.
Political parties perform public
functions, so should be under RTI
Act.
Decision of the C1C should have
been challenged in the Court of Law
instead of Government resorting to
amending the Law.
Transparency will curb the use of
black money used by the political
parties.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.
Since no such proposal has been received, this issue has
not been examined by this Ministry.
Section 2(h) of the Act does not provide for conditions
such as performance of public duty that make such authority
or body as a public authority for the purpose of the RTI
Act.
The position of political parties is unique. They are neither
created nor established by or under the constitution. There
are already provisions in the Representation of People Act,
1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with the
transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
Since they work in a competitive environment with other
political parties, there is every possibility of the misuse of
RTI Act by the political rivals. Thus, in the view of this
Ministry, political parties may be exempted from the purview
of the RTI Act.

38
12 3 4 5
3.
4.
5.
6.
35
36
37
38
K.K. Sharma
Indian Council of
Universities
Desiya Murpokku
Dravida Kazhagam
Communist Party
of India
Information Sought under RTI Act
should· be supplied by Political
Parties to Election Commission,
centre or state, as the case may be,
who should supply the same to
information seeker.
Support the RTI (amendment) Bill,
2013
Support the RTI (amendment) Bill,
2013
Support the RTI (amendment) Bill,
2013
The proposal needs separate examination.
No comments.
No comments.
No comments.

39
Comments and Suggestions on the Bill
Sl. Memorandum Name of Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. No. Organisation
12 3 4 5
1. 39 Govind N.
Shantharam and
Venkatesh Nayak
Political parties perform public
functions so they must be included
in the definition of public authorities.
There is not enough transparency
in the financial aspects of political
parties.
Public Authority, as defined under
section 2(h) of the RTI Act, is a
broader term than the ‘State’ as
defined under Article 12 of the
Constitution. In other words, it is
possible that an entity may fall short
of being 'State' and yet may be a
'Public Authority' under the RTI Act.
Section 2(h) of the Act does not provide for conditions
such as performance of public duty that make such authority
or body as a public authority for the purpose of the RTI
Act.
There are already provisions in the Representation of People
Act, 1951 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deal with
the transparency in the financial aspects of political parties.
The definition of “State” based on Article 12 of the
Constitution of India and Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgement
in B. Hassan Ali Khan Vs. Director of Higher Education,
Andhra Pradesh, (1987) 4 Reports 198 (AP) dated 23rd
January, 1987 (WP No. 3065 of 1978) - would include
parameters such as ‘substantial financial aid’, ‘control by
the Government’, ‘performance of public functions' and
‘entrustment of governmental activities’. All of these
parameters are not essential and in a particular case, one or
a combination of more than one of them may suffice.
The definition of ‘public authority’ under Section 2(h) (a)
of the RTI Act, 2005 means the authority or body or
institution of self Government established or constituted by
or under the Constitution. The political parties are not
established or constituted by or under the Constitution and
thus would not be included in the definition of Section 2(h)
(a) of the RTI Act, 2005.

40
ANNEXURE-C
LIST OF PERSONS HEARD BY THE COMMITTEE AT DELHI AND DURING ITS STUDY VISIT
A. DELHI
1. Association for Democratic Reforms, New Delhi
(i) Prof. Jagdeep Chhokar
(ii) Shri Anurag Mittal
(iii) Ms. Shivam Kapoor
2. National Campaign for People’s Right to Information, New Delhi
(i) Ms. Anjali Bharadwaj
(ii) Shri Shekhar Singh
3. Shri Subash Chandra Agrawal, New Delhi
4. (i) Adv. Om Prakash Saxena
(ii) Shri Neeraj Saxena                
Ghaziabad(i) Shri Sanjeev Gupta
(ii) Shri Anuj Aggarwal
5. (i) Shri Kamlesh Shantilal Shah
(ii) Ms. Ankita Kamlesh Shah         RTI Activists, Nagpur
6. Shri K.K. Sharma, New Delhi
7. Shri Kulamani Mishra, Odisha
8. Shri Shailesh Gandhi, Former Chief Information Commissioner, Mumbai
9. Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat, Delhi
(i) Shri B.S. Sachdeva
(ii) Dr. Jaikishan
(iii) Shri P rabhat Gujral
10. Shri Ashok Mittal, Indian Council of Universities, Mathura
11. Shri Nripendra Misra, Public Interest Litigation, Delhi
12. Shri Sarabjit Roy, India Against Corruption, Jan Andolan and National Campaign for
Political Reform in India, New Delhi
13. Adv. R.L. Saravanan, Chennai
14. Shri V . Ramesan, Potti Sreeramulu Foundation, Andhra Pradesh
40


41
15. (i) Shri Rahul Kadiyan
(ii) Ms. Swati Chawla
16. Shri Nilotpal Basu, former M.P. and Member of the Central Secretariat of the Party,
Communist Party of India (Marxist)
B. CHENNAI, TAMIL NADU
1. Shri N. Parameshwara Murthy Bahujan Samaj Party
2. Shri N.V. Subramanian Nationalist Congress Party
3. Shri Americai V . Narayan Indian National Congress
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian AIADMK
5. Shri T.K.S. Elenagovan, M.P. DMK
6. Dr. G .R. Ravindran Communist Party of India
7. Shrimati Vanathi Srinivasan Bhartiya Janta Party
8. Dr. R. Afzal Bahujan Samaj Party
9. Shri Panchachi Moorthy Bahujan Samaj Party
10. Shri A.S. Abdul Malik Bahujan Samaj Party
11. Shri N. Prabakaran Nationalist Congress Party
12. Shri S.M. Hidayathulla Indian National Congress
13. Shri T.K. Rangaraja Communist Party of India (Marxist)
C. MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA
1. Shri Vijay Kumbheer Surajya Sangharsh Samithi
2. Shri Dolpphy D’souza Police Reforms Watch
3. Shri Bhasker Prabhu Mahila Adhikar Manch
4. Shri Maruti S. Salunkhe Shiv Sena
5. Shri Sudhaker P. Sunar Shiv Sena
6. Shri Mahesh Aimace Yashada
7. Shri Shirish G. Sawant Maharashtra Nav Nirman Sena
8. Shri Rajesh P. Sharma Indian National Congress
9. Dr. Arjun Chikhale Y ashada
10. Shri V .G . Gyan Bahujan Samaj Party, Mumbai
11. Shri A.S. Kulli Bahujan Samaj Party, Mumbai
12. Shri Abdul Qadir Choudhary Samajawad Party, Mumbai
13. Shri R.G. Aman Member, GAD, Mantralaya
14. Shri K.M. Deshpande Member, GAD, Mantralaya
D. JAIPUR, RAJASTHAN
1. Shrimati Aruna Roy Social Activist
2. Shri Nikhil Dey Social Activist

42
3. Shri Bharwar Meghwanshi Social Activist
4. Shrimati Mamata Jailtely Social Activist
5. Shrimati Renuka Pameeha RTI Activist
6. Shri Rajendra Bhanawat Doosra Dashak
7. Shri Radhakant People’s Union for Civil Liberties
8. Shri Narendra Acharya Communist Party of India
9. Shri Tara Singh Sidhu Communist Party of India
10. Shri Ravinder Shukla Communist Party of India (Marxist)

43
ANNEXURE-D
LIST OF THE REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
43
Report
No.
1
Subject of the Report
2
Date of Presentation
3
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05)
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
Report on the Right to Information Bill,
2004.
Report on the Andhra Pradesh Legislative
Council Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
Report on the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Bill, 2004.
Report on the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and other Backward Classes
(Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation
(Amendment) Bill, 2003.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 26.08.2004
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
26.08.2004.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2005
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
21.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 24.03.2005
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
24.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 20.04.2005
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
20.04.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 13.05.2005
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
13.05.2005.
Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 29
th June, 2005 and forwarded to Hon’ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha on 29 th June, 2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 26.07.2005 and
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26.07.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2005
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
04.08.2005.

44
12 3
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
20th
21st
Report on the High Court and Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Bill, 2005.
Report on the National Tax Tribunal Bill,
2004.
Report on the Contempt of Courts
(Amendment) Bill, 2004
Report on the Prevention of Child Marriage
Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07)
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
Report on the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Bill, 2006.
Report on the Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2006.
Report on the Electoral Reforms
(Disqualification of persons from
contesting elections on framing of charges
against them for certain offences)
Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
Report on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006,
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department
of Justice).
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2005
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
04.08.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 29.08.2005
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
29.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 29.11.2005
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
29.11.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 22.05.2006
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
22.05.2006.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2006
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
04.08.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 05.12.2006
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
05.12.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2007
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
15.03.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 10.05.2007
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
14.05.2007.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 17.08.2007
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
17.08.2007.

45
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
29th
30th
31st
32nd
12 3
Report on the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Legislative
Department.
Report on the Government’s Policy of
Appointment on Compassionate Ground
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (Department of Personnel
and Training)
Report on Working of Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
Report on Action Taken Replies on Law’s
Delays : Arrears in Courts
(85
th Report of Home Affairs)
Report on The Supreme Court (Number
of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008
Report on Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism
Report on Constraints Being Faced by
Kendriya Bhandar
Action Taken Replies of the Government
on the Recommendations/observations
contained in the 25 th Report on Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Action Taken Replies of the Government
on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 26
th Report on Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 06.09.2007
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
06.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 07.09.2007
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
07.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 11.03.2008
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
11.03.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 29.04.2008
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
29.04.2008.
-do-
-do-
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 04.08.2008.
Laid on the Tables of the Rajya Sabha
and Lok Sabha on 22
nd October, 2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 23.10.2008
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
23.10.2008.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2008
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2008
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
19.12.2008.

46
12 3
Report on the Representation of the People
(Second Amendment) Bill, 2008
Report on the High Court and Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Bill, 2008.
Report on the “Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 29
th Report
of the Committee on “Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism”
Report on “The Constitution (One Hundred
and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008”.
Action Taken Replies of the Government
on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 24
th Report on “Working
of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)”
Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
Report on The Personal Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 23
rd Report
of the Committee on “Government’s Policy
of Appointment on Compassionate Ground”.
Report on Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 30
th Report
of the Committee on “Constraints Being
Faced by Kendriya Bhandar”.
Report on Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the recommendations/
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2009
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2009
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2009
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2009
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 9.03.2010
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
9.03.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 29.04.2010
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
29.04.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2010
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
04.08.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 29.11.2010
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
29.11.2010.
-do-
33
rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd

47
observations contained in the 38 th Report
on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions.
Report on The Constitution (One Hundred
and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Public Interest Disclosure
and Protection to Persons Making the
Disclosures Bill, 2010
Report on the Judicial Standards and
Accountability Bill, 2010
Report on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
The Administrators-General (Amendment)
Bill, 2011
The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign
Public Officials and Officials of Public
International Organisations Bill, 2011
Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
Report on The Right of Citizens for Time
Bound Delivery of Goods and Services
and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011
Report on The Administrative Tribunals
(Amendment) Bill, 2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 9.12.2010
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
9.12.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 1.03.2011
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
1.03.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 09.06.2011.
Laid on the Tables of the Rajya Sabha on
11.08.2011 and Lok Sabha on 10.08.11.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 30.08.2011
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
30.08.2011.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 9.12.2011 and
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9.12.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 02.02.2012.
Laid to Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
20.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 29.03.2012
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
29.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 21.05.2012
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
21.05.2012.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 28.08.2012
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
28.08.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2012
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
17.12.2012.
12 3
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th

48
12 3
Report on The Registration of Births and
Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012
Action Taken Replies of the Government
on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 51
st Report on Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Action Taken Replies of the Government
on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 52
nd Report on Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
The Readjustment of Representation of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in Parliamentary and Assembly Consti-
tuencies Bill, 2013
Report on the Demands for Grants (2013-
14) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions.
Report on the “Electoral Reforms-Code
of Conduct for Political Parties & Anti
Defection Law”
Report on the “Status of Women
Government Employees, Service Conditions,
Protection against exploitation, Incentives
and other related Issues”
Report on the Rajasthan Legislative Council
Bill, 2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 27.02.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
27.02.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
20.03.2013.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 25.04.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
26.04.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 2.05.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
2.05.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 3.05.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
3.05.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 26.08.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
26.08.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 30.08.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
30.08.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 09.12.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
09.12.2013
55
th
56th
57th
58th
59th
60th
61th
62nd
63rd

49
12 3
64th
65th
66th
Report on the Judicial Appointments
Commission Bill, 2013
Report on the Representation of the People
(Second Amendment and Validation)
Bill, 2013
Report on the Right to Information
(Amendment) Bill, 2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 09.12.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
09.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 09.12.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
09.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2013
and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
17.12.2013

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.