PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 27
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES ON
LAW’S DELAYS : ARREARS IN COURTS
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES ON
LAW’S DELAYS : ARREARS IN COURTS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/V AISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-53

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1
(i) C HAPTER -I
Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Ministry ..................................................................................... 2—4
(ii) C
HAPTER -II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
does not desire to pursue for now in view of the
Government’s replies . ........................................................................................... 5—13
(iii) C
HAPTER -III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
the Committee has not accepted replies
of the G overnment ................................................................................................ 14—18
(iv) C
HAPTER -IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Ministry have not been
received ................................................................................................................... 19—32
4. M
INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 33—39
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................ 41—47
A. Institution, disposal and pendency of cases in
the Supreme Court ......................................................................................................... 43
B. Institution, disposal and pendency of cases in
the High Courts ............................................................................................................. 44—45
C. Institution, disposal and pendency of cases in
the Subordinate Courts ................................................................................................. 46—47

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Shri Tarlochan Singh
9. Vacant
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
15. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
25. Shri Vishvendra Singh
26. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee to submit this
Report on its behalf, do hereby present its Twenty-Seventh Report on the ‘‘Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the recommendations contained in the 85th Report of the Committee on
Home Affairs on the subject ‘‘Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts’’. The Department Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, after its
bifurcation from the Committee on Home Affairs on 26th July, 2004, had taken up for
consideration the Action Taken Replies on the 85th Report of the Committee on Home Affairs.
2. The Committee on Home Affairs had examined the subject in detail and had made exhaustive
recommendations. Since the recommendations pertain to important and crucial issues relating to
judiciary such as, judicial arrears, revamping of judicial system, modernization of Courts,
strengthening of judicial infrastructure etc., the Committee decided to consider the Action Taken
Replies of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice). In the light of the above,
the Committee requested the Ministry to furnish the updated Action Taken Replies on the
1st October, 2007. The Ministry sought extension of time till the 15th February, 2008. However,
on Committee's request the matter was expedited. The Committee heard the presentation of the
Secretary, Department of Justice in its meeting on the 14th February, 2008 on the subject.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 24th April, 2008.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
24th April, 2008 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Law and Justice (Department of Justice) on the recommendations/observations of the then
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs in its 85th Report on 'Law's
delays: Arrears in Courts'. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha on 7th March, 2002 and laid
on the table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2002.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Department of Justice in respect of the
recommendations contained in the above mentioned report. These replies have been categorised as
follows
 :
Chapter – I — The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry
in respect of Paras 38.2, 44, 45 and  77. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has
accepted its recommendations as mentioned in Chapter – I of the report.
Chapter – II — The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the replies given by Department of Justice in respect of paras 48, 51, 52,
54, 73 and 84. The Committee is convinced with the explanations advanced by the Department of
Justice and does not want to pursue as of now.
Chapter – III — The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has
not accepted replies given by Department of Justice with regard to paras 32.1, 32.2, 38, 65
and 70.  The Committee expresses its concern for not accepting the recommendations of the
Committee contained in Chapter – III of this report and desires that the Ministry should furnish
logical explanations in respect of these recommendations.
Chapter – IV — The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Department of Justice have not been received with regard to paras 7, 20, 22, 26, 28, 30 and
49. The Committee observes that the Ministry has furnished interim replies and the Committee
desires that the Ministry should furnish action taken notes in respect of recommendations
categorised in Chapter – IV.
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 85th report, the ATRs furnished
by Department of Justice and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been
dealt with in the succeeding chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
1. Strength of Judges
The Committee is of the considered view that the Government may reconsider the
recommendations of the 120th Report of the Law Commission and take steps to increase
the strength of judges per million population, at the earliest. The Committee endorses the
Law Commission’s recommendations and suggests that variations can be made for different
jurisdictions on the basis of pendency, rate of disposal and other relevant factors in
consultation with the judiciary. The Committee understands that the States are generally
not able or willing to provide the finances that are required to create courtrooms and other
infrastructure consequent upon the number of the judges being increased. The Committee
recommends that the Union Government must take the initiative to provide funds and
create mechanisms to monitor their utilization. (Para 38.2)
Action Taken Reply
In so far as the Judge strength is concerned, the position is as follows:
The Law Commission had recommended and the Supreme Court has spelt out that the
existing Judge population ratio should be increased from 10.5 per million population to 50 Judges
per million. This increase in Judge strength of 50 Judge per million population should be effected
and implemented in a phased manner within a period of five years. The Central Government have
requested the, Supreme Court through an Interlocutory Application to modify its order (dated
21.3.2002 in All India Judges Association Vs. Union of India) to allow creation of judge strength
on the basis of work-load and not on the basis of population alone. The matter is still sub judice .
Judges strength in High Courts was reviewed in 2007. It has been decided to create 152
posts of Judges taking the strength of Judges in High Courts from 725 to 877.
Government proposes to set up Gram Nyayalayas and the Gram Nyayalaya Bill which was
earlier referred to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee will be pursued in the
Parliament with official amendments based on the recommendations of the Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee. The strength of judicial officers of the country is expected to
increase after such Nyayalayas are set up.
In so far as providing infrastructure facilities for the judiciary, it is the primary
responsibility of the State Governments to provide such facilities for the High Courts and
Subordinate judiciary. However to augment the resources of the State Governments, the Union
Government initiated a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for development of infrastructure facilities for
the judiciary since 1993 — under which grant is released for construction of court buildings and
residential accommodation for judges and the States have to provide matching share. UTs are not
required to provide matching share. From 1993-94 upto 2006-07, a sum of Rs.690.65 crore was
released as Central share to the States/UTs. As per available information, States/UTs have spent
Rs.1442.59 crore till 2006-07 including their share.
2

3
The Central Government also provides infrastructure support by way of computerization of
the courts and presently has under implementation a scheme in this regard.
Recommendation/observation
2. Case load and Judicial manpower requirement
The Committee has carefully considered the computations made in the Department
of Justice for the reduction of pendency of cases over a period of 3, 5 or 7 years, besides
disposal of regular year to year institution of cases. The Committee notes that the
Government has proceeded on the hypothesis that arrears should be cleared in a period of
6 years. The Committee questions the hypothesis. (Para 44)
The Committee is of the view that the aim should be to clear the arrears within
three to four years, that the primary sanctioned strength should be maintained on the basis
of an optimum judge population ratio worked out on the basis of the pendency and the rate
of disposal, and that judges’ strength should be augmented protem to deal with the
accumulated arrears. The system should ensure a zero accrual of arrears beyond three
years. The judges’ strength should be increased or augmented in the phased manner and
without compromising the quality of judges for numbers can never be a substitute for
quality. (Para 45)
Action Taken Reply
The recommendation has been forwarded to all the High Courts and State Governments and
UT Administrations.
The Supreme Court has spelt out that the existing Judge population ratio should be
increased from 10.5 per million population to 50 Judges per million. This increase in Judge strength
of 50 Judge per million population should be effected and implemented in a phased manner within
a period of five years. The Central Government have requested the Supreme Court through an
Interlocutory Application to modify its order (dated 21.3.2002 in All India Judges Association Vs.
Union of India) to allow creation of judge strength on the basis of work-load and not on the basis
of population alone. The matter is still sub judice .
Judges strength in High Courts was reviewed in 2007. It has been decided to create 152
posts of Judges taking the strength of Judges in High Courts from 725 to 877.
The proposed Gram Nyayalayas is also expected to contribute in reduction of arrears.
Recommendation/observation
3. Computerization of Courts
The Committee strongly recommends that the task of computerization should be
taken up on a high priority basis; proper networking should be achieved between the
Supreme Court, High Courts and all Subordinate Courts within a specific time schedule
which will definitely help in disposing of the cases faster. (Para 77)
Action Taken Reply
Government has approved a scheme of comprehensive computerization of all District and
Subordinate Courts in the country and has commenced implementation of the scheme which
includes up gradation of the IT infrastructure in the Supreme Court and the High Courts and linking
the lowest court to the highest court electronically. The scheme which is based on the National

4
Policy and Action Plan presented by the E-Committee is envisaged at a total estimated cost of
Rs.854 crore for implementation in a period of five years. Presently, the first phase of the scheme,
at a total cost of Rs.442 crore (with scope for 10 per cent enhancement) is under implementation
for being completed in a period of two years.
The above mentioned scheme is being implemented by the Government as a Mission Mode
Project called E-Courts.

5
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
GIVEN BY DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Recommendation/observation
1. Liquidation of pendency in High Courts
The Committee notes that in order to liquidate the pendency in High Courts within
a span of one to three years, additional judges will be required and also the supplemental
creation of supporting staff for each judge and other infrastructural support. The
Committee would like to impress upon Government to make full use of the centrally
sponsored scheme for infrastructural development of the judiciary started by it since 1993.
The main problem the Committee foresees is that State Governments may not be very
enthusiastic about the scheme as they have to share the cost on 50:50 basis. It may be
pointed out that the Committee on Home Affairs in its 72nd Report on Demands for Grants
(2001-02) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, has urged upon the
Government to consider the idea of giving substantially larger contribution to the State
Governments in carrying out the scheme. The Committee would urge the Government to
make a specific plan for improving, augmenting and streamlining the facilities and
resources for existing courts and tribunals and for new courts and tribunals to be created
to cut the monstrous problem of arrears to size. (Para 48)
Action Taken Reply
The scheme of development of infrastructure facilities for the judiciary which is
implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme is being continued in the Eleventh Five Year Plan
with an outlay of Rs.701.08 crores. This scheme is exclusively for, construction of courts and
residential accommodation for the judges and judicial officers. The Department of Justice had
earlier taken up the matter of enhancing the central share for this Centrally Sponsored Scheme
from 50 per cent to 75 per cent with the Planning Commission which was not agreed to. Prior
to the finalization of the Eleventh Plan outlay for the scheme, a proposal was made to the Planning
Commission for enhancing the central share in respect of the North Eastern States to 90 per cent
which also did not find favour with the Planning Commission. In the period from 1993-94 to
2006-07 an amount of Rs.690.65 crore had been released to the States and UTs as central share.
The States/UTs have reported spending Rs.1442.59 crore (including their share) in the same period,
which indicates that some of the States do have the ability to share 50 per cent or more of the
cost of infrastructure development.
In addition, the Central Government provides support for computerization of the courts as
an entirely central sector initiative. As has been mentioned separately, a scheme of comprehensive
computerization of the District and Subordinate Courts is under implementation. This scheme is
being implemented with the National Informatics Centre as the implementing agency. The first
phase of the scheme is expected to cost Rs.442 crore. As part of the scheme laptop computers
have been provided to judges and judicial officers (12155 laptops), laser printers for these laptops
are being procured for delivery, training is underway to familiarize the judges and the court staff
5

6
with the computerization. Internet connectivity and facility is being provided to the judges. The
above measures are part of Government’s efforts at improving and augmenting the infrastructure
facilities and resources for the judiciary.
Recommendations/observations
2. Alternative mode of dispute settlement
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs in its 49th Report (1998)
accepted the proposal of arbitration, conciliation, mediation and judicial settlement and it
became part of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999. (Para 51)
The Committee is hopeful and cautiously optimistic that efforts of this kind would
definitely help reduce the burden on the courts and decrease the accumulation of arrears.
The Committee feels that the Government should encourage Non-Governmental
organizations to spread awareness among the people, especially people of low income groups,
about the futility of frivolous cases to be filed in the court and persuade them to adopt
methods like arbitration, mediation, and out of the court settlement. The Committee is of
the view that an enlightened Bar and the Bar Councils have a crucial role to play in the
process. (Para 52)
Action Taken Reply
The Department of Legal Affairs, who are concerned with the subject matter, have
furnished the following information:
Part
 - I:
The following fora are available for encouraging awareness among low-income groups in
the matters of arbitration, mediation and out of court settlement:
(1) The International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution (ICADR),
(2) Lok Adalats and Legal Aid to Poor.
(3) Arbitration and Conciliation under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
(4) The International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution (ICADR)
The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 has already been amended to incorporate provisions of
section 89, which enjoin upon the courts a duty to try settlement of cases through ADR Modes
like arbitration, conciliation, Lok Adalats, etc.
ICADR has been spreading awareness amongst various Group of citizens about the futility
of frivolous cases to be filed in the courts and persuade them to adopt methods like arbitration,
mediation for out of the court settlement. In this connection ICADR has organised around 54
Seminars/Workshops/Training Programmes upto the F.Y . 2005-06 and trained around 6000 persons
as Arbitrators and Conciliators.
It has further organised the following Seminars/Workshops/Training Programmes/Lectures/
Diploma Courses during the year 2006-07.
(1) ICADR, Headquarters organised a National Workshop on Plea Bargaining on 23rd and
24th September, 2006 in SCOPE Complex in collaboration with Ministry of Home
Affairs.
(2) The second Workshop on Plea Bargaining was held jointly by ICADR and Orissa
Judicial Academy , Cuttack on 28th January, 2007 in Cuttack.

7
(3) ICADR organised an International Level Conference on ‘‘Alternative Dispute
Resolution’’ on 10th February, 2007 at Hotel Inter-Continental, The Grand, New
Delhi. It was inaugurated by Hon’ble Mr. Justice K.G. Balakrishnan, Chief Justice of
India. The said Conference was attended by Rt. Hon. Baroness Hale of Richmond,
DBE, PC, FBA Lord of Appeal in Ordinary, U.K. and Prof. (Dr.) Julian Farrand, QC,
LLD, FCIArb.
(4) A National Seminar on ‘‘Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanism – National
and International Perspective’’ was held jointly by ICADR and University Law
College, Jaipur on 24th March, 2007 in Jaipur. About 300 delegates attended the
Seminar.
(5) A Seminar on ADR-Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation was held jointly by ICADR
and Bar Association and Bar Council, Punjab and Haryana, on 21st April, 2007 at
About 400 delegates attended the Seminar, which was a great success.
(6) A Workshop on ‘‘Insolvency and Creditors Rights Reform’’ was held by ICADR in
collaboration with Ministry of Law and Justice, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the
World Bank on 29th August, 2007 in Hotel Taj Mahal, New Delhi.
(7) ICADR are making efforts to approach Heads of the Government Departments, Public
Sector Undertakings, etc., and request them to include Arbitration/Conciliation Clauses
of ICADR in the Agreements to be entered into by such Departments/PSUs with other
parties so that in case of future disputes arising between them, the cases are referred
to ICADR for settlement.
(8) The Chief Engineer (Projects), Irrigation, Government of Andhra Pradesh informed
that it is proposed to refer two cases, involving the claim amount below
Rs.10,00,000/-, to ICADR for arbitration. In other cases, where claim amount is in
excess of Rs.10,00,000/-, civil courts are being approached, subject to agreement
between the parties concerned, for withdrawal of cases which will then be referred
to ICADR.
(9) A Convocation Ceremony was held in the office premises of Regional Centre,
Hyderabad, on July 22, 2006 to present Diplomas and Certificates to the successful
students of P.G. Diploma in ADR (2005) and P.G. Certificate Course in ADR (2005)
conducted at Hyderabad and Visakhapatnam respectively.
(10) Post Graduate Diploma in ADR [Proximate Education (2006-07)] : ICADR in
collaboration with NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad started the third batch of
the said diploma course through the distance education. 157 candidates enrolled for
the diploma course from various parts of India.
(11) Post Graduate Diploma in ADR [Regular (2006-07)]: ICADR in collaboration with
NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad, started the P.G. Diploma Course in ADR for
the academic year 2006-07 (seventh batch). 58 candidates enrolled for the said
diploma course and the classes started in January, 2007. The course will conclude in
October, 2007.
(12) Post Graduate Diploma in Family Dispute Resolution (2006-07): ICADR in
collaboration with NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad, started the P.G. Diploma
Course in Family Dispute Resolution for the academic year 2006-07 (fourth batch).
19 students enrolled for the said diploma course and the classes started in
March, 2007. The course will conclude in November, 2007.

8
(13) The Regional Centre, Hyderabad conducted a Workshop on ADR for 3 days from
12-8-2006 to 14-8-2006 for 23 District Judges and 26 Additional District Judges and
Senior Civil Judges of Andhra Pradesh at A.P. Judicial Academy, Secundera bad. This
Workshop on ADR was held to facilitate implementation of the provisions of Section
89 of the Code of Civil Procedure in Andhra Pradesh.
(14) Hon’ble Supreme Court of India referred a Family Dispute matter in the case of
K. Nagasri vs. K. Nageswara Rao [Transfer Petition Civil No. 983 of 2005] to
ICADR, Hyderabad for reconciliation purpose. One student of ICADR was appointed
as Conciliator and after protracted negotiations, a Memorandum of Understanding was
signed by the parties to live together.
(15) The Family Court, Hyderabad has referred 258 cases to ICADR for conciliation
purposes. The Regional Centre, Hyderabad has appointed the diploma holders of P.G.
Diploma in Family Dispute Resolution as Conciliators. They are making their sincere
and diligent efforts to conciliate between the disputing spouses without charging any
fee. In 14 cases the Conciliators through their efforts have succeeded in making the
parties to arrive at amicable settlements.
(16) A meeting of the Advisory Council of ICADR, Hyderabad was held on 22-7-2006. It
was presided over by Hon’ble Chief Justice of Andhra Pradesh High Court,
Shri Justice G.S. Singhvi and attended by Prof. V . Nageswara Rao, Law Secretary,
Government of A.P. and others. It was decided in the meeting that to spread the
message of Conciliation and Mediation, a Committee may be constituted with two
senior most High Court Judges, a Member from ICADR and Secretary, A.P. State
Legal Services Authority to prepare and implement programmes, to go to each District
to impart training to Judicial Officers, Advocates, Doctors, Teachers, Engineers and
Social Workers so that wider Panels of Conciliators could be prepared who will work
under the supervision of the District Judge.
(17) A Workshop on ADR for the benefit of Judicial Officers, Advocates, Professors and
others was conducted in the office of the District Legal Service Authority, Guntur
from 28th to 31st December, 2006. About 60 persons attended the Workshop.
Similar Workshops on ADR were also conducted by the Regional Centre, Hyderabad in other
districts of Andhra Pradesh:
(a) A Workshop in ADR was conducted at Nalgonda from 18th to 21st January, 2007.
(b) A Workshop in ADR was conducted at Kurnool on 10th-11th February, 2007.
(c) A Workshop in ADR was conducted at Eluru on 24th - 25th February, 2007.
(d) A Workshop in ADR was conducted at Karimnagar on 24th-25th March, 2007.
(18) A Presentation Ceremony of Post Graduate Diplomas and Certificates was held in
Regional Centre, Hyderabad on 3rd June, 2007 for the successful candidates of P.G.
Diploma in ADR (Regular Course), P.G. Diploma in ADR (Proximate Education), P.G.
Diploma in Family Dispute Resolution, P.G. Certificate Course in ADR at
Visakhapatnam and also for presentation of the Gold and Silver Medals to the two top
ranking students of P.G. Diploma in ADR (Regular Course) (2006).
(19) A Workshop on ADR was conducted in the district of Ongole of Andhra Pradesh on
28th-29th April, 2007.
(20) The ICADR, Regional Centre, Bangalore, conducted a two days Training Programme
on ‘‘Arbitration, Conciliation and Mediation’’ for Engineers of Karnataka Water

9
Resources Department in three batches on 18.4.2006-19.4.2006, 18.5.2006-
19.5.2006, 18.7.2006-19.7.2006.
(21) The ICADR, Regional Centre, Bangalore organised a three days Seminar on
‘‘Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Development Initiative’’ from 27th August,
2006 to 29th August, 2006.
(22) The ICADR, Regional Centre, Bangalore, conducted the fourth batch two days’
training Programme on ‘‘Arbitration, Conciliation and Mediation’’ for Engineers of
Karnataka Water Resources Department at IAS Officers Association, Infantry Road,
Bangalore, on 1.12.2006 and 2.12.2006.
(23) The High Court of Kamataka launched a pilot training programme on ‘Mediation’ in
collaboration with ICADR, Regional Centre, Bangalore, at Karnataka Judicial Academy
premises from 20.1.2007 to 25.1.2007 and 24.3.2007 to 28.3.2007 to train
experienced, dynamic young and energetic Lawyers as Mediators with a view to
complement the provisions of section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The
training programme was implemented with technical co-operation and support of the
Institute for the Study and Development of Legal Systems (lSDLS), San Francisco.
2. Lok Adalat
With the steep growth in the number of laws and the number of litigations, the Courts are
choked with cases. Civil disputes, in particular, are fought for several decades. There is serious
problem of overcrowding of dockets. Because of the ever-increasing number of cases, the Court
system is under great pressure. The existing strength of Judges and infrastructure at their
command is unable to tackle the problem of ‘docket explosion’.
In order to reduce the heavy demand on Court time, cases must be resolved by resorting
to ‘Alternative Dispute Resolution Methods’ before they enter the portals of the court and Lok
Adalat may be one of the best method of A.D.R. to resolve the disputes pending in the courts as
well as at pre-litigative stage.
The Institution of Lok Adalats has been given a statutory status by the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987. The provision of statutory support to Lok Adalats has helped in taking justice
to the doorsteps of the poor and needy and made justice quicker and less expensive. Under the
said Act, the award made by the Lok Adalats is deemed to be the decree of Civil Court, and is
final and binding on all parties and no appeal lies before any court against its award.
Presently, Lok Adalats are being held by the State Legal Services Authorities all over the
country for amicable settlement of the following disputes beside others :—
➢ Motor Accident Claim Cases.
➢ Matrimonial/Family disputes
➢ Criminal Compoundable Offence cases
➢ Land Acquisition Cases.
➢ Labour Disputes
➢ Workmen’s compensation
➢ Bank Recovery cases, (Nationalised, Multinational and Private Banks)
➢ Pension cases

10
➢ Housing Board and slum clearance cases and Housing Finance cases
➢ Consumer Grievance cases
➢ Electricity matters
➢ Telephone Bills disputes
➢ Municipal matters including House Tax cases
➢ Disputes with Cellular Companies viz. Airtel, V odafone, Tata Tele services etc.
Chapter VI-A has been inserted in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 by the Parliament
with a view to provide compulsory pre-litigative mechanism for conciliation and settlement of
disputes relating to ‘Public Utility Services’.
The Public Utility Services covered under the Legal Services Authorities (Amendment)
Act, 2002 are :—
1. Transport services for the carriage of passengers or goods by air, road or water;
2. Postal, Telegraph or Telephone service;
3. Supply of power, light or water to the public by any establishment;
4. System of public conservancy or sanitation;
5. Service in hospital or dispensary;
6. Insurance service etc.
The basic purpose behind the amendment of the Act is to prevent harassment of consumers
by organizations responsible for providing Public Utility Services and to ensure speedy settlement
of disputes relating to such public utility services at a pre-litigative stage.
Subsequent to the coming into force of the said Amendment in the Act, the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Kerala, Punjab, Rajashtan, Sikkim, U.T.
of Chandigarh have established Permanent Lok Adalats under chapter VI-A of the Act.
However, a number of State Legal Services Authoritites could not get established Permanent
Lok Adalats for the public utility services under Chapter VI-A of the Legal Services Authorities
(Amended) Act, 2002 due to lack of positive response from the State Governments. The proposals
for establishment of such Lok Adalats are pending with the State Governments.
As on 30.6.2007, more than 2.22 crore cases have been settled in Lok Adalats organized
all over the country.
Section 89 lays down that where it appears to the Court that there exist elements of
settlement, which may be acceptable to the parties, the Court shall formulate the terms of
settlement and give them to the parties for their comments. On receiving the response from the
parties, the Court may formulate the possible settlement and refer to either (i) arbitration
(ii) conciliation (iii) Judicial Settlement including the settlement through Lok Adalat or
(iv) Mediation.
Efforts are being made to provide an additional forum to the litigants for settlement of their
disputes by setting up of Mediation Centres in the Country. Such Centres have been set up in
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharahstra, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand,
Chandigarh, and Delhi.
The main problem being faced by Alternative Dispute Redressal System, is that there are
not many trained ‘Mediators’ and ‘Conciliators’ whom the cases can be referred for pre-trial

11
settlement by the court. This is also one of the reasons why the people do not accept this mode
of pre-trial settlement-as an alternative to the regular courts of law. As on date there are not many
trained personnel to impart training to prospective Mediators and Conciliators including Judicial
Officers and members of the Bar about Alternative Dispute Redressal methods and pre-trial
settlement of cases.
It has, therefore, been decided to start training programme in all the High Courts of the
Country to impart training to the Trainers who shall further impart training to the persons to act
as Mediators.
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 provides for conciliation and amendment of the
law relating to domestic arbitration, international, commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign
arbitrational awards as also to define the law relating to conciliation and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
Committee’s further observation
While placing on record its appreciation on the various steps taken by the
Government in the matter, the Committee reiterates its earlier view that non-Governmental
Organisations should be roped in to spread awareness to all strata of society and to every
rural and urban area covering the length and breadth of the country regarding arbitration,
conciliation and out of court settlements.
Recommendation/observation
3. Suggestions received from individuals/lawyers/retired judges
The Committee finds that many of the suggestions though well-intentioned are not
practicable. On the other hand, some of them arise from practical experience and insight
and those suggestions are the stuff of judicial reforms at the operational level. The
Government should examine the whole range of suggestions and many more which may be
received from time to time carefully with a view to implement those which are found
acceptable and feasible. It would give the people a sense of participation in the reform
process. (Para 54)
Action Taken Reply
The suggestions before the Committee that were mentioned in Para 54 have been forwarded
to all State Governments and Union Territories. Some of the practicable suggestions in the direction
of judicial reform at the operational level have been acted upon.
For instance, the Civil Procedure Code has been amended which, inter-alia , limit the
number of adjournments which can be granted to a party to three, provide for speedy process
service by speed post, courier services, fax or e-mail, authorize the court to fix time limit for oral
arguments and provide for a number of other measures aimed at ensuring expeditious disposal of
cases.
On the matter of enhancement of working days in the courts, the Department of Justice
has requested all the High Courts to consider that the vacation/holidays of the High Court may be
fixed in such a manner that the number of working days (Bench sitting of High Courts) may not
be less than atleast 222 days per year. In the Conference of Chief Ministers and Chief Justices held
on March 11, 2006, Hon’ble CJI has announced that this time they will curtail their vacations in
Supreme Court by one week. Consequently there will be corresponding increase in working days
in the Supreme Court.

12
The comprehensive scheme of computerization of the District and Subordinate Courts
(E-Courts), presently under implementation, envisages, inter alia , availability of digitally signed
court orders, issues of certified copies of orders and judgements within 24 hours, production of
under-trial prisoners before Magistrates through Video-conferencing, examination of witnesses
through Video-conferencing, status of pending as well as disposed of cases online and E-filing of
cases.
Judicial Reform is, however, a continuous process and all practicable suggestions are noted
for examination and feasibility of implementation.
Recommendation/observation
4. National Judicial Academy
The Committee is of the opinion that the establishment of NJA is an important step
towards judicial reforms and the expenditure on the improvement of judicial system would
be an investment for a future. The Committee is of the view that the NJA should establish
a Research Centre on Judicial Reforms including subject such as Arrears and should
inculcate the mind set of problem solving and the spirit of reform. (Para73)
Action Taken Reply
The recommendation of the Committee was earlier forwarded to the National Judicial
Academy. The NJA had then informed that although, apparently, the proposal is in no way
inconsistent with the objects of the Academy yet, the final decision in this regard can only be
communicated after consideration of the matter by the Governing Council and the General Body
of the Academy.
The Academy became functional with the joining of a full time Director during
October, 2003.
The courses and the training curriculum in the NJA as decided by the Academic Council
lay emphasis on reduction of arrears, problem solving and the spirit of reform in the various
subjects in which training, workshop and seminars are organized by the Academy. The NJA’s
academic activities in 2005-06 covered judicial reform oriented subjects such as role of judiciary
on Intellectual Property Rights Development and Adjudication, Civil Justice and Alternative Dispute
Resolution, gender justice dimension, cyber laws, cyber forensics and E-governance in Judiciary,
training methodologies and capacity building of judicial training institutions, environmental disputes
and adjudication, court management, judicial planning and administration, juvenile justice, science
law and ethics, media and judicial relations, advancing the cause of justice, alternate dispute
resolution method and judicial settlements without trial, combating corruption and reducing arrears
in courts etc.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and would appreciate if the decision
of the National Judicial Academy on the issue of establishing a Research Centre on Judicial
Reforms is communicated to it for its consideration.
Recommendation/observation
5. Fast Track Courts
The Committee welcomes the plan for establishment of 1734 Additional Courts under
the Special Problems Grants of XI Finance Commission. However, if it is calculated that 542

13
courts (which have been started functioning), were to clear 25 cases per month, then in 6
months i.e. from 1st April, 2001 to 31st October, 2001, they should have cleared 94,850
cases. In fact they had cleared only 15,078 cases. Taking into account the fact that all 542
courts did not start functioning from 1st April, 2001, still figures are not at all encouraging.
The Committee recommends that the Government should closely monitor the
implementation of the proposal. Every step taken to reduce arrears and ensure swift
disposal of cases is a step to restore and reinforce the faith of the people in the judiciary
and the fundamental values of rule of law, (Para 84)
Action Taken Reply
Government has continued with the scheme of Fast Track Courts (FTCs). Out of the 1734
FTCs recommended by the Eleventh Finance Commission, 1562 FTCs were reported operational by
the States as on 31.3.2005, the date up to which the scheme originally was in force. Government
has extended the scheme in respect of the 1562 FTCs in the States for a further period of five
years up to 31.3.2010. Central assistance is being provided to the States for the FTCs. During the
year 2005-06, an amount of Rs.l00.00 crore and during 2006-07, an amount of Rs.102.93 crore
was released to the State Governments. During the current financial year 2007-08, an amount of
Rs.33.32 crore has been released to various States.
As per information furnished by the States the FTCs have disposed of 18,57,098 cases out
of 26,69,495 cases transferred to these courts since inception.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee, while endorsing the establishment of Fast Track Courts, would like to
suggest that the Government should keep track of the disposal rate of the Fast Track Courts and
closely monitor their effective functioning as well.

14
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT
OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED
REPLIES GIVEN BY DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Recommendation/observation
1. Vacancies of Judges
The Committee is aware that for this state of affairs of inordinate delay in filling
up of vacancies for that the Union Law Ministry is not blameworthy, as the entire process
of initiation of proposal for appointment of new Judges is no longer the responsibility of the
Executive as a result of a decision of the Supreme Court. Though it was not contemplated
in the Constitution, responsibility for judicial appointments now rests in the domain of the
judiciary. The Union Law Minister is accountable to Parliament for the delay in filling up
of the vacancies of judges but he has functionally no contribution to make. The Supreme
Court read into the Constitution a power to appoint judges that was not conferred upon it
by the text or the context. The underlying purpose of securing judicial independence was
salutary but the method of acquiring for the Court the exclusive power to appoint judges
by the process of Judicial interpretations is open to question. Against this backdrop the
Committee recalls a recent discussion in the Rajya Sabha in which the Government was
asked regarding alternate arrangements to fill up the vacancies and whether there was any
scope for having a fresh review of the Supreme Court's judgment. (Para 32.1)
The Committee is of the view that the delays in judicial appointments is a matter
of serious public concern. The Committee is duty bound to point out that the failure to fill
judicial vacancies promptly and punctually cannot be shielded or defended in the name of
judicial independence. (Para 32.2)
Action Taken Reply
No comments. The position remains the same.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee reiterates its recommendation on the issue and suggests the Government
to earnestly consider the Constitutional provisions in this regard. The Committee is of the firm
opinion that the provisions of the Constitution accord primacy to the Executive in the matter
of appointment of the Judges, which was taken away through a judicial interpretation. The
Committee is of the considered opinion that the earlier system of consultations with the judiciary
and the primacy of the Executive in the appointment of Judges worked well and was in
consonance with the Constitutional intent and provisions and there were no delays in judicial
appointments. The Committee also feels that Judicial independence in appointment of judges
has gone through the tests of time and has proved futile in expeditiously filling up vacant posts
and thereby checking the ever increasing pendency of cases. In the light of the above, the
Committee strongly recommends the restoration of the primacy of the Executive in the matter
so that judicial vacancies are filled up promptly and expeditiously.
14

15
Recommendation/observation
2. Judge population ratio
The Committee is of the opinion that the judge population ratio recommended by the
Law Commission should be accepted as a starting point with sufficient scope for variation
on the basis of pendency and disposal. (Para 38)
Action Taken Reply
The judge population ratio recommended by the Law Commission, which has also been
spelt out by the Supreme Court mentions that the existing Judge population ratio should be
increased from 10.5 per million population to 50 Judges per million. This increase in Judge strength
of 50 Judge per million population should be effected and implemented in a phased manner within
a period of five years.
The Central Government have requested the Supreme Court through an Interlocutory
Application to modify its order (dated 21.3.2002 in All India Judges Association Vs. Union of India)
to allow creation of judge strength on the basis of work-load and not on the basis of population
alone. This is in line with this recommendation of the Committee.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee notes that a time span of over 2 (two) decades has elapsed since the
recommendation regarding increasing the judge population ratio to 50 Judges per million to be
effected and implemented in a phased manner within a period of five years. However, there has
been minimal result in this regard. Therefore, the Committee desires the Government to devise
ways to accelerate the implementation of the said recommendation in order to restore the faith
of the public on the judiciary, which has eroded to near irrepair.
Recommendation/observation
3. Implementation of Law Commission reports
The Committee strongly feels that when almost 50 per cent of the reports of the
Commission are not being implemented, the efficiency, if not the utility of the Commission
may well be questioned. It is for the Government and the Parliament to take note of the
Law Commission’s reports with a view to consider them and to implement them rather than
to allow them to gather dust on bureaucratic and ministerial shelves. A strong convention
should be evolved in this respect. (Para 65)
Action Taken Reply
The Department of Legal Affairs are concerned with the subject. Based on the information
furnished by that Department the position is as follows:
The Law Commission of India have submitted its 202 Reports till date. Out of these 202
Reports, action has been completed in respect of 143 reports by way of full or partial
implementation. 52 reports are pending for implementation. All these Reports have been laid in the
Parliament. As per the terms and conditions of the Constitution of the 18th Law Commission, the
report submitted by it shall also be made available on the Website as soon as reports are submitted
to the Government.
Further to the above, information has been given by the Department of Legal Affairs that
203rd Report of the Law Commission has also been received recently and is under examination.

16
Committee’s further observation
The Committee notes the reply of the Department of Justice in the matter. However, it
recommends that the remaining 52 Reports of the Law Commission of India should also be
considered for implementation within a stipulated time period. The Committee recommends for
an early affirmative action on the part of the Government in this regard.
Recommendation/observation
4. Legal Education in India
Though setting up Centres of Excellence for Legal Education is the first important
step, a long distance is yet to be travelled, if we want to improve our legal education and
consequently legal system in the country. The Committee is hopeful that necessary steps,
such as improving the infrastructure in Law Colleges, introduction of curriculum meant to
produce high standards of law professionals, recruitment of dedicated teachers will be taken
up by the Government of course in close partnership with the Bar Council of India to
augment legal education in the country. (Para 70)
Action Taken Reply
The Department of Legal Affairs who are concerned with the subject matter, have informed
as follows:
‘‘Under section 7( 1) of the Advocates Act, 1961, the responsibility ‘to promote legal education and
to lay down, standard of such education’ rests with the Bar Council of India.
The Bar Council of India has furnished following comments on the Report of the Committee on
Home Affairs on the subject of ‘‘Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts’’:
(a) With regard to improving the infrastructure of law colleges, the Bar Council of India
is insisting for improvement of the physical infrastructure like land, building, etc.
library and the faculty during the stationary inspection of the law colleges in the
country. Extension of approval in the case of existing colleges is granted subject to
the specific conditions for improvement on the above and time limit is also prescribed
for complying with the said conditions and to report compliance to the Bar Council
of India.
(b) Regarding introduction of new curriculum, the Bar Council of India has proposed
revision/amendments to the existing curriculum framed in 1996 and the revision of
curriculum along with the proposed amendments on the rules of legal education has
already been circulated to all the Universities in the country, imparting legal education,
as well as the State Bar Councils as provided under Part IV of the Rules relating to
standards of legal education and recognition of degree in law. Bar Council of India
are awaiting for the responses from the Universities and the State Bar Councils for
finalizing the same.
(c) Regarding recruitment of dedicated teachers, the fact remains that the country is
experiencing acute shortage of competent law teachers to man the modern law
schools/Universities. Although the subject matter of post graduate legal education does
not come within the purview of the Bar Council of India, the Bar Council of India
is taking keen interest in improving the quality of law teachers also. Towards this
direction, the Bar Council of India has initiated a programme of training the law
teachers in various batches at various centres in collaboration with the National Law

17
Universities of our country. The first training programme in this series has already
been conducted at the National Law School of India University, Bangalore in the
month of May, 2007 where about 40 law teachers from various law colleges
participated. Bar Council of India proposes to conduct similar regional training
programme to law teachers at the National Law Universities at Hyderabad, Bhopal,
Calcutta and Jodhpur.
(d) The Bar Council of India propose to set up a National Institute of Lawyers on the
lines of National Judicial Academy and this Central Institute will concentrate on
improving the standard of the legal profession as well as legal education in the
country. For this venture the Bar Council of India is looking forward for timely
financial assistance from the Government of India through the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
2. The 184th Report of the Law Commission which deals with the subject of Legal Education
and Professional Training (‘‘The Legal Education and Profession Training and Proposals for
Amendment to the Advocates Act, 1961 and the University Grants Commission Act, 1956’’) has
been forwarded to the Bar Council of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development
(Department of Higher Education) for their comments/views. Copies of the report have also been
endorsed to the University Grants Commission and the All India Council for Technical Education
for their views.
3. The Department of Higher Education has informed that a proposal for withdrawal of the
‘‘The University Grants Commission (Amendment) Bill, 1995’’ which is pending in Rajya Sabha for
the last ten years, has been drafted for seeking Government’s approval. The recommendation of
the 184th Report of the Law Commission is proposed to be taken into account while preparing a
comprehensive amendment in the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
4. A proposal for establishment of National Law University along with its three centres in
Eastern, Western and Northern regions is under consideration. Further, Department of Higher
Education, has also desired that the proposal of National Law University to have one more centre
in the Central Region apart from its other centres.
5. The Government of Haryana has earmarked 25 Acres of land for the proposed National Law
University to be established at Manesar (Gurgaon). The CPWD has provided tentative layout plan
and Area Statement of the proposed National Law University. The matter is under examination.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Department of Legal Affairs in the matter.
The reply appears to be untenable in as much as for imparting quality legal education physical
infrastructure should not be the sole starting point. As for revision of curriculum the reply
simply states that the Bar Council of India has circulated the same in the year 1996 to all the
universities. It is a matter of serious concern that the new curriculum is still to be finalized.
Further the reply of the Department of Legal Affairs at para (4) above is factually contradictory
with the information furnished by the Department to this Committee on 20th March, 2008 as
part of consideration of Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
wherein it has informed that the National Knowledge Commission headed by Shri Sam Pitroda
has recommended setting up four autonomous, well networked Centre for Advanced Legal
Studies and Research (CALSAR) and the proposal to establish the National Law University is
being re-examined. The Committee, therefore, would appreciate if the factual proposition of the
Government is conveyed to the Committee for its consideration. The Committee, further,
reiterates its recommendation for taking steps for imparting quality legal education in India in

18
consultation with Bar Council of India especially in the revision of curriculum, which is long
over due in view of the current curriculum, as stated in the reply of the Government, being
framed in 1996. The Committee further impresses upon the Government to prevent
mushrooming of incompetent Law Colleges/institutions in the country by framing-stringent
rules.

19
19
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation/observation
1. Malimath Committee recommendations
The Committee has been informed that the Malimath Committee was asked to
submit its report within six months. However, it has now been given extension up to
31 March, 2002. The Committee welcomes the setting up of this Committee to go into the
revamping of the criminal justice system and is hopeful that its recommendations would be
far reaching as far as revamping of the criminal justice system is concerned. The
Committee would also expect of the Government to steadily process the recommendations
and thereafter implement those which are found acceptable. (Para 7)
Action Taken Reply
The Malimath Committee submitted its report in April 2003 and made 158 recommendations.
Thirty five of these recommendations of the Committee have been implemented.
Provisions relating to anticipatory bail have been introduced in the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Act 2005 and the provision for plea-bargaining has been introduced in the
Criminal Procedure Code vide Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2005. Further, 10 recommendations
of the Committee regarding legislative changes are sought to be implemented through a new
legislation i.e. Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill 2006. The recommendations relating
to rape laws are under active consideration before the Government. The recommendations of
administrative nature have been implemented by issuing suitable instructions/advisories to the State
Governments.
Acceptance/implementation of many recommendation/suggestions made by the Malimath
Committee would require amendments to the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 through an amendment Bill. Since the Criminal Law and the Criminal Procedure
are on the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India and criminal laws
are administered by the State Governments, any amendment to them requires consultation with the
States. The report was forwarded to the State Governments and Union Territories Administrations
on October 8, 2003 to obtain their comments. So far comments of 18 State Governments and 6
UT Administrations have been received. The other States, who have not responded, are being
reminded regularly to send their comments. The report is being processed in consultation with the
State Governments and no time frame can be fixed.
Twenty eight recommendations relating to functioning of courts etc. were forwarded to the
various High Courts for taking necessary action and 14 recommendations were concerned with
Ministry of Finance and they have been asked to take action on them.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee notes that after a lapse of 2(two) years the progress of action taken in
implementing the recommendations of the Malimath Committee Report is appalling that only

20
35 recommendations out of the total 158 recommendations have been implemented so far and
the remaining recommendations are in various stages of implementation i.e. requiring legislative
changes, consultations with the State Governments and action on the part of the High Courts
etc. The Committee recommends that the Government should devise ways and means to speed
up the process of consultations with the State Governments and the matter should be expedited
in urgency especially in the cases where the Malimath Committee has recommended changes in
the substantive laws viz. the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
In the light of the above the Committee desires for a time bound implementation of the
Malimath Committee Report and not allow the implementation process to linger on much
longer. The Committee may accordingly be apprised of the such a time bound plan and the steps
taken by the Government in this regard.
Recommendation/observation
2. Pendency in Supreme Court and High Courts
The Committee is impressed by the various steps taken by the Supreme Court
towards reducing the arrears successfully. Though similar methods are said to have been
applied by various High Courts also, similar results have not been achieved. The Committee
is particularly perturbed to note that cases are pending for over 50 years, 40 years and 30
years in certain High Courts. As per the data furnished by the Government, M.P. High
Court has a case pending since 1950, Patna High Court has a case pending since 1951,
Rajasthan since 1956, Kolkata since 1955. The Committee is equally disturbed to note that
over 5 lakh cases are pending in the High Courts for over 10 years. And the number of
cases pending for 6-10 years are also as high as 3 lakh. (Para 20)
Action Taken Reply
The observations of the Committee have been forwarded to the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Courts and the Chief Ministers of the concerned State Governments vide Union
Law Minister's D.O. letter of 25th February, 2002 with the request to work out special plans to
take necessary steps for expediting the disposal of cases which have remained pending for a long
time.
The position (as on 30.9.2007) with regard to institution, disposal and pendency of cases
is at Annexures A, B and C. It will be observed that the overall institution of cases is comparable
or higher than disposal of cases. With a view to facilitate speedy disposal of cases and reducing
pendency, Government has, inter alia , taken up the implementation of a scheme of computerization
of all District and Subordinate Courts in the country thereby making use of Information and
Communication Technology in Indian Courts to ensure speedy disposal of cases.
Committee’s further observation
While acknowledging the initiatives taken by the Government to combat pendency of
cases in High Courts and Subordinate Courts, the Committee expresses its concern over the huge
pendency of cases in these Courts inspite of the initiatives taken. The highest pendency, as per
the data provided by the Department of Justice, is at Allahabad High Court followed by Madras,
Bombay, Calcutta, Punjab and Haryana, Orissa and Rajasthan High Courts. These seven High
Courts have more than 25 Lakh cases pending with them. Six High Courts viz. Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Patna have more than seven Lakh cases
pending with them. Though the rest of the High Courts have less pendency as compared to the
above stated High Courts none the less pendency exist at each High Court. The situation is far
worse at the Subordinate Courts level. Huge arrears of pending cases are in U.P . Maharashtra,

21
Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Bihar and Rajasthan. Uttar Pradesh alone has
48,17,554 cases pending at the Subordinate Courts level. The Committee feels that the arrears
of cases is a serious malady requiring immediate corrective steps. Further, the huge arrears are
a poor reflection on the working of the judicial system. In the light of the above the Committee
further recommends for concerted and need specific plans for the High Courts and Subordinate
courts to clear the backlog of cases in addition to their computerization. The Committee,
therefore, recommends improvement of judicial infrastructure and adequate budget allocation
for the subordinate judiciary.  The Committee also recommends for appointment of ad-hoc
Judges for the High Courts especially to clear the pendency and setting up of fast track courts
at subordinate level. The Committee further suggests that a Monitoring Committee be constituted
at each High Court to devise specific plans to clear the backlog of cases.
Recommendations/observation
3. Pendency in High Courts
The Committee strongly feels that urgent steps are needed to be taken for the
disposal of huge pendency of cases in the High Courts, especially of Allahabad, Madras,
Calcutta, Kerala and Bombay. The Committee would like that the Government be urged
upon to take up this matter with the Chief Justice of India, Chief Justices of the concerned
High Courts and the State Governments with a view to work out or devise special plans to
reduce the pendency and revive public confidence in the Judiciary with regard to delays in
the disposal of cases and accumulation of arrears. (Para 22)
Action Taken Reply
The recommendation has been forwarded to the Chief Justices of the concerned High
Courts and the Chief Ministers of the concerned State Government vide Union Law Minister's D.O.
letter dated 25.2.2002.
While the disposal of the pendency of cases in the High Courts is a matter of general
concern and steps have been taken both by the High Courts and the Government to dispose
pending cases, with particular reference to the High Courts mentioned in the para above, the High
Courts of Kerala, Madras, Allahabad and the Bombay High Court have recently informed as follows:
High Court of Kerala:  While sharing the concern on the issue of arrears, the Registry of
the High Court has mentioned various steps that have been taken for the reduction of arrears in
the High Court. For the analysis of the status of case disposal, statement of filing, disposal and
pendency of cases in the High Court is prepared every month and circulated among the Hon'ble
Judges and Officers on the Judicial side of the High Court. Based on an analysis on the above,
the Chief Justice gives direction thereby taking every positive step for the speedy disposal and
reduction of arrears by accelerating the process of Justice Delivery.
In the High Court, classification and grouping of cases involving similar question of Law
is done for the expeditious disposal of cases coming under a separate category or group identified
as per the classification. While constituting Benches and allocating work to each Bench, the Chief
Justice takes utmost care to see that optimum output is obtained in the disposal of cases by each
Hon’ble Judge.
Also, certain categories of cases are given priority in the daily cause list and hearing list.
Rules 92 and 94 of the Rules of the Kerala High Court, 1972 specify the matters to be included
in the said list. Out of these, priority is given to the Part-heard cases, Death Sentence References,
cases of under-trial prisoners, cases in which reports have been called for or findings have
been submitted, cases which have been directed to be posted to a specific date or on the

22
expiry of a specified period and cases in which the hearing has been directed to be expedited or
advanced.
Priority is also given to cases in which other proceedings are stayed, cases, the pendency
of which causes delay in the disposal of cases pending in the lower courts, appeals from decisions
of a Single Judge/against orders of remand, probate and Succession Appeals, Matrimonial Appeals,
Land Acquisition Appeals, Appeals under Special Acts such as Companies Act, Guardian and Wards
Act and Insolvency Act, Reference under section 113 of the Code of Civil Procedure, petitions for
special leave to appeal to Supreme Court, Tax Matters and Revenue Recovery Matters, cases
involving Senior citizens and Civil and Criminal cases.
As far as the High Court is concerned, while finalizing the daily roster, the Chief Justice
gives priority in listing old cases by constituting special benches to hear such cases, taking into
account the categories mentioned above which are to be given priority for disposal. High Court
Legal Services Committee is also conducting periodical Lok Adalats for the purpose of speedy
settlement of cases in the High Court. In addition to the above, special priority is given for the
trial and disposal of stayed cases.
As a result of these measures taken for reduction of arrears, at present there is downward
trend in the pendency of cases. The statement of filing, disposal and pendency of cases in the High
Court of Kerala year-wise from the year 2002 to 2006 and for the period from 1.1.07 to 31.10.07
is given below:—
Year Filing Disposal Pendency
2002 70842 70365 126314
2003 72517 71504 127327
2004 73960 65883 135404
2005 74693 76721 133376
2006 72812 88639 1 17549
1.1.07 66674 69593 1 14630
to
31.10.07
From an analysis of the above figures it is clear that from 2005 onwards the disposal is
far above the filing which has resulted in a decrease in pendency of cases. As a result of these
measures taken for the clearance of arrears, at present there are only 22 cases pending which were
filed during the period from 1.1.81 to 31.12.90, The pendency of cases filed from 1.1.91 to
31.12.2000 are 10002. The remaining 104606 cases were filed after 1.1.01.
High Court of Madras:  The following steps have been taken by the High Court of Madras
for speedy disposal of cases and to reduce the arrears:
1. Cases covered by the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court and the High Court are also
identified and posted for final disposal
2. Division Bench has been constituted exclusively to deal with Criminal Appeals where
the priority is for the accused are in Jail.
3. Priority given in listing of cases of rape and sexual harassment and other cases
involving offences committed against women.

23
4. In respect of Prevention of Corruption Act cases, exclusively a Judge is to be
nominated by the Hon’ble Chief Justice to deal with the matter so as to reduce the
delay in disposal of cases.
5. V alue of appeals in civil courts increased to Rs.15 lakhs from Rs.5 lakhs for being
posted before the Division Bench.
6. Cases of similar points of law are grouped and posted before the same Bench.
7. One court has been constituted exclusively for the cases pending before the Tribunal
and transferred to the High Court after the abolition of the State Administrative
Tribunal.
8. To reduce the pendency of Misc. Petitions some Hon’ble Courts are allotted to deal
with them on alternative days.
9. Old Civil Suits, Original Matrimonial Suits and Testamentary Original suits pending up
to the year 1997 are listed before one Hon’ble Court.
10. Original Side Appeals against orders passed in Arbitration matters taken up for hearing
in priority bases.
11. Steps are taken to identify the cases of the following nature and post them for hearing:
(a) Senior Citizen cases
(b) Cases in which stay injunction has been granted by the High Court by which the
trial of cases are pending before lower courts.
The above said cases are all identified and given priority and posts for final hearing.
12. Though the working days of the High Court is 210 days, the working hours of the
High Court has been increased by 15 minutes daily for arriving at 220 days.
13. As per the directions of the Hon’ble Chief Justice/Patron-in-Chief, continuous Lok
Adalats for cases pending before High Court are organized. Sitting and retired judges
of the High Court are two members who sit and dispose of cases.
14. Mediation Centre proposal was mooted and it is progressing in full swing.
15. Digital Display Board was installed in the High Court which has helped the advocates
In avoiding unnecessary adjournments.
16. Two more Additional Master Courts were constituted apart from the existing Master
Court to take evidence of the parties and witnesses in Civil Suits.
17. Out of Eleven Judges, three Judges are nominated to hear the First Appeals in the
Principal Seat at Madras and similarly in the Madurai Bench to clear the backlog of
First Appeals, five Judges are nominated to hear the Final Hearing of Second Appeals
year-wise to clear the backlog of Second Appeals.
High Court of Allahabad:  The following steps have been taken by the High Court of
Allahabad for speedy disposal of cases and to reduce the arrears:
1. Benches have been constituted keeping in view the pendency of cases of particular
nature.
2. Whenever a Bench is unable to sit, the cases of that Bench are transferred immediately
to another Court by the order of the Hon’ble Chief justice.

24
3. A broad categorization of cases being filed in the High Court is being done with the
help of a Code Book. Each petition is allotted a Code number and with the help of
computerization all such cases of one particular category are sorted out. A
Classification Section dealing with grouping and bunching of cases prepares a list of
cases of the like nature, likely to be decided by single/identical judgement.
4. A massive exercise was undertaken by the High Court of stock-taking of the cases
pending and to get each cases entered in computer so as to reach the correct figure
of the pending cases.
5. A permanent Mediation and Conciliation Centre has been set up in the High Court.
6. Lok Adalat is being held regularly in each month in the High Court for disposal of
Motor Accident claims petitions.
7. Certain powers and duties in relation to judicial proceedings have been given to
Registrar General of the High Court. Matters such as sufficiency of service are being
listed before the Registrar General and Officers of the H.J.S. rank working in the
registry.
Bombay High Court:  The Registry of the Bombay High Court has informed that constant
efforts are being taken at the Principal Seat, as well as the Benches of that High Court for speedy
disposal of the cases and to effectively reduce the pendency. The measures taken under the
directions of the Hon’ble Chief Justice to effectively deal with the pendency of cases both at macro
and micro level include introduction of latest technology in the nature of IT tools, classification and
bunching of cases and allocation of the afternoon session exclusively for the purposes of final
hearing of the matters.
On 31.10.2007, the full House of the Bombay High Court approved a software programme
viz. Case Management and Information System in which there is a provision for automatic listing
of cases on the basis of slots which has relevance to the pendency and the average final figures
in a particular category of cases. This programme has innovative features of sending notices by
FAX or e-mail and automatic general of notices. This software is supposed to be implemented at
the earliest.
The Registry has further informed that there has been classification and bunching of cases
more particularly in the matters of First Appeals arising out of the Land Acquisition Act and Motor
Vehicles Act. It has been informed that starting from the second quarter of 2007-08, the Chief
Justice has constituted Special Benches initially at Bombay both on the Original side and Appellate
side followed by similar Special Benches at Nagpur and Aurangabad which have shown encouraging
results. For instance Special Bench constituted at Nagpur to take up Single Judges matters disposed
of 390 matters out of 914 in a span of four days. The sanction strength of the High Court has
also been increased from 64 to 75.
Information is yet to be received from the High Court of Calcutta.
As part of Government’s initiatives aimed at disposal of arrears and prompt disposal of
cases Government is implementing the scheme of computerization of the courts which include
upgradation of the existing IT facilities at the High Courts.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the High Courts of Kerala, Madras,
Allahabad and Bombay to reduce the pendency of cases. However, as per the information
provided by the Department of Justice the High Courts of Allahabad, Bombay and Madras still

25
have huge pendency. The Committee desires that the steps taken by the High Courts in reducing
backlog of cases be practical and feasible and must result in reduction of arrears. In this
context, the Committee recommends that the Government may take upon itself to make an
assessment of the various steps taken by the various High Courts to reduce pendency and identify
the measures that have had substantial impact. This assessment can pose a guideline to all High
Courts and Subordinate Courts in combating the huge pendency lying with them.
Recommendation/observation
4. Pendency in High Courts and Subordinate Courts
The Committee notes that the problem of pendency in the High Court is the most
acute. It fully agrees with the observation of the Law Minister that the High Courts have
become the slowest layer in the judicial process. It is significant that despite poor
infrastructure and other constraints in lower courts they have made a dent, however small,
on the problem of arrears. Those courts deserve better facilities and better working
conditions. The Committee, also recommends that all necessary steps may be taken to
secure expeditious handling of cases in the High Courts and the Subordinate Courts by
filling the vacancies of Judges in High Courts; stricter control over adjournments;
reallocation of cases, when a bench is unable to sit; Bench stabilization, and Man-power
management to reduce time taken in file movement. The Committee also recommends to
the Government to accord top priority to improve manpower and infrastructural facilities at
the Subordinate/District Court levels so as to facilitate wiping out of the arrears and swift
disposal of cases. Budgetary allocations have to be augmented substantially. There is need
for a greater sense of purpose. (Para 26)
Action Taken Reply
The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to all the High Courts by
Department of Justice initially on 26.3.2002 with copy to all the State Governments and UT
Administrations.
In so far as filling up of vacancies is concerned, the Government has been requesting the
Chief Justices of the High Courts, Chief Ministers and the Governors of the States, from time to
time, to initiate proposals for filling up of the present and anticipated vacancies in keeping with the
provisions of the Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges in the High Courts.
In his D,O. letter dated 26.4.2002 addressed to Chief Justices of all the High Courts and
the Chief Ministers of all the States, the Union Law Minister had requested them to take early steps
in filling up the vacant posts of Judicial Officers of Subordinate Courts by 31 st March, 2003, as
directed by the Supreme Court.
As regards according priority to infrastructure facilities for facilitating wiping out of arrears
and better disposal of cases and augmenting budgetary allocations, it may be mentioned that in the
Eleventh Five Year Plan the Department of Justice will be implementing schemes for improvement
of infrastructure facilities covering construction of Courts, computerization of Courts and Court
Management Techniques etc. at a total outlay of Rs.1470 crore which is much higher than the
Tenth Plan outlay of Rs.700 crores.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the
Government should pursue the matter vigorously with all the High Courts so that vacant posts
are filled up expeditiously. As for the allocation of funds, in the Eleventhth Five Year Plan to

26
the Judiciary for creating infrastructural facilities and computerization etc. the Committee
recommends that the allocation should be made in proportion to the number of cases pending.
The Committee recommends working out a formula for matching demands to the Judiciary as
it strongly feels that the Judiciary is provided with insufficient funds invariably. The Committee
opines that insufficiency of funds has played a major factor in contributing to arrears. The
increase in the Eleventh Plan for the judiciary works out to Rs.770 crore only which, in the
opinion of the Committee, is meager in comparison to the huge pendency of cases at various
levels. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should allocate enough
funds to the judiciary.
Recommendation/observation
5. Implementation of Malimath Committee Report
The Committee feels that the recommendations of the Malimath Committee,
especially those cited above when implemented in all the States/UTs, will definitely expedite
the disposal of cases and suggests that the Government may persuade the States/Union
Territories with all sincerity, which are still in the process of implementing them, to
complete the process without further delay. (Para 28)
Action Taken Reply
The observations of the Committee have been conveyed to all the High Courts with copies
to the respective State Governments with a request to implement the Malimath Committee
recommendations which pertain to them without further delay.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee would like the Ministry to pursue the matter with the High Courts and
the respective State Governments in all sincerity and not merely play a role of the post-office,
but earnestly monitor the implementation process of the States by seeking their periodic status.
Recommendation/observation
6. Alternative tribunals to counter arrears
The Committee is of the firm view that setting up of alternative tribunals viz;
Industrial Relations Commissions; Rent Tribunals; and setting up of tribunals with
jurisdiction on various educational malpractices are likely to help reduce the burden on
courts. The Committee recommends that Government may take necessary steps to set up
these Tribunals at the earliest. (Para 30)
Action Taken Reply
As the Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation and
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) are the concerned Ministries
to set up Industrial Relations Commissions, Rent Tribunals and Tribunals with jurisdiction on
various educational malpractices respectively, these Ministries were requested to take necessary
action.
The Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation has informed that Rent Control
is a State subject and as such the State Governments have the exclusive powers to legislate on
the subject. It is, however, open to the Central Government to prepare a Model Legislation for
adoption by the States and they may adopt it with such suitable modifications to suit the local

27
condition. The Ministry had prepared a Model Rent Control Legislation and the same was
forwarded to the State Governments in 1992 for amending their existing Rent Control Laws or
enacting new rent acts on the lines of Model Legislation. The Model Legislation among other things
suggested ‘‘setting up of a two tier system of adjudication with Rent Controllers and Tribunals and
installing speedy and simplified procedure for settlement of disputes’’.
Most of the States have modified their rent laws on the basis of the Model Legislation.
However, in some States the action is under way . They are being requested from time to time to
amend the Act in accordance with the Model. A Status note showing action taken by States/UTs
on adoption of Model Rent Control Legislation is enclosed. The Ministry of Labour recently has
informed that there is no proposal to set up Industrial Relations Commission.
As regards setting up of Tribunal with jurisdiction on various educational malpractices, the
response of the Ministry of HRD is awaited.
Status note on Action Taken by State Government/UTs
on Model Rent Control Legislation (As on 31-10-2007)
Sl.No. State/UT Present Status
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control
(Amendment) Act, 2005 is enforced from 28.4.2005.
2. Arunachal Pradesh State of Arunachal Pradesh is yet to enact the Rent Control
Act in the State.
3. Assam The Government of Assam has submitted a copy of
notification dated 3.4.2007 stating that the Governor of Assam
is pleased to constitute the Committee for drafting of Urban
Rent Control Legislation Bill, Public Disclosure Bill and the
Community Participatory Bill (Nagararaj Bill) in connection
with the implementation Reforms Agenda of JNNRUM in the
State level and finished the job of drafting the Bills within
three months from the date of notification.
4. Bihar Sub ject matter is under consideration.
5. Chhattisgarh No information has been provided.
6. Goa Certain amendments have been carried out in the Goa Rent
Control Act. The Rent Control Act, as it stands today, covers
most of the suggestions made in the Model Rent Control
Legislation.
7. Gujarat The Government of Gujarat have extended the Bombay Rents,
Hotel and Lodging House Rent Control Act, 1947 upto
31.3.2011 and have exempted premises constructed/let out
after 30.3.2001 for a period of ten years.
8. Haryana The State Government has prepared ‘‘The Haryana Urban
(Regulation of Rent and Eviction) Bill, 2007.’’ Which is under
consideration.

28
12 3
9. Himachal Pradesh The matter is under consideration of the State Government
for issuing the notification under Section 3(1) of H.P Urban
Rent Control Act, 1987.
10. Jammu and Kashmir No information has been provided.
11. Jharkhand S tate Government has informed in November, 2006, that the
Act will be amended within a period of two years.
12. Karnataka A new rent legislation entitled Karnataka Rent Act, 1995 on
the lines of the Model Bill has been brought in. This has come
into effect from 31.12.2001.
13. Kerala The Government of Kerala has informed that the Hon’ble High
Court of Kerala in the Judgement dated 4.6.2002 in O.P.
No. 10733/97 has struck down Sections 5,6,8 of the Kerala
Building (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965. A draft Bill
amending the existing Act incorporating suitable provisions,
substituting the struck down provisions is being processed.
14. Madhya Pradesh The Select Committee has recommended certain amendment
in the Madhya Pradesh Kiraya Vidheyak Bill. The
recommendations of the Committee are under examination.
The amendments recommended by the Committee will be
placed before the Cabinet for its approval and the same will
thereafter be sent to State Legislation Assembly.
15. Maharashtra Maharashtra Rent Control Bill was passed by the Legislative
Council on 16.12.99 and Leg. Assembly on 21.12.99 with
amendments. The amendments made by the Leg. Assembly
were concurred in by the Leg. Council on 22.12.99. The
provisions are not strictly in accordance with the Model Law.
Ministry of Home Affairs conveyed the President’s assent dt.
08.03.2000 to the Maharashtra Government. The Act was
brought into force but it has been challenged in the Supreme
Court.
16. Manipur The Government of Manipur is preparing a Bill on Rent
Control on the lines of suggestions made by the Government
of India for placing before  the Manipur Legislative Assembly.
17. Meghalaya State Government is actively considering the matter of
bringing amendments to the State Rent Control Law.
18. Mizoram A Committee on ‘‘Mizoram Urban Area Rent Control Bill’’
under the Chairmanship of Secretary General Administration
Deptt. has been constituted. The matter is under active
consideration.
19. Nagaland No information.

29
12 3
20. Orissa Steps were taken to initiate the proposal to introduce the
‘‘Orissa House Rent Control Legislation’’ in Orissa but after
detailed scrutiny and careful examination of the said proposal,
it was decided by the State Government that introduction of
the Rent Control Legislation will not be beneficial to the
people of Orissa. The State Government has decided not to
go in for such a Legislation.
21. Punjab State Government has taken a decision to amend the existing
Rent Control Legislation i.e. , The East Punjab Rent
Restrictions Act, 1949. Policy decision in this regard has been
taken and the amending legislation is in the process of getting
finalised before its presentation to the Legislature.
22. Rajasthan A new legislation entitled the Rajasthan Rent Control Act,
2001 on the lines of the Model Bill has been brought in. This
has come into effect from 1.4.2003.
23. Sikkim Government of Sikkiin already has an Act Called ‘‘Gangtok
Rent Control and Eviction Act, 1956’’. The pre-merger of
old laws in the State of Sikkim have been protected by
Article 371 (F) of the Constitution of India and therefore,
bringing in an amendment to the Act on the basis of the
MRCL may lead to technical hurdles.
24. Tamil Nadu Issue of comprehensive amendment to the existing Tamil
Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 on
the lines of Model Rent Control Law is under active
consideration.
25. Tripura There is an existing Act on Rent Control named as ‘‘The
Tripura Buildings Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1975’’ The
Act contains provisions for constitutions of Rent Control
Courts and various other provisions to protect interest of
land-lords and tenants. The jurisdiction of MRCL is proposed
to be limited to larges cities. All the towns in Tripura, except
Agartala which has a population of 2 Lakh, are small in area
and population. In view of existence of a State Rent Control
Act, it has not been felt necessary to enact a new law on the
lines of MRCL However, MRCL and State Rent Act are being
examined to identity areas where similar provisions are to be
made.
26. Uttar Pradesh The Uttar Pradesh Urban Building (Regulation of Letting, Rent
and Eviction) Act, 1972 has been amended by U.P. Act No.5
of 1995.
27. Uttaranchal No information has been provided.
28. West Bengal The Rent Control Laws as amended have been already
effected in W.B. from 10.7.200l.

30
12 3
29. Andaman and Nicobar Andaman and Nicobar Islands Rent Control Legislation which
Islands was notified on 19.10.1965 is applicable in Port Blair
Municipal Area. It is not based on the MRCL. The U.T. is
examining the amendment of their existing Rent Control
Regulation and the result shall be communicated at appropriate
time. (26.6.2001).
30. Chandigarh In Chandigarh, East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act is in
operation. The Chandigarh Admn. issued notification on
7.11.02 exempting buildings and rented lands above monthly
rent exceeds Rs.1500/-from the purview of East Punjab Urban
Rent Restriction Act, 1949. It has also been informed that as
and when the Punjab Government enacts a new Rent Law on
the lines of Model Legislation, the same will be got extended
to the UT of Chandigarh.
31. NCT of Delhi Delhi Rent Act, 1995 has been assented to by the President.
It is not yet enforced. It was decided to bring the Act of
1995 into force with amendments. Delhi Rent Act
(Amendment) Bill, 1997 was introduced in July; 1997. The
Bill was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Urban and Rural Development. The Committee completed
examination of the Bill in December, 2000 and submitted its
report to the Parliament on 21.12.2000. The Government has
accepted the recommendations of the Committee in toto.
Notice for moving official amendments to the Amendment Bill
was given to the Secretary General, Rajya Sabha. The Bill
could, however, not be discussed in the Rajya Sabha and the
13 Lok Sabha was dissolved. After the formation of 14th Lok
Sabha and new Government, the matter is required to place
before the Cabinet for taking a decision. The file containing
draft Cabinet Note has been submitted to the Competent
Authority for approval.
32. Dadra and Nagar This is a small UT, without Legislature. There is no State
Haveli Rent Law in force. Hence the UT sent nil information.
33. Daman and Diu The Goa, Daman and Diu Buildings (Lease, Rent and
Eviction) Control Act, 1968 and the Goa, Daman and Diu
Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Rules, 1968 are
applicable to the U.T. of Daman and Diu. The matter was
placed before the Law Committee of the Administration and
the Members of the Committee requested for more time to
study the matter.
34. Lakshadweep T here is no rent control law in force in the Union Territory
of Lakshadweep. As per the Laccadive Minicoy and Amindiv
Islands (Protection of Scheduled Tribes) Regulation 1964,
prior sanction of the Administration is required for transfer of
any interest in any landed property in the U.T. of

31
Lakshadweep to a non Scheduled Tribe. Disputes are very
few and are being settled under conciliation. Housing problem
is not acute at present and inter island migration is limited. In
view of special circumstances, no rent laws are considered
necessary for the U.T. of Lakshadweep.
35. Puducherry Pondicherry Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1969 is
in force in Puducherry. Administration has taken steps to
amend the existing Act.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee notes the reply of the Government and desires that the reply of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development with regard to setting up of Tribunals with
jurisdiction on various educational malpractices is obtained and forwarded to this Committee for
its consideration.
Recommendation/observation
7. Central assistance to financially weak States for eliminating arrears
The Department of Justice in its action taken replies to the recommendations of the
Committee on Home Affairs said that the matter regarding enhancement of Central support
to the State Governments which are financially weak has been taken up with the Planning
Commission. A reminder has also been sent to them in this connection. States like Manipur,
Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and UTs of Pondicherry and Lakshadweep are lagging
behind at present. Those States/UTs have been requested to ensure that funds are utilized
fully. The Committee is informed that suitable monitoring mechanism is in place. The
Committee would urge the Government to pursue the plan for elimination of the bulk of
the arrears by swift and satisfactory disposal of cases through a dynamic multi-pronged
approach with a sense of urgency. (Para 49)
Action Taken Reply
As part of Government’s efforts towards elimination of arrears and disposal of cases, it has
constantly tried to bring about improvements in the functioning of courts, simplifying procedures
and delivery of speedy justice.
In this direction the measures taken by Government are
(i) Continuation of the Fast Track Courts (FTCs), 1562 numbers in the country, upto
31.3.2010: The Central Government through the Department of Justice provide
assistance to the States for this purpose. As mentioned separately, the scheme of
FTCs was originally envisaged upto 31.3.2005. Government extended the scheme of
financial support to the States for the FTCs by another five years. During the year
2005-06, an amount of Rs.100.00 crore and during 2006-07, an amount of
Rs.102.93 crore was released to the State Governments. During the current financial
year 2007-08, an amount of Rs.33.32 crore has been released to various States.
As per information furnished by the States the FTCs have disposed 18,57,098
cases out of 26,69,495 cases transferred to these courts since inception.
12 3

32
(ii) Implementation of scheme of computerization of the courts: After implementing
computerization of the city courts in four metros of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and
Kolkata, Government took up computerization of the City Courts in the State Capitals
or in cities where Principal Bench of the High Court is located. In view of the
success of these efforts at computerization of the City Courts, Government has
approved for implementation a scheme of comprehensive computerization of all
District and Subordinate Courts in the country and has commenced implementation of
the scheme which includes upgradation of the IT infrastructure in the Supreme Court
and the High Courts and linking the lowest Court to the highest Court electronically.
The scheme which is based on the National Policy and Action Plan presented by the
E-Committee is envisaged at a total estimated cost of Rs.854 crore for implementation
in a period of five years. Presently, the first phase of the scheme, at a total cost of
Rs.442 crore (with scope for 10% enhancement) is under implementation for being
completed in a period of two years.
The above mentioned scheme is being implemented by the Government as a Mission
Mode Project called E-Courts. The scheme of computerization of the courts on its
total implementation is likely to substantially reduce pendency in the courts and
facilitate speedy disposal of cases thereby enhancing confidence of the public in the
judicial system.
(iii) Financial support to the States and UTs for construction of court buildings (including
building for High Courts) and residential accommodation for the judges. In the
Eleventh Plan period this activity is to be continued at an outlay of Rs.701.08 crore
with specific allocations being made for the States in the North Eastern Region as
also the UTs.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee notes the reply and impress upon the Government that stringent
monitoring of the schemes of the Government, especially the scheme of computerization of
Subordinate Courts and electronically linking of the lowest court to the highest court and the
progress made with regard to construction of court buildings and residential accommodation for
the judges in the States/UTs including the initiatives taken in the North-Eastern States and UTs
should be in place. The Committee further desires that the periodic progress made in this regard
be furnished to it for its consideration.

33
MINUTES

34

35
35
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. 1.22 P.M. and again at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
14th February, 2008, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Dr. P.C. Alexander
5. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Raj Babbar
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
9. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Prof. M. Ramadass
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. 1. Shri Satya Prakash
2. Shri D. Shankar

36
II. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice (Department of Personnel
and Training)
1. Shri Satyanand Mishra, Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Misra, Additional Secretary
3. Dr. S.K Sarkar, Joint Secretary
4. Shri C.B. Paliwal, Joint Secretary
5. Shri C.A. Subramanian, Director
III. UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (UPSC)
1. Shri D.K. Samantarary, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Biresh Kumar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri K. S. Bariar, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. V . K. Mahna, Director
IV. MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
• Department of Legal Affairs
Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
• Legislative Department
Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
• Department of Justice
1. Shri Rajiv Agarwal, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ramesh Abhishek, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Shashi Bhushan, Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Biswas, Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee took up for discussion the ATRs on 85th Report of the Committee on Home
Affairs on the subject Laws Delays: Arrears in Courts with the representatives of the Department
of Justice, Department of Legal Affairs and the Legislative Department. The representatives of the
Department of Justice informed the Committee about the implementation status of the various
recommendations as contained in the Report specifically on (i) computerization of courts;
(ii) Judicial infrastructure; (iii) increase in the Judge strength particularly at subordinate level;
(iv) periodic review of Judge strength in various High Courts (v) Fast Track Courts, Gram
*** Relates to some other matter.

37
Nyayalayas; and (vi) efforts to make the National Judicial Academy as an apex training institution
for judicial officers etc. The Members raised queries on the ATRs which were replied to by the
representatives.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting was adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.

38
XIX
NINTEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 24th April, 2008, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
2. * * *
3. The Committee also discussed and adopted its 26th and 27th Reports respectively on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and Action taken Replies on
the Subject ‘‘Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts’’.
38
*** Relates to some other matter.

39
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting was adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-A
(Vide Para 2 of the Report )
43
COURT NEWS, OCTOBER-DECEMBER, 2007
INSTITUTION, DISPOSAL AND PENDENCY OF CASES
(A) SUPREME COURT OF INDIA (FROM 01-10-2007 TO 31-12-2007)
Pendency
(At the end of 30-09-2007)
Admission Regular T otal
matters matters matters
26,170 18,649 44,819
Institution Disposal Pendency
(01-10-2007 to 31-12-2007) (01-10-2007 to 31-12-2007) (At the end of 31-12-2007)
Admission Regular T otal Admission Regular T otal Admission Regular T otal
matters matters matters matters matters matters matters matters matters
14,515 1,522 16,037 12,725 1,205 13,930 27,960 18,966 46,926

44
ANNEXURE-B
(Vide Para 2 of the Report)
COURT NEWS, OCTOBER-DECEMBER, 2007
(B) HIGH COURTS (FROM 01-07-2007 TO 30-09-2007)
Sl. Name of Civil Cases Criminial Cases Total
No. High Court Opening Institution Disposal Pendency Opening Institution Disposal Pendency Pendency
Balance from from at the Bal ance from from at the of Civil
as on 01-07-07 01-07-07 end of as on 01-07-07 01-07-07 end of and
01-07-07 to to 30-09-07 01-07-07 to to 30-09-07 Criminal
30-09-07 30-09-07 30-09-07 30-09-07 Cases at
the end of
30-09-07
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
1 Allahabad 1 596500 40250 32300 604450 200429 27443 24096 203776 8,08,226
2 Andhra Pradesh 134347 12816 14220 132943 14365 2790 2561 14594 1,47,537
3 Bombay 2 331079 32847 34948 328978 38395 6475 6439 38431 3,67,409
4 Calcutta 238721 17399 16288 239832 39261 6251 6026 39486 2,79,318
5 Chhattisgarh 50819 3616 2707 51728 22953 1618 1598 22973 74701
6 Delhi 61798 6956 8891 59863 17668 3270 4127 16811 76674
7 Gujarat 83275 11732 14020 80987 29946 5196 5490 29652 1,10,639
8 Gauhati 51342 5960 5329 51973 7098 2278 2010 7366 59339
9 Himachal Pradesh 20110 4495 4272 20333 6447 660 659 6448 26781
10 Jammu and Kashmir 43334 5782 5492 43624 1819 548 617 1750 45374
11 Jharkhand 27132 2762 2185 27709 22173 4292 4898 21567 49276

45
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
12 Karnataka 87343 13427 12825 87945 15551 2505 1764 16292 1,04,237
13 Kerala 94774 13895 17476 91193 25714 5077 6234 24557 1,15,750
14 Madhya Pradesh 125489 18245 16341 127393 59118 10463 9297 60284 1,87,677
15 Madras 389865 50253 49002 391116 33872 21654 20295 35231 4,26,347
16 Orissa 206107 11162 12864 204405 20983 8023 5659 23347 2,27,752
17 Patna 3 68787 7842 6281 70348 30652 18812 17647 31817 1,02,165
18 Punjab and Haryana 204445 13868 9349 208875 4 44872 11486 9537 46821 2,55,696
19 Rajasthan 159697 13546 12985 160258 52135 9056 8998 52193 2,12,451

46
ANNEXURE-C
(Vide Para 2 of the Report)
COURT NEWS, OCTOBER-DECEMBER, 2007
(C) DISTRICT AND SUBORDINATE COURTS (FROM 01-07-2007 TO 30-09-2007)
Sl. Name of Civil Cases Criminal Cases Total
No. High Court Opening Institution Disposal Pendency Opening Institution Disposal Pendency Pendency
Balance from from at the Bal ance from from at the of Civil
as on 01-07-07 01-07-07 end of as on 01-07-07 01-07-07 end of and
01-07-07 to to 30-09-07 01-07-07 to to 30-09-07 Criminal
30-09-07 30-09-07 30-09-07 30-09-07 Cases at
the end of
30-09-07
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
1 Uttar Pradesh 1230938 138322 138500 1230760 3548716 570557 532479 3586794 4817554
2 Andhra Pradesh 1 483637 85324 92575 476386 470502 81155 84357 467300 943686
3(a) Maharashtra 976120 89273 102468 962925 3081797 356129 368657 3069269 4032194
3(b) Goa 19320 3747 3930 19137 14892 4360 4216 15036 34173
4 West Bengal and 491 114 33989 33055 492048 1634405 193407 135802 1692010 2184058
A & N Islands
5 Chhattisgarh 51414 7934 8367 50981 216277 43360 46638 212999 263980
6 Delhi 2 141226 22417 20080 143563 624843 77999 52646 650196 793759
7 Gujarat 746868 64722 71186 740404 1833029 344509 373582 1803956 2544360
8(a) Assam 64813 11322 7692 68443 135946 43070 37227 141789 210232
8(b) Nagaland 1709 174 141 1742 3753 343 402 3694 5436
8(c) Meghalya 4014 276 354 3936 6886 417 444 6859 10795
8(d) Manipur 3016 646 553 3109 3402 1523 1381 3544 6653
8(e) Tripura 6382 1508 1797 6093 27724 16343 16897 27170 33263

47
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
8(f) Mizoram 1455 366 259 1562 4257 1236 917 4576 6138
8(g) Arunachal Pradesh 398 90 42 446 5072 181 442 4811 5257
9 Himachal Pradesh 64858 12262 13516 63604 83280 28630 30455 81455 145059
10 Jammu and Kashmir 60061 14268 13244 61085 101276 46735 46355 101656 162741
11 Jharkhand 43274 5702 5702 43274 223551 26517 29441 220627 263901
12 Karnataka 566842 44917 65008 546751 528935 142362 122343 548954 1095705
13(a) Kerala 397767 62087 72348 387506 532491 170197 152405 550283 937789
13(b) Lakshadweep 86 9 9 86 95 31 30 96 182
14 Madhya Pradesh 203537 54780 55629 202688 806056 214817 199622 821251 1023939
15(a) Tamil Nadu 472332 220152 204185 488299 421537 209078 202444 428171 916470
15(b) Puducherry 13799 5250 5295 13754 7545 7997 7789 7753 21507
16 Orissa 179922 12950 13455 179417 826583 57270 53986 829867 1009284
17 Bihar 250217 10892 10768 250341 1080155 73258 54244 1099169 1349510
18(a) Punjab 273395 34828 32917 275306 314569 120270 127662 307177 582483
18(b) Haryana 217975 30659 32427 216207 316454 72675 59411 329718 545925
18(c) Chandigarh 20998 2427 2572 20853 75352 18990 14034 80308 101161
19 Rajasthan 280321 45462 44729 281054 805997 197918 182051 821864 1102918
20 Sikkim 205 57 64 198 588 253 232 609 807
21 Uttarakhand 29619 6049 5555 30113 104802 23825 23677 104950 135063
TOTAL: 7297632 1022861 1058422 7262071 17840767 3145412 2962268 1802391 1 25285982
Note: Above statement is compiled on the basis of figures received from the High Courts.
1 Pendency figures at the end of 30-06-2007 has been revised by the A.P. High Court.
2 Pendency figures at the end of 30-06-2007 has been revised by the Delhi High Court.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.