PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 8
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE SCHEDULED CASTES, SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER
BACKWARD CLASSES (RESERVATION IN POSTS AND 
SERVICES) BILL, 2004
TH 
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 29 JULY, 2005)
TH 
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 29 JULY, 2005)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 29 JULY, 2005)
TH 
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 29 JULY, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JUNE, 2005/ASADHA, 1926 (SAKA)JUNE, 2005/ASADHA, 1926 (SAKA)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE RAJYA SABHA AND LOK SABHA ON 26 JULY, 2005)TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE RAJYA SABHA AND LOK SABHA ON 26 JULY, 2005)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

85
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE SCHEDULED CASTES, SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER
BACKWARD CLASSES (RESERV ATION IN POSTS AND
SERVICES) BILL, 2004
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH JULY , 2005)
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 29 TH JULY , 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLES OF THE RAJYA SABHA AND LOK SABHA ON 26TH JULY , 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JUNE, 2005/ASADHA, 1926 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-15

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—23
4. M INUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY S HRI P.C. A LEXANDER, MP, AND
DR. R ADHAKANT N AYAK, MP ............................................................................................... 24—27
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 29—45
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 47—84
(i) The Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes
(Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004 ...................................................... 49—58
(ii) List of the witnesses who appeared before the Comm ittee ................................. 59—60
(iii) V iews/suggestions of individuals/organisations on the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and
Services) Bill, 2004 and comments of Government thereon ...............................
61—84

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2004-05)
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Raashid Alvi
9. Vacant
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
12. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
13. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar
14. Justice (Retd.) N.Y . Hanumanthappa
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar
16. Shri Dahyabhai V . Patel
17. Shri Brajesh Pathak
18. Shri Harin Pathak
19. Shri V . Radhakrishnan
20. Shri Vishwendra Singh
21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
22. Prof. Vijaya Kumar Malhotra
23. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
24. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
25. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
26. Shri A.K. Moorthy
27. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, The Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, do hereby present this Eighth Report on the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred* the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha
on 22nd December, 2004 to the Committee for examination and report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 3rd February, 2005 held preliminary discussion
on the Bill and heard the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. The
Committee decided to issue a press communique in national/regional dailies for eliciting views of
cross sections of people on the various provisions of the Bill.
4. In response to the said press release, the Committee received 182 memoranda containing
views/suggestions on the Bill from individuals/groups/organisations representing interests of SCs,
STs and OBCs.
5. The Committee heard oral evidence of the witnesses who appeared before it in its meeting
held on the 17th February, 10th March, 19th and 20th April, 2005.
6. The Committee took up clause by clause consideration of the Bill in its meetings held on
the 2nd and 3rd May, 2005.
7. In its sitting held on the 7th June, 2005 the Committee considered the draft report on the
Bill and adopted the same.
8. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee has made use of the background note on
the Bill received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; suggestions
received from individuals/organizations/experts; comments of the Ministry on the views received
from organizations/experts and reply of the Ministry to queries raised by the Members on the Bill
in the meetings.
9. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
10. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions
made by experts/organizations who deposed before the Committee and submitted their valuable
suggestions on the Bill.
E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
June 7, 2005 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice
*Referred vide  Parliamentary Bulletin No. 41889 dated 31 December, 2004.

1
REPORT
RESERV ATION IN PUBLIC SERVICES FOR THE SCHEDULED CASTES, SCHEDULED
TRIBES AND OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES - HISTORIC PROCESS
1. It is a historic fact that the Scheduled Castes had been under cruel subjugation and they
had to bear the shock of inequality and untouchability for a pretty long time. Social stigma attached
to the people belonging to the lower strata of the society, their deprivation of the facilities and
privileges enjoyed by the upper castes and their continued exploitation and suppression led to an
unending and relentless struggle for emancipation from the thraldom of the social evils. It was the
craving to live the life gracefully with recognition and social status that several saints, social
reformers and political leaders from both the Scheduled Castes and Non-Scheduled Castes had tried
their best for the eradication of untouchability and evils of casteism from the social fabric. The
liberation movements for the oppressed were indicative of the fact that no community would be
willing to remain under oppression forever, and no society would sustain the shock of inequality
and disunity.
1.1 With the advent of the Britishers the gulf between the classes and the masses widened further
and the social discrimination against the lower castes became more pronounced. The lower castes
liberation movement got an impetus during the British period. With the dawn of democratic
institutions in India, the liberation movement steadily became more vocal, assertive and effective.
From 1857 to 1956 the movement was led by several leaders throughout India. It was the period
when Mahatma Gandhi emerged on the national scene as the most important leader of the Freedom
Struggle of India. Besides leading that movement, he became the most vocal and assertive champion
of the lower castes and the oppressed. He cursed the practice of untouchability and fought for its
abolition. The most prominent among the leaders, who led the movement to abolish untouchability
was Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar whose efforts culminated in abolition of untouchability.
1.2 In this backdrop, the concept of reservation in public services emerged as a viable solution
to bridge the gap between the lower castes and the upper castes. Realising the inequitious
distribution, of posts in the administration between different castes and communities, the rulers of
some of the then Princely States, who were genuinely interested in the upliftment of
disadvantageous sections of the society, took initiatives and introduced reservation in the
administrative posts in favour of the backward castes and communities in their States as early as
in the first quarter of the twentieth century. Mysore and Kolhapur were amongst the first to do
so. Because of the movement for social justice and equity started by the Justice Party, the then
Presidency of Madras initiated the reservation in Government employment in 1921. It was followed
by Bombay Presidency comprised of the major portions of the present States of Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Gujarat. Thus, the first quarter of the twentieth century saw reservations in
Government employment in almost whole of Southern India. These reservations were not only in
favour of the depressed classes which were rechristened as Scheduled Castes in the Government
of India Act, 1935, but also in favour of other backward castes and classes including what were
then known as intermediate castes. To identify the backward classes in the State of Mysore,
Justice L.C. Miller Committee was appointed in 1918-20. Similarly in the Princely States of
Travancore and Cochin, Justice C.D. Nokes Committee was appointed in 1935
1.
1. Sixteenth Report of the Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes of Thirteenth Lok
Sabha (2001-2002), Page 1
1

2
1.3 In the year 1932, the Poona Pact was signed by Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya, the
principal signatory on behalf of the caste Hindus and Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar on behalf of the
depressed classes. It was not merely a simple contract between the Caste Hindus and the
Untouchables, but it was a sacred pact meant to be honoured with spirit of goodwill and
brotherhood. This was, of course, the first occasion when the British Government recognized the
depressed classes as a separate element in Indian politics. Before the Poona Pact, 1932 the
representation of the depressed classes in public services was negligible except a few pockets of
old Presidency of Madras and Princely State of Mysore
2.
1.4 The sum and substance of the Poona Pact was that the separate electorates granted by the
“Communal Award” were withdrawn and the method of joint electorates was introduced with the
principle of reservation of certain seats exclusively to the members of the Depressed Classes where
the Depressed Classes candidates were to be elected to the panel of four candidates in the first
instance by the Depressed Classes members themselves and thereafter one of those four were to
be elected by the general electorate. The system of primary election, however, was to last for 10
years unless terminated sooner by mutual agreement between the communities concerned. The
principle of reservation was made applicable to both Central Legislature as well as the Provincial
Assemblies. Although no fixed percentage of reservation was stipulated in respect of election to the
local bodies and employment in public services, it was agreed that a fair representation of the
Depressed Classes were to be secured in local bodies and public services.
1.5 For the first time instructions were issued in 1934, without providing a formal reservation
that candidates belonging to depressed classes and possessing the requisite qualifications should not
be deprived of fair opportunities of appointment merely because they would not succeed in open
competition. Till the Government of India Act, 1935 came into force, there was no particular
nomenclature for the oppressed. The term Scheduled Castes was used for the first time in the
Government of India Act, 1935. In August, 1943, Government of India provided reservation at the
rate of 8 1/3 per cent of the Scheduled Castes in the vacancies filled up by direct recruitment
through open competition. In June 1946, the percentage of reserved seats was raised to 12.5
percent, corresponding to their percentage in the population in undivided India. The relaxation in
the upper-age limit and concessions in examination fee prescribed for appointment to a service or
post were announced in favour of the Scheduled Castes candidates
3.
1.6 Soon after independence, orders were issued by Government on 21st September, 1947
providing for reservations in services for Scheduled Castes at the rate of 12.5% of vacancies in
respect of direct recruitment through open competition. In the case of recruitment otherwise than
by open competition separate reservation at the rate of 16 2/3% was provided in favour of
Scheduled Castes. The question of providing reservations for the tribal communities in the Central
Services also came up for consideration of the Government and instructions were issued in
December, 1947, that the appointing authorities should consider as far as possible desirability of
recruiting suitably qualified candidates from amongst the tribal communities. However, a decision
to reserve a definite percentage of vacancies at the rate 5% for candidates of Scheduled Tribes
was taken only after promulgation of the Constitution in 1950.
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS REGARDING RESERV ATION
2. Going by the past experience of exploitation and oppression of the lower castes, the framers
of the Constitution felt that unless special provisions were made for the protection of the rights
of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes to secure fair representation
in public employment in proportion to their population, it would never be possible for them to catch
2. Mahatma Gandhi and Baba Saheb Ambedkar, Dr. S.N. Busi, Pages 201-203
3. Dalit Movement in India and its Leaders : Dr. R.K. Kshirsagar, Page 131, (Para11)

3
up and compete successfully for securing public employment. Therefore, to secure fair
representation of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in services and
posts under the State, special provisions of reservation under Articles 16(4), 16(4-A), 16(4-B), 46
and 335 of the Constitution were made.
2.1 Article 16(4) expressly provides for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of
any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of State, is not adequately represented in the
services under the State. Article 16(4) reads as under:—
“Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.’’
2.2 Article 16(4-A) says that nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any
provision for reservation in matters of promotion with consequential seniority, to any class or classes
of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State.
Article 16(4-A) was inserted by the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 to
overcome the decision of the Supreme Court in Indira Sawhney V/s Union of India (93) (ASC 407
(1992) SUPP III SCC 210) that no reservation in promotions could be made under clause (4).
2.3 Clause (4-B) in Article 16 was included by the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment)
Act, 2000 with a view to enabling the State to consider any unfilled vacancies of a year which
are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any provision for reservation made
under clause (4) or clause (4-A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding
year or years. The clause has further provided that such class of vacancies shall not be considered
together with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for determining the ceiling
of fifty per cent reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.
2.4 The Directive Principles of State Policy also enjoin the State to promote with special care
the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and, in particular, of
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and, to protect them from social injustice and all forms
of exploitation. (Article 46)
2.5 The proviso to Article 335 of the Constitution clarifies that for including the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates to State services, the required qualification may be relaxed.
Thus, adequate representation of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the services is
given priority over other considerations. Article 335 reads as under :—
“The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall
be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of
administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the
affairs of the Union or of a State:
Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any provision in
favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for relaxation in
qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the standards of evaluation, for
reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of services or posts in connection
with the affairs of the Union or of a State.’’
4COMMISSIONS APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  FOR BACKWARD CLASSES
3. It is noteworthy that while the terms “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” find
specific mention in the Constitution, there is also an explicit provision regarding the Other
4. Report of the National Commission for Backward Classes, Pages 1-2

4
Backward Classes in article 340 (10) of the Constitution. Article 340 of the Constitution
contemplates the appointment of a Commission whose reports and recommendations, would be of
assistance to the authorities to take adequate steps for  the advancement of Backward Classes.
3.1 Government of India appointed a Backward Classes Commission under Article 340 of the
Constitution on 29th January 1953, popularly known as the Kaka Kalelkar Commission. The
Commission was required to “investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward
classes within the territory of India and the difficulties under which they labour and to make
recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove
difficulties and to improve their condition”. The Commission submitted its report to the
Government on 30th March 1955 which was considered and rejected by it in 1961.
3.2 The Second Backward Classes Commission popularly known as Mandal Commission, was
appointed on 1st January, 1979 to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward
classes and recommend the criteria for defining such classes of citizens, steps to be taken for their
advancement and examine the desirability or otherwise of making provision for the reservation of
appointments or posts in favour of such backward classes of citizens which are not adequately
represented in public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
The Commission submitted its report on 31st December, 1980.
3.3 In 1990, the Government of India took the historic decision to introduce reservation of 27%
for Backward Classes on the basis of Mandal Commission’s recommendation and issued formal
orders vide office memorandum No. 36012/31/90-Estt./SCT dated 13th August, 1990 providing for
reservation for socially and educationally backward classes (SEBCs) of 27% of the vacancies filled
by direct recruitment in civil posts and services under the Central Government and Public Sector
Undertakings and financial institutions. It was inter-alia laid down that the SEBCs would comprise
in the first phase the castes and communities which are common to both the lists in the report
of the Mandal Commission and the State Governments/Union Territories lists. However, the
Government’s decision was followed by widespread protests against it, mostly in Northern States
and a number of writ petitions were filed questioning the said order and for staying the operation
of the Office Memorandum. The operation of the order was stayed by the Supreme Court. The
stay continued in force till 16th November, 1992, when the Supreme Court finally disposed of these
writ petitions.
3.4 The Supreme Court in its landmark judgement dated 16.11.1992 in Writ Petition (Civil) No.
930 of 1990, Indira Sawhney and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors., etc. popularly known as the
Mandal Case, held office Memorandum No. 36012/31/90-Estt.(SCT) dated 13.8.1990 valid and
enforceable subject to the exclusion of socially advanced persons/sections (creamy layer) from the
notified Backward Classes. The Supreme Court also directed the Government of India and each of
the State Government and Administration of Union Territories to constitute a permanent body, in
the nature of a Commission or Tribunal, for entertaining and advising the respective Governments
on the requests for inclusion and complaints of over-inclusion or under-inclusion in the lists of
Backward Classes and also directed that advice tendered by such body shall ordinarily be binding
upon the concerned Government.
3.5 Pursuant to the direction of the Supreme Court, the Government of India vide its Resolution
No. 12011/16/93-BCC(c)-Ministry of Welfare dated 22nd February, 1993 set up an Expert
Committee to determine the basis viz. criteria for identification of the socially advanced persons/
sections among the OBCs insofar as the Government of India was concerned. The Committee
furnished its report on 10.3.1993. Subsequently, Government of India vide its letter No. 12011/51/
93-BCC (C) – Ministry of Welfare dated 4th June, 1993 requested the Committee to prepare lists
of those castes and communities which figure in the list of Backward Classes notified by State
Governments as well as in the lists contained in the Mandal Commission Report, and to prepare

5
other related lists. A report dated 26th June 1993 was furnished by the Expert Committee to the
then Ministry of Welfare.
3.6 The reservation for Backward Classes took effect from the 8th September 1993 when the
Department of Personnel and Training vide its Office Memorandum No.36012/22/93-Estt.(SCT) dated
8th September, 1993 and the then Ministry of Welfare vide their Resolution No. 12011/68/93-BCC (c)
dated 10th September, 1993 set the stage for the operationalisation of the O.M. of
13th August, 1990. The O.M. dated 8th September, 1993 incorporated in the Office Memorandum
of 13th August, 1990, the rule of exclusion of socially advanced persons/sections from reservation,
on the basis of the recommendations of the Expert Committee, thus fulfilling the condition laid down
by the Supreme Court for the implementation of the Office Memorandum of 13th August 1990.
FEATURES OF THE EXISTING RESERV ATION POLICY OF GOVERNMENT
4. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has, in its note submitted to the
Committee, apprised that the scheme of reservation in Government services is governed by the
executive instructions issued by the Department of Personnel and Training from time to time.
Public Sector Undertakings including financial institutions like banks, insurance companies, etc.
under the Government of India follow the instructions issued by the Department of Personnel and
training. The Supreme Court in the case of Indira Sawhney V/s. Union of India has held that these
instructions have the force of law.
4.1 The Ministry has further informed that the reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes in direct recruitments done on an all India basis by open competition
is at present 15%, 7.5% and 27% respectively. It is 16.66%, 7.5% and 25.84% respectively in case
of direct recruitment on all India basis otherwise than by open competition. In case of direct
recruitment to Groups ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts which normally attract candidates from a locality or a
region, the percentage of reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is generally fixed
in proportion to the population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the respective States/
Union Territories and reservation for OBCs is fixed keeping in view the proportion of their population
and the fact that total reservation for SCs, STs and OBCs cannot exceed the limit of 50%. The
reservation for OBCs has consequently been fixed at 27% or less. Reservation in promotion by non-
selection is available to Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in all groups of posts and services
viz. Groups A, B, C and D at 15% and 7.5% respectively. In case of promotion by selection,
reservation to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is available upto the lowest rung of Group
‘A’ at the rate of 15% and 7.5% respectively. In promotion by selection to posts within Group ‘A’
which carry an ultimate salary of Rs.18,300/- or less, there is no reservation, but the Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribes officers who are senior enough in the zone of consideration for promotion
so as to be within the number of vacancies for which the select list is to be drawn up, are included
in that list provided they are not considered unfit for promotion.
4.2 According to the Ministry, various relaxations and concessions are being extended to the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in order to ensure that the posts
reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes are filled by the
candidates belonging to these categories. For example, the upper age limit is relaxable by 5 years
for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes in case of direct
recruitment, whereas, the upper age limit is relaxable by 3 years for the Other Backward Classes.
Similarly, the qualification relating to experience for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is
relaxable at the discretion of the Union Public Service Commission and other recruitment agencies
of the Government. Not only this, in case of promotion by selection, the candidates belonging to
the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes are assessed by relaxed
standards as the zone of consideration for these candidates is extended to five times.

6
NEED FOR ENACTING A LAW ON RESERV ATION
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions in his deposition
apprised the Committee that certain judgements delivered by the Supreme Court has seemingly
affected the interests of the backward classes. With a view to protecting the interests of the
weaker sections of the society several constitutional amendments, namely, the Constitution
(Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, the Constitution (Eighty-fir st Amendment) Act, the Constitution
(Eighty-second Amendment) Act and the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act have been
enacted. Nevertheless, demand for a law on reservation for backward classes made in the wake
of the judgements of the Apex Court has been voiced from time to time by various organisations/
associations representing the interests of the weaker sections of the society. In keeping with the
spirit of economic and social development of SCs, STs and OBCs, the National Common Minimum
Programme adopted by the Government has also stipulated the enactment of a legislation to codify
the executive orders/instructions regarding reservations issued from time to time by the Ministry.
The legislation on reservation is, in fact, a result of the keenness shown by the Government to
provide a statutory backing to the policy of reservation so as to instil confidence in the members
of the SCs, STs and OBCs that their legitimate aspirations of adequate representation and
participation in national mainstream have been given protection by the Parliament. Another major
reason behind bringing in this legislation is to remove ambiguity that could have occurred because
of the multiplicity of the Office Memoranda issued by the Ministry for governing reservations.
SCHEDULED CASTES, SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER  BACKWARD CLASSES
(RESERV ATION IN POSTS AND SERVICES) BILL, 2004 — SALIENT FEATURES
6. The Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts
and Services) Bill, 2004 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 27th December, 2004. The Bill seeks
to provide for reservation of posts in civil services for members of the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in establishments and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto. The Bill is stated to go a long way in meeting the constitutional goal
of securing justice, liberty and equality for all citizens of the country and in promoting fraternity
amongst them all.
6.1. S alient features of the Bill are as under:—
(i) Reservation as determined by the Government from time to time shall be provided to
the members of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes not
falling in the creamy layer, in the matter of direct recruitment and to the members
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the matter of promotion to posts in
civil services;
(ii) There shall be no reservation when appointments are made to posts classified as
‘scientific or technical’ which are required for conducting research and which are
above the lowest grade of group ‘A’;
(iii) The recruitment to a vacancy not reserved for any category shall be open to all
eligible candidates including the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes;
(iv) The Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes candidates
selected on their own merit shall not be adjusted against the vacancies reserved for
them;
(v) The maximum age limit prescribed for direct recruitment to a service or a post shall
be increased by 5 years in the case of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes and 3 years in the case of candidates’ belonging to the Other

7
Backward Classes. In the case of promotion, the upper age limit shall be increased
by 5 years in the case of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes where the maximum age limit, if prescribed, is not more than 50 years.
Relaxations and concessions may be given to members of the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in qualifications relating to experience
and standard of suitability in case of direct recruitment;
(vi) (a) Total number of vacancies reserved for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes in a cadre in a year shall not exceed 50% of the
total number of vacancies in that cadre;
(b) The backlog reserved vacancies of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
shall not be counted for determining the 50% ceiling;
(vii) The vacancies reserved for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes in the matter of appointments by direct recruitment shall not be
filled by candidates not belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes, as the case may be;
(viii) If some posts in a cadre are abolished and some employees are surrendered or their
services are terminated as a result thereof, a Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and
Other Backward Class candidate shall not be surrendered or his services shall not be
terminated if it results in lower representation of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes as the case may be, in the cadre as compared to
reservation prescribed for them.
(ix) There will be provision for punishment for making false claim to belong to a
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Other Backward Class and for officers who
knowingly issue a false certificate; and
(x) The Government shall be empowered to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of the Act, etc.
VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL RECEIVED FROM INDIVIDUALS, ORGANISATIONS
REPRESENTING INTERESTS OF SCs,  STs AND OBCs
7. The Committee received numerous memoranda from the individuals, organisations interested
in the subject-matter of the Bill and the specialised agencies like the National Commissions for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the National Commission for Backward Classes. Having
been authorised by the Committee, its Chairman had a separate meeting in his office, with Dr. Suraj
Bhan, Chairman of the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and other members of the
Commission and also with Justice Shri Ram Surat Singh, Chairman of the National Commission for
Backward Classes and other members of the Commission on 9th March, 2005 and heard their views
and suggestions on various provisions of the Bill. The Committee also had the benefit of written
suggestions/views received from Shri Udit Raj, Chairman of the All India Confederation of SC/ST
Organisations and Shri Charanjit Singh Atwal, Hon’ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Committee
scrutinized the suggestions in the light of the provisions of the Bill and found them useful for better
comprehension of the Reservation Policy of the Government and the reaction shown by the public
to the proposed legislation. To be enlightened further on the issues involved in the Bill, the Committee
interacted with the following witnesses or groups and heard their views on the Bill in its meetings
held on 17th February, 10th March, 19th and 20th April, 2005:—
(i) Shri Subash Kankheria, General Secretary, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Memorial Foundation,
(ii) Dr. R.S. Sauran, President, All India Punjab National Bank Employees Welfare Association,

8
(iii) Shri T.L. Bharti, Chairman, Akhil Bharat Anusuchit Jati-Janjati Karamchari Parisad,
(iv) Shri M .L. Nigam, General Secretary, DDA SC/ST Employees Welfare Association,
(v) Shri Swami Nath, Acting President, Samarpit Samaj,
(vi) Dr. K. Krishnaswamy MD, Ex. MLA, Leader, Pushiy Tamilagam Party, Tamil Nadu,
(vii) Shri K. Paramalai, MLA, Tamil Nadu,
(viii) Shri Ganga Das, IAS (Retd.), Former Chairman, Siddhartha Educational and Cultural
Trust; New Delhi,
(ix) Prof. M. Ramadass, Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha),
(x) Shri K.V. Thangka Balu, MP, Chairman Parliamentary Forum Indian Backward
Classes Federation, New Delhi,
(xi) Justice B.S.A. Swamy, Retd. High Court Judge, Hyderabad
(xii) Shri K. Veeramani, President, Dravidar Kazhagam, Chennai
(xiii) Shri A. Subba Rao, Managing Trustee, Lourgers Forum for Social Justice, New Delhi,
(xiv) Dr. M.P. Raju, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi,
(xv) Shri G. Karunanidhi, General Secretary, All India Federation of Backward Classes
Employees Associations,
(xvi) Shri P. Madhu, M.P.,
(xvii) Shri Jesudasu Seelam, M.P.,
(xviii) Dr. M. Jgannath, M.P.,
(xix) Shri R.S. Gavai, M.P., Chairman of the Parliamentary Forum for SC/ST,
(xx) Shri Gandhi Azad, M.P.,
(xxi) Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot, M.P.,
(xxii) Shri V . Narayanasamy, President, All India OBCs Employees Association,
(xxiii) Shri B.K. Hari Prasad,
(xxiv) Shri V . Hanumantha Rao,
(xxv) Shri Vittal Rao,
(xxvi) Shri Avtar Singh Badana,
(xxvii) Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi,
(xxviii) Shri Ram Kripal Yadav, and
(xxix) Shri Kadar Mohindara
7.1 The suggestions put forward on the Bill and the views expressed by the witnesses during
the course of their deposition before the Committee are summarised below :—
(i) The Reservation Act should extend to the whole of India.
(ii) The Bill should be included in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution to avoid
unwarranted judicial interventions.

9
(iii) The term “backlog vacancies” as defined in sub-clause (b) of clause 2 of the Bill,
should include the shortfall of reservation with reference to the post-based roster
introduced by the Government in 1997 and backlog vacancies, determined as per
vacancy based roster, which were in operation before 2.7.1997, should also be
treated as backlog vacancies for the Post Based Roster.
(iv) The concept of “Creamy Layer” defined in the Bill should not be applicable to the
Other Backward Classes, it being against the provisions of clause (4) of Article 15
of the Constitution which speaks of the social and educational backwardness of
citizens.
(v) Clause 2(d), defining the term “establishment” should be amended so as to
include:—
(a) In sub clause (ii), corporation in which not less than thirty three percent of
the paid up share capital is held by the Government;
(b) A subsidiary company floated by Government Corporation/Company wherein
not less than thirty three percent of the paid up share capital is held by the
parent corporation/company;
(c) All banking companies, Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFC) and other
Financial Companies in which not less than thirty three percent of paid up
share capital is held jointly by the Nationalised Banks, Government Financial
Institutions like LIC, GIC, UTI, SFC, EPF etc.;
(d) In sub-clause (iv), deemed universities and other professional colleges
including educational institutions of excellence;
(e) In sub-clause (v), educational institutions run by Private Sector;
(f) In sub-clause (vi), a corporation in which not less than thirty-three percent of
the paid up share capital is held by the Government directly or indirectly;
(g) In sub-clause (vii), all Scheduled Banks of RBI, Nationalised Banks and
Scheduled Commercial and Financial Corporations, managed and controlled by
Government of India, constituted as Body corporate under the Central Act or
maintained by or with the help of the Government of India;
(h) Corporative Societies established under the Corporative Societies Act or
deemed to have been registered under that Act;
(i) Non-Government organisations getting benefit or financial and assistance from
the Government; and
(j) All industries, privatised PSUs and Joint Sector Ventures.
(vi) Judiciary and Armed Forces should also be brought under the purview of the
reservation policy of the Government.
(vii) The term “Civil Services” used in clause (3) of the Bill, needs to be defined
specifically and clearly to avoid litigations in matter of interpretation. The definition
should include medical, engineering, education, police, para-military, military and
judiciary services apart from the services under the purview of the Bill.
(viii) The Bill seeks to provide reservation in appointment by promotion to the grade of
such posts where element of direct recruitment does not exceed seventy-five

10
percent. This is understood to have adverse effect on the reservation policy as the
provisions will not apply to the establishments recruiting more than 75 percent
posts. Therefore, this ceiling should be removed. Particularly, it should not be made
applicable in case of promotion from Group ‘D’ Posts to Group ‘C’, as there are
more than 75 percent direct recruitment in Group ‘C’ services.
(ix) Definition clause of the Bill should include “Promotion by upgradation/restructuring”
keeping in view the multiple litigations in courts on the questions of interpretation
of these terms.
(x) Reservation in promotion should be available within Group ‘A’ posts also meaning
thereby that reservation should be made available at all the levels and should not
be restricted upto the lowest rung of Group ‘A’.
(xi) Reservation should be applicable to deputation posts both in India and abroad.
(xii) Other Backward Classes (OBCs) should be given reservation in promotion also.
(xiii) The concept of “Zone of Consideration” should be clearly specified.
(xiv) The percentage of reservation for each communities should be specified clearly so
that the same is not reduced by any recruitment process both in direct recruitment
or in promotion e.g. OBC-27 percent, SC-15 percent and ST-7.5 percent.
(xv) The present ceiling of 50% for reservation for SC/ST and OBCs should be
enhanced as there has been rise in the size of population since the time when this
ceiling was fixed.
(xvi) Reservation should also be made available to the cases where appointments are
made for a period of less than forty five days and for the work-charged posts.
(xvii) Scientific and technical posts and institutions as well as services should be brought
under the purview of the reservation.
(xviii) Where an unreserved vacancy is filled by a candidate belonging to a Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other Backward Class on the basis of merit either by
direct recruitment or by promotion after availing relaxation of age, then such
candidate should be adjusted against the vacancy reserved for the SC, ST or OBC
as the case may be.
(xix) Relaxation in maximum age limit for direct recruitment should be increased from
present 3 years to 5 years for OBCs. Similarly, other concessions like fee
concession, relaxation in qualifying standard etc. should also be extended to OBCs
at par with the other groups like SC and ST.
(xx) Backlog vacancies of OBCs should be filled without applying the limit of 50% on
reservation in a current year.
(xxi) The Government should consider bringing an amendment to the Constitution for
providing reservation for OBCs in the appointment by promotion.
(xxii) The current percentage of reservation for OBCs should be revised in proportion to
the size of their population. A caste based census needs to be conducted by the
Government for reservation on the basis of the increased population.
(xxiii) There should be adequate representation of SC, ST and OBC in the composition of
the Selection Committee/Recruitment Boards and Agencies.

11
(xxiv) Recruitment should be made on the basis of a roster prepared for a cycle of the
vacancies. While preparing the roster, care must be taken that not more than 2
vacancies go to a particular category consecutively.
(xxv) There should be separate Liaison Officers for Scheduled Casts, Scheduled Tribe
and Other Backward Classes.
(xxvi) The Liaison Officer should have power to inspect the record of proceedings of the
recruitment/selection/seniority-cum-suitability lists.
(xxvii) Liaison Officer should belong to SCs/STs /OBC.
(xxviii) There should be an independent monitoring committee or agency to oversee the
implementation of the provisions of the Bill.
(xxix) Every establishment should have a Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Grievances Redressal Cell for consideration of grievances of the SCs and STs.
(xxx) Policy of reservation has not achieved what it aimed despite lapse of more than 50
years of its coming into existence. Serious efforts should be initiated by the
Government to implement reservation to the weaker sections of the society.
(xxxi) The proposed legislation is silent on penalty provisions. It is particularly, impossible
to meet the objective of the Bill in the absence of a clear and specific penal
provisions.
(xxxii) The National Commission for Backward Classes should be accorded statutory
status so that it can have powers to deal with the grievances of OBCs.
(xxxiii) There should be two separate legislations, one for the SCs and STs and the other
for the OBCs keeping in view the different social, cultural and economic status and
background of these communities.
(xxxiv) A reservation Tribunal should be provided in the Act to decide on the matters
relating to reservation for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/OBCs.
7.2 Suggestions received on the Bill were forwarded to the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions for comments. The suggestions and comments received from the Ministry
are appended at Annexure....
7.3 The Committee notes that the proposed legislation providing for reservation to the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in recruitment and
promotion to civil services under the control of the Central Government has evoked an
overwhelming public response which is evident from plethora of written suggestions received
from different parts of the country and the views expressed by several witnesses during the
course of evidence. The Committee feels that such a response to the proposed legislation
is clearly indicative of their aspirations for upliftment and betterment of the social and
economic status. The Committee finds that many of the suggestions/views are beyond the
ambit of the Bill, yet they are reflection of the fact that the Reservation Policy of the
Government has suffered from infirmities as a result of which the prescribed level of
reservation has not been achieved even after more than fifty years of its enforcement.
From the suggestions received and the views expressed before it, the Committee finds that
the overall position of reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes in services has been quite dismal and unsatisfactory. Consequently, the
gulf between the upper classes and the lower classes has not been bridged to the desired
extent.

12
7.4 Viewed in the light of the above observations, the Committee impresses upon the
Government to make a pragmatic assessment of the reservation policy in the light of the
suggestions/views on the Bill so as to ensure adequate representation of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in services.
7.5 The Committee in its meeting held on the 3rd May, 2005 took up clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill.
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION
CLAUSE-2
8. Clause (2) defines the various terms used in the Bill.
8.1 The Committee considered sub-clause(c) of clause 2 defining the term “creamy layer” as
under :—
“Creamy layer” means those members of Other Backward Classes who constitute the
forward section from amongst such Backward Classes .
8.2 The Committee took into account the various suggestions submitted to it and the views
expressed by the witnesses and the Members on this issue proposing for deletion of sub-
clause(c) of the clause on the ground of its being against the provisions of the Constitution and
based on the interpretation of the Supreme Court given in Indira Sawhney V/s Union of India
popularly known as Mandal Case (AIR 1993, SC 477).
8.3 The Committee notes that, in fact, the concept of ‘creamy layer’ to exclude well-off
persons among the OBCs from the benefits of the policy of reservation, was introduced by
the Supreme Court in Indira Sawhney and Others V/s Union of India. The Constitution,
however, is silent on this issue. Article 15 (4) of the Constitution provides for special
provisions for socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the SCs and STs.
As is evident, the article does not mention anything about ‘creamy layer’ nor does it
mention any economic criteria for determination of backwardness of a community. The
Government is implementing creamy layer formula which is based on economic status of
OBCs. This is a kind of further division of OBCs in forward class OBCs and less forward
class OBCs. Supreme Court held this division justified and reasonable in the above case.
The Committee does not want to go into the controversy of reasonableness of this division.
However, the Committee feels that ‘creamy layer’ indirectly brings in the economic criteria
rejected by the constitutional framers. The Committee notes that article 16(4) empowers the
State to provide for reservation for any backward class in appointments, which in the
opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State. This, in
view of the Committee, sufficiently exhibits the intention that adequate representation in
services under the state should be ensured. On the contrary, formula of creamy layer puts
a restriction on achieving this constitutional obligation. The Committee also notes that
individuals/organisations belonging to SCs, STs and OBCs in their suggestions submitted to
the Committee and views expressed before it vehemently opposed the insertion of the term
“creamy layer” in the proposed legislation contending that a class should not be excluded
from getting benefit of reservation quota only on the basis of a judicial interpretation. The
Committee, in these circumstances, recommends for deletion of sub-clause(c).
8.4 The Committee notes that ever since it started the process of examination of the Bill, there
has been a persistent demand for amending sub-clause (iii) of clause 2(d) which lays down as
under :—
“a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid-up share capital is held
by the Government.’’

13
8.5 On many occasions while hearing the witnesses, it has been placed before the Committee
that in view of the liberalisation of the economic policy of the country, a trend has begun to
disinvest the Government equity shareholding in public sector undertakings/corporations and
Government Companies. Consequently, the percentage of paid up share capital held by the
Government in some of those companies, has got reduced to below fifty-one percent. It has been
further argued that with gradual reduction in the percentage of paid-up share capital held by
Government the reservation policy in those undertakings, corporation, companies have taken a back
seat which has adversely affected the interests of SCs, STs and OBCs as the employment
opportunities which were available to them earlier because of their reservation quota in these
corporations have now shrunk drastically.
8.6 The Committee feels that in these circumstances it is all the more important to
protect the interests of the weaker communities of the society failing which the State would
not be able to meet the constitutional mandate as embodied in article 16(4) according to
which the State is required to provide adequate representation to the backward classes of
citizens in services under the control of the State. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that irrespective of the percentage of shareholding of the Government in PSUs,
Corporations and Companies, the reservation policy should be followed therein. Accordingly,
the Government should consider amending the sub-clause suitably.
8.7 The Committee considered sub-clause (n) defining the terms “scientific or technical posts”
as follows :—
“Scientific or technical posts” include posts for which qualifications in the natural sciences
or exact sciences or applied sciences or in technology are required and the incumbents for
such posts have to use that knowledge in the discharge of their duties.
8.8 The Committee is of the view that reservation should also be extended to scientific
or technical posts. The Committee has dealt this issue in detail while considering clause 4
of the Bill. In view of its observation in succeeding paras relating to clause 4, the
Committee recommends deletion of sub-clause (n).
8.9 The clause is adopted as amended.
CLAUSE-3
9. The clause provides for reservation for members of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes in the matter of direct recruitment and to the members of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes in the matter of promotion to posts in civil services.
9.1 The Committee considered the proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 3 which reads as
under:—
“Provided that the members of the Other Backward Classes falling in the creamy layer shall
not be deemed to be as members of the Other Backward Classes for the purpose of this
Act.’’
9.2. The Committee feels that in view of its observations in para 8.3 there remains no
justification and rationale behind retention of the proviso. The Committee, therefore,
recommends deletion of the proviso.
9.3 The Committee considered sub-clause (2) providing for reservation for members of the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, for appointment by promotion to the grades of such posts
where element of direct recruitment does not exceed seventy-five percent.

14
9.4 The Committee, in this connection, notes that the representatives of Banking Employees’
Welfare Association, while deposing before it, specifically mentioned that criteria based on 75 per
cent ceiling for direct recruitment does not fit in the scheme of reservation for weaker sections
of the society. In their view, this ceiling restricts the appointments where posts are filled by
promotion. Citing an example, they informed the Committee that if the direct recruitment element
exceeds 75 per cent, the promotion is generally denied to the persons holding clerical cadre posts
in banks. It was, therefore, advised that this criteria should not be applied in promotion from
Group ‘D’ to Group ‘C’ posts; as there is more than 75 per cent recruitment in this cadre.
9.5 The Committee feels that the provisions contained in sub-clauses (2), (3) and (4)
cumulatively curtail the scope of reservation for the candidates belonging to Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, instead of providing adequate representation to these classes,
as envisaged by the Constitution. The Committee, therefore, recommends deletion of sub-
clauses (2), (3) and (4).
9.6 The clause is adopted as amended.
CLAUSE-4
10. The clause seeks to exclude the following categories of services from the purview of
reservation:—
(i) where appointments are made for a period of less than forty-five days;
(ii) for the work charged posts;
(iii) for the posts higher than the lowest grade of Group ‘A’ post and classified as
scientific or technical, which are required for conducting research or for organising,
guiding and directing research.
10.1 The Committee was informed that though work charged posts are required for any
emergency relief, in practice, they are carried on indefinitely. First, appointments are made to these
posts temporarily but later they are regularised. In this process, job opportunities, which could have
been available to the candidates belonging to the reserved categories, are denied to them. The
Committee was further informed that the Departments like disaster management, flood relief, etc.,
have been created on permanent basis thus, depriving the SCs and ST’s from getting the benefit
of reservation in jobs under these Departments.
10.2 The Committee notes that almost all the witnesses who appeared before the Committee,
during the course of oral evidence and suggestions received by it, supported the view that
reservation policy should be extended to the excluded categories, including scientific as well as
technical posts. It was argued that such an exclusion from getting benefit of reservation in such
posts is against the spirit of articles 14, and 16(4) of the Constitution which states that the State
shall not deny to any person equality before  the law or the equal protection of the laws within-
the territory of India and ensure adequate representation in services under the control of the State.
In other words, the Constitution guarantees the right to equality and as per this right, there should
not be any discrimination in access to public offices.
10.3 On a query as to why the reservation policy cannot be extended to the scientific and
technical posts, the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions replied :—
“As per definition given in the Bill “Scientific or Technical Posts” include posts for which
qualification in the natural sciences or exact sciences or applied sciences or in technology
are required and the incumbents to such posts have to use that knowledge in the discharge
of their duties. Such posts exist in organizations like the Department of Atomic Energy,

15
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, etc. The Supreme Court, in the Indira Sawhney’s case,
had held that such posts and other specialist posts should be excluded from the purview
of reservation.
10.4 The Committee understands that Scientific or Technical Posts by their nature require
specialised knowledge and skill and appointments to such posts need candidates of the
higher merit to bring in the elements of efficiency and competence in these fields. The
Committee, however, feels that if these fields are kept out of the purview of the
reservation policy of the Government, the spirit of the Constitution to adequately represent
the backward classes in services under the State will be defeated. The Committee observes
that the representations received from different persons, groups and organisations belonging
to SCs, STs and OBCs, suggesting measures for an effective reservation policy, are
indicative of the fact that the reservation policy has not succeeded in achieving the desired
results and if these services are kept out of reservation, the scenario may worsen further.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should consider bringing scientific
and technical posts, as well as the short term and work charged posts, within the ambit of
reservation. The Committee, however, desires that in the process of reservation to the
scientific and technical posts, elements of efficiency and competence should not be
compromised.
10.5 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-6
11. This clause provides for relaxation of the maximum age, etc., for a candidate belonging to
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, for direct recruitment to a
service or post.
11.1 The Committee notes that the individuals and the Groups/Organisations representing the
interests of Other Backward Classes strongly and emphatically put forward their demand for
increasing the maximum age fixed for direct recruitment for a candidate belonging to OBCs. In
their view, the maximum age limit for direct recruitment is relaxed by five years in case of
members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, whereas the maximum age limit for OBCs for
direct recruitment in services is relaxed by three years only, and by not extending the same benefit
to OBCs, the Government has adopted a discriminatory approach in this matter.
11.2 The Committee, in this context, considered the reply of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievance and Pensions, given in response to a query as to why the relaxations which are available
to the members of SCs and STs, have not been extended to the members of OBCs. The Ministry
in its reply stated as under :—
“The social, educational and economic conditions of OBCs are not as bad as that of SCs
and STs. Therefore, comparison of OBCs with the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes is
not justified. Representation of OBCs in services is still less because reservation for them
was introduced as late as in 1993. In due course of time, it would be made up. It is felt
that relaxation in age limit or in fee for OBCs, at par with Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes, is not needed.
11.3 The Committee does not find the reply of the Ministry convincing. In the view of the
Committee, the Ministry’s conclusion seems to be founded on a mere theory, than on
reality. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the benefits, such as relaxation in the
maximum age limit, etc. for direct recruitment, should also be extended to the candidates
belonging to OBCs, in the same manner as are available to the candidates belonging to SCs
and STs and the clause be amended accordingly.

16
11.4 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-7
12. The clause provides for relaxation/reduction in the examination fee and application fee
payable for recruitment to a service or post through competitive examination, for the members of
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
12.1 In view of the observation of the Committee in Para 11.3, it recommends that the
benefit of reduction in the examination fee and application fee payable for recruitment to
a service or post through competitive examination should also be extended to the candidates
belonging to OBCs.
12.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE-8
13. The clause seeks to provide relaxation and concessions to members of the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in qualifications relating to experience and
standard of suitability in case of direct recruitment.
13.1 The Committee considered the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 8 of the Bill. The effect
of the proviso is that if a candidate is found unfit to hold the post he/she shall not be appointed
to that post.
13.2 The Committee finds that the proviso has no relevance to sub-clause (2) as the sub-
clause seeks to lower the general standard of suitability for direct recruitment in case
sufficient number of SCs, STs and OBCs are not available to fill all the vacancies reserved
for them. The Committee is of the view that the proviso does not fit in this scheme, as its
insertion would render a candidate belonging to these communities unfit to hold the post
for which he/she has to be appointed through direct recruitment. In other words, the proviso
would defeat the purpose of the proposed provision. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the proviso should be deleted.
13.3 The Clause is adopted as amended.
CLAUSE-13
14. The clause provides for appointment of Liaison Officers in every Ministry or Department
of the Government or in offices under the control of Heads of Departments to ensure that the
provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder or instructions issued by the Government
regarding reservation, are not violated in any establishment.
14.1 The Committee notes that the Liaison Officer to be appointed under the provisions
of clause 13 has been provided limited powers to exercise. His jurisdiction would be
restricted to submitting a report to the concerned Secretary or Head of the Department in
case he, during the course of his inspection, finds any case of negligence/violation or lapse
in relation to providing reservation for members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes. The Committee feels that with these limitations, the Liaison
Officer may not perform his functions properly, as he would have to deal with diverse
grievances of different communities. It would, therefore, be appropriate if, instead of a
common Liaison Officer for the three communities, separate Liaison Officers for each of
the communities are appointed. In the view of the Committee, this would help them to have
better appraisal of the grievances of the community under their functional jurisdiction. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause should be amended accordingly.

17
14.2 Subject to the above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 1, ENACTING FORMULA AND TITLE
15. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes, which
were of consequential or drafting nature, namely, the figure “2004” and the words and
“Fifty-fifth” to be substituted by the figure “2005” and the words “Fifty-sixth”, respectively.
16. The Committee adopts the following clauses without any changes/amendments:—
(i) Clause 5 seeking to provide that unreserved vacancies to be open to members
of the Scheduled Castes, etc.;
(ii) Clause 10 seeking to provide for the maximum limit of reservation in a
recruitment year;
(iii) Clause 11 proposing that the appointment for reserved vacancies to be made by
candidates from reserved categories;
(iv) Clause 12 regarding abolition of posts not to affect the number of reserved
posts;
(v) Clause 14 regarding report to be made by every appointing authority;
(vi) Clause 15 regarding penalty for making false claim;
(vii) Clause 16 regarding power to give directions;
(viii) Clause 17 seeking to provide for continuance of the existing office memoranda;
(ix) Clause 18 regarding Central Government power to make rules.
17. In respect of clauses 10, 13 and 15, the Committee has made some general observations
based on the sentiments and feelings expressed by various individuals/groups representing interests
of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. The Committee’s
observations on the above clauses and on some other key issues pertaining to the reservation
policy, are given under a separate heading titled ‘Part-II General Observations of the Committee on
key issues pertaining to reservation’.

18
CHAPTER-II
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON KEY ISSUES
PERTAINING TO RESERV ATION
Issue: Whether present ceiling of fifty percent reservation be increased?
18. Clause 10 puts a restriction on the total number of vacancies reserved for members of the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in a cadre in a recruitment year,
by saying that such reserved vacancies shall not exceed fifty percent of the total number of
vacancies in the cadre. This ceiling, however, will not apply while counting the backlog vacancies
which shall be carried forward from the previous year.
18.1 It was argued before the Committee that the present ceiling of fifty percent does not
represent the interests of weaker sections or communities, adequately. Parliamentarians belonging
to the Other Backward Classes demanded vehemently that the ceiling should be increased in
proportion to the size of population as the percentage of OBCs has increased substantially over the
years. It was contended that the ceiling fixed for reservation is based on 1971 census and since
then considerable changes have taken place in the socio-economic fabric. It was, accordingly,
pleaded that to adequately represent the three weaker communities, ceiling should be determined on
the basis of data made available by the 2001 census. Another argument was that in some States
like, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, the maximum limit of reservation has been fixed
at more than fifty percent, to cater to the wishes and aspirations of the weaker sections of those
States.
18.2 The Committee notes that fifty percent limit is not a fall out of any statutory
provision but has been worked out by the Supreme Court in Indira Sahwny’s case. Later,
this limit found a reference in article 16(4-B) of the Constitution, which was inserted by the
Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 2000. The Committee, in this context,
considered the views expressed by some witnesses that the percentage of reservation quota
fixed for different communities should be mentioned in the Bill itself, to reflect the actual
representation and to ensure its enforceability in letter and spirit. The Committee has,
however, not found the suggestion tenable. The Committee also considered the view of
Government on the question whether the limit of 50% should be increased. The
Government opined that increasing the limit might be held illegal and unconstitutional. The
Committee is of the view that Government should carry out a survey to assess the size of
different communities i.e., SCs, STs and OBCs in the total population of the country, make
an appraisal of their representation according to their population, and if need be, explore
the feasibility of enhancing the limit of fifty percent by way of amending the Constitution
suitably.
Issue: Whether there is a need for a monitoring agency for proper implementation of the
provisions regarding reservation?
19. The Committee was given to understand that the role and powers of the Liaison Officer
to be appointed under the provisions of clause 13 of the Bill are limited. It has been contended
that under the scheme of the proposed legislation, Liaison Officer will have to submit a report
about negligence or lapse in relation to providing reservation for members of the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes to the Secretaries to Government of India and Heads
18

19
of the Departments. It has been viewed that the Liaison Officer himself being a functionary
under the control of the higher authorities, including appointing authority of Government,
may find some difficulties in discharging his functions fearlessly and impartially. It would,
therefore, be appropriate if he is given some more powers.
20. The Committee, considering the views and suggestions put forward before it, feels that
there is a need to make the role of the Liaison Officer more effective and powerful, so as to enable
him to discharge his functions efficaciously. In fact, Liaison Officer would be more of a
coordinating officer, who would be required to carry out an inspection to look into the cases of
violation of the provisions of the proposed legislation on the one hand, and submit a report thereon
to the Competent Authorities on the other. The Committee is of the view that for better
assessment of enforcement of reservation in appointment and to have first hand
information, Liaison Officer should have regular meetings with the representatives of
recognized SCs, STs and OBCs Associations.
21. The Committee feels that in the circumstances narrated above, Liaison Officer has not been
given any power to impose penalty or even at least to propose a penal action against the authorities
responsible for violation of the provisions of the Act. Suspicion was raised by many witnesses that
in such a situation, effective enforcement of the reservation policy would not be possible. The
Committee endorses the view and impresses upon Government to consider constituting a
special monitoring committee, to oversee the overall enforcement of the Act and impose
penalties or propose disciplinary action, etc. for contravening the provisions of the Act.
Issue: Whether appointing authority or officer or any employee entrusted with the
responsibility to enforce the provisions of the Act should be penalised/punished for
violation of the provisions of the Act?
22. The Committee notes that there has been an overwhelming demand for insertion of adequate
penal provisions in the Bill. Clause 15 of the Bill provides punishment for a term of three years
or with fine extending to fifty thousand rupees or with both, in case of making a false claim to
be a member of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes and also in
case of issuing a false certificate. Thus, the penal provision governs the two categories of persons,
one who makes a false claim and the other, who issues a false certificate. The clause nowhere
mentions anything for penal action against the erring authorities. It has been contended
that it would be virtually impossible to meet the objectives of the Bill without being
entrusted with adequate and comprehensive penal provisions. The Committee’s attention
was drawn to the Reservation Act in enforcement in Uttar Pradesh, which contains certain
penal provisions.
22.1 The Committee notes that the Government, when asked to furnish comments on the issue
of punitive clause for officers found negligent in implementing the provisions for reservation, has
explained the following position:—
“It is expected of every Government servant to maintain at all times absolute integrity and
devotion to duty and ensure the same of his subordinates under the CCS (Conduct) Rules.
Any deliberate flouting of the provisions of the Act would clearly amount to misconduct
within the meaning of the Conduct Rules and the delinquent officials would make
themselves liable for disciplinary action under the CCS (CCA) Rules. Further, making such
a provision in the Bill will go adversely against the integrity of Government servants who
generally discharge their duties assigned to them diligently.”
22.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Government. In  the view of the
Committee, cases of dereliction of duty are not uncommon and it is also a fact that all the erring
officials are not brought to book, due to several reasons or lapses in the system. The Committee
feels that in the absence of any penal provisions, the purpose and intent behind bringing this

20
legislation would be defeated. It notes that the Bill does not contain any explicit provision to punish
or impose penalty on those who derelict their duty of enforcing the provisions of the Act. For
example, the Bill is silent on what action would be initiated against the appointing authority or any
other officer entrusted with the task of enforcement of the Act who would be found negligent or
violating the prescribed rules. In  the view of the Committee, this is a serious lacunae, which would
render the whole reservation policy redundant.  Also the constitutional obligation to provide
adequate representation to members of SCs, STs and OBCs in services under the control
of State could only be achieved, if enforcement machinery is strengthened with adequate
penal powers. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon Government to consider inserting
suitable penal provisions in the Bill almost on the following lines:
“Any appointing authority or officer or employee entrusted with responsibility to
enforce the provisions of this Act, acts in a manner intended to contravene or defeat
the purposes of this Act, or in anyway prejudicial to the interest of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in the matter of selection,
appointment, promotion and such service condition shall on conviction, be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend
to fifty thousand rupees or with both.”
Issue: Separate Legislation for SCs, STs and OBCs
23. The Committee, while interacting with Members of Parliament, on behalf of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes communities, came across their demand for a separate legislation for
members of SCs and STs. They pleaded that history is testimony of the fact that SCs and STs
have been subjected to so many discriminations, like untouchability and other social evils from the
times immemorial. Hence, their sufferings and grievances and other issues related to them need to
be looked differently from the Other Backward Classes.
23.1 On another occasion, the Committee heard views of the Parliamentarians representing Other
Backward Classes and sought their opinion on the question of a separate legislation, one, for the
SCs and STs and the other for the Other Backward Classes, as demanded by the Parliamentarians
belonging to SCs and STs. The Committee, after interacting with the OBCs Members gathered that
there was no support in favour of a separate legislation from their side.
23.2 Before arriving at any conclusion on the issue of a separate legislation, community-wise, the
Committee finds it useful to take into account certain other facts. The Committee notes that there
is a separate Ministry of Tribal Affairs to look after the welfare and other related issues of tribal
communities of the country. Likewise, the Ministry of Social Justice is responsible for development
and welfare of Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes. The Ministry also implements the
reservation policy of the Government as prescribed in the standing instructions of the Department
of Personnel and Training. Further, there are three separate Commissions, two Constitutional,
namely, the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and the National Commission for Scheduled
Tribes and one Statutory, namely, the National Commission for Backward Classes (yet to get
constitutional powers) to monitor the safeguards provided to these communities and review issues
concerning their welfare. Not only this, OBCs are treated differently in some matters from the
other two Backward Communities. For example, there is no reservation for OBCs in appointments
by promotion and the maximum age limit fixed for direct recruitment to services or posts is
increased by five years in case of a candidate belonging to SCs and STs while the maximum age
limit is relaxed by three years in case of a candidate belonging to OBCs.
23.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Government in bringing in this legislation by
which, administrative instructions governing reservation are intended to put on the statute book for
the first time. In the view of the Committee, social, educational, geographical, ethnic and economic

21
conditions of SCs, STs and OBCs are different and this diversity has shaped their lives accordingly.
Reservation in services may be one tool to ameliorate standard of living of disadvantaged or
deprived classes of  society but this is not the only way to uplift them to the desired level. Some
other issues concerning welfare and development of SCs, STs and OBCs also need to be addressed
properly for overall improvement of their conditions. The Committee, therefore, feels that it
would be appropriate if separate legislations are brought for SCs, STs and OBCs instead of
one comprehensive law. The Committee, however, raises its concern that if thrust is laid on
separate legislation community-wise, there could be an enormous delay in law making
process which may persist for months or even for years hampering interests of the weaker
sections. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Government to consider bringing
in separate legislations for SCs, STs and OBCs. The Committee is of the view that it would
be a worthwhile exercise to bring in separate legislations simultaneously without any delay.
Issue: Whether OBCs should be given reservation in promotions also like SCs and STs?
24. V arious witnesses belonging to Other Backward Classes, during the course of their
deposition before the Committee, submitted that OBCs, like members of SCs and STs, should be
considered for the benefit of reservation in appointment by promotion to the services or posts
under the Central Government. They argued that OBCs’ share in the total population of  the country
had increased over the years and the present reservation policy has not come upto their expectation
in that proportion. At present, reservation to this community is restricted to direct recruitment to
the services only.
24.1 The Committee has observed in the first part of the Report that Other Backward Classes
is a nomenclature which came into existence after the Mandal Commission examined the whole
issue, taking into account the socio-economic conditions of these classes. The Constitution does
mention about the Other Backward Classes in article 340(10) of the Constitution. Articles 15(4)
and 16(4) of the Constitution refer to educationally and socially backward classes, yet, in broader
sense, the Constitution covers them in so far as it casts an obligation on the State to ensure
adequate representation of backward classes in services.
24.2. In this background, the Committee notes that the Other Backward Classes have no
representation in promotion to the services or posts, though they have a prescribed
reservation quota in direct recruitment. The Committee feels that to meet the
constitutional obligation to provide adequate representation to these classes, Government
should consider extending reservation to the members of Other Backward Classes in
promotions also, and bring an amendment to the Constitution, to give effect to this
proposal.
Issue: Welfare of Minorities
25. The Committee was informed that five minority communities, namely, Muslims, Sikhs,
Christians, Buddhists and Zoroastrians (Parsis) constitute 18% of the total population of the
country, as per 2001 census. These communities have, however, remained socially and
educationally backward. Though Government has launched some welfare schemes for bringing
them at par with the other communities of the society, yet the desired results have not been
achieved. The Committee found it necessary to take up the issue of welfare of the minorities, while
commenting on the provisions of the Bill.
25.1 The Committee feels that much more is still needed to be done for the welfare of
the minority communities to bring them in the national mainstream. Plans or schemes,
whatsoever, chalked out for development of the minority communities have not yielded
desired results, so far. In fact, these communities also need to be considered for the benefit
of reservation so as to treat them at par with the SCs, STs and OBCs. The Committee

22
observes that Government has extended reservation to some classes or castes of Muslims
in some States realizing the constitutional mandate to adequately represent each class of
backward citizens. Likewise, Government may also identify other categories of the minority
communities such as, SCs, STs and backward classes of Muslims, Sikhs, Christians,
Buddhists and Zoroastrians (Parsis) for giving them such benefit as they have suffered a lot
for want of any such policy. This, in view of the Committee, would be a step forward in the
direction of overall development of weaker or backward classes of the society.
Issue: Should the Bill after enactment be included in the Ninth Schedule of the
Constitution?
26. The Committee was informed that there have been several litigations in Courts involving
interpretation of various issues/matters pertaining to the reservation policy of the Government
implemented through various administrative orders/instructions issued from time-to-time. It was
argued before the Committee that because of these litigations and judicial pronouncements in
matters pertaining to reservation, many administrative problems have arisen in implementing the
reservation smoothly. In fact, judicial interventions have hampered the process and acted adversely
against the spirit behind providing reservation to the weaker communities. It was, therefore,
demanded that the Bill, after its enactment, should be included in the Ninth Schedule to the
Constitution, so as to keep the provisions of the Bill out of Courts’ intervention.
26.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions, in their comments furnished to it, stated that the Act could be placed in the Ninth
Schedule by an amendment of the Constitution only. The Committee impresses upon
Government to explore the feasibility of including the Act in the Ninth Schedule, after
enactment of the Bill.
ADEQUACIES OF REPRESENTATION IN SERVICES
27. During the course of deliberations on the issue of adequacy of representation of backward
classes in services under control of State, the Committee was apprised that many of the castes,
races and tribes among the SCs, STs and OBCs have been deprived of the benefit of reservation
in services/jobs as such benefit due to variety of reasons has been restricted to certain upper castes
among the weaker sections. Exclusion of some castes from the benefit of reservation has pushed
them far behind which is violation of the principles of social harmony and social equality as
embodied in the constitutional provisions. For example, the Valmiki Majhabi Category despite their
large population in Punjab has got scant representation in Government jobs. Not only this, they are
also fearing merger with other categories which, in their opinion, would further worsen their living
conditions.
27.1 The Committee also came across demand of certain sections of people of Andhra Pradesh
for sub-dividing or sub-grouping the castes enumerated in the list of Scheduled Castes on the plea
that this sub-division would entitle them to the benefit of reservation in Government jobs.
27.2 The Committee observes that to protect and promote interests of backward classes of
society, the Constitution specifically mentions about advancement of any socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens or for the SCs and STs. Article 16(4) of the Constitution casts an
obligation on the State to identify the group of backward class of citizens which in the opinion
of the State is not adequately represented in the service under the State and make reservations in
their favour for such appointments. The Committee notes that views/suggestions of people
belonging to SCs, STs and OBCs have highlighted the need to make the existing reservation policy
more effective and purposeful to fullfil the Constitutional mandate. In a way this infers that the
reservation policy has not succeeded in achieving the desired objective. The Committee is of the

23
opinion that possibly a particular sub-caste or group of a homogeneous class may have been
enjoying the benefit of reservation and other groups though may be more backward and deserving,
may have been deprived of the benefit simply because of their lack of awareness, information or
knowledge. On the other hand, it cannot also be ruled out that induction of more categories, castes,
groups, tribes or classes in the lists of SCs, STs and OBCs has rendered it difficult to implement
the reservation policy successfully because fresh entrants in the lists reduce opportunities for
availing the benefit under reservation. It would be imperative if Government, curbs induction of
new categories and sub-castes till the objective of adequate representation for the existing
categories is achieved. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Government to make
concerted efforts to identify such sub-castes or categories of a homogeneous class who have
been deprived of reservation in jobs or services, if possible. The Government may also
consider amending the Constitution suitably to this effect.
28. The Committee has been given to understand that generally, candidates belonging to
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes have no
information or knowledge of the reservation prescribed for them at the stage of direct
recruitment to services or jobs. In fact, people come to know the percentage of seats
reserved for SCs, STs and OBCs only when any advertisement for filling up certain posts
in Government Departments or Ministries appear in the electronic or print media. The
three backward communities together constitute nearly more than 60% of the total
population of the country and it is an irony that for such a large size of population, there
are no convenient means to get acquainted with the reservation policy. Administrative
instructions issued in this regard by the Government are of limited access. The Committee
feels that awareness of reservation policy would enable candidates belonging to SCs, STs and
OBCs to take maximum advantage of the scheme and it would therefore, be appropriate if
a Schedule is appended to the statute showing percentage fixed for reservation of SCs, STs
and OBCs at national, state and regional levels. The Schedule so appended, should also
reflect the lists of the three backward communities each showing sub-castes and groups
identified for reservation by the Central and State Governments.

24
MINUTE OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI P.C. ALEXANDER, M.P.
At the meeting of the Standing Committee held on 7 June 2005 to consider the draft report
on Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other backward classes (Reservation and Posts in
Services) Bill 2004, I had stated that I had reservations about extending of some of the benefits
now exclusively enjoyed by the Scheduled castes and Scheduled tribes categories, such as
reservation in promotion and relaxation of age limit to the OBC category also, as the conditions
of the two categories are not comparable. I had further stated that proposals like deletion of the
50% ceiling for reservation and for reservation for OBCs in promotions will further adversely affect
the interests of the non-backward categories. I had also expressed the view that dispensing with
the ‘creamy layer’ concept will not be in the interests of the more backward among the Other
Backward Communities. The following are the main proposals in the report of the Committee on
which I had expressed reservations:—
(i) Removal of the ‘creamy layer’ concept — pages 20 and 21 of the draft report;
(ii) Relaxation of the age limit for direct recruitment bringing it on par with that for the
SCs and STs — page 25 of the draft report;
(iii) Deletion of the 50% limit fixed for reservation — pages 29 and 30 of the draft report;
(iv) Extension of reservation in promotion to the OBCs also — pages 34 and 35 of the
draft report.
I request that this letter may be suitably incorporated in the report of the Committee.
24

25
MINUTE OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY DR. RADHAKANT NAYAK, M.P.
I have gone through the revised Draft of 8th Report on the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004. I fully agree
and endorse the said Report, except a few points, based on constitutional principles, for which I
would respectfully differ from the Hon’ble Chairman and other Hon’ble Members; here I would
mention only those specific points on which I differ or which require due amplification and in all
other aspects wherein I agree fully are not repeated. These are as follows:
(1) I respectfully disagree on the structure of the report comprising the historical settings,
chapter heads, the arrangement of the chapters, the order of the items, the sub-titles, the
inter-connections and repetitions of some points and even the use of some terms like
‘Dalit’, etc. Some of my comments therefore may cut across items contained in different
sections or paragraphs, although references are made only to a few pages.
(2) On a closer examination and in deference to the suggestions of the SC/ST  MPs’
Coordination Council, I suggest that the present Bill may be limited to the matter of
reservation in posts and services in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes alone.
The law relating to Other Backward Classes may be separately enacted quickly, after the
required amendment to the Constitution, whenever needed is effected. If this suggestion is
approved, the very title of the present Bill would be “The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004” (Pages 31 and 32).
(3) I would also respectfully disagree and differ with regard to the views of the Hon’ble
Chairman and other Hon’ble Members relating to the observations in this Report to the
effect that the provisions for reservation, the historic process, Constitutional provisions and
the legal status of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are comparable to those of
the Other Backward Classes and that Other Backward Classes should be treated at par with
the SCs and STs in the matter of reservation in public employment. The detailed reasons
for this disagreement are not given herewith for the sake of brevity and convenience.
However, I may mention that the historical processes of reservations with regard to OBCs
are quite different from those of SCs and STs. The Constitutional provisions also are
substantially different for these two groups. The definition, constitutional status, the
provisions for identification and the scheme of special provisions including reservations in
the Constitution are completely and substantially different for these groups. For example,
Articles 335 and 16(4-A) are exclusively for the SCs and STs and there is no comparable
or similar provisions with regard to OBCs in the Constitution. Under Article 366 of the
Constitution, the, expressions “Scheduled Castes” and ‘‘Scheduled Tribes” are specifically
defined, whereas there is no such definition of OBCs under Article 366. The provisions and
procedures for specifying and notifying the SCs and STs do not have any comparable
Constitutional provisions or procedures in relation to OBCs and the provisions of Article 340
are not in any manner similar or comparable with the provisions of the Article 341 or 342.
The Constitutional mandate under Article 335 in relation to SCs and STs is unique and there
is no such comparable mandate in relation to OBCs. Even Article 46 which covers all
weaker sections accords a special status to SCs and STs. Article 15(4) also accords a
specific identity and status to the SCs and STs clearly distinguishable from socially and
educationally backward classes of the citizens. Similarly the provisions of Article 16(4-A)
accords special status to the SCs and STs, which are not available to OBCs. There are no
25

26
comparable provisions for OBCs as are available to SCs and STs for reservation in
legislatures under Article 330 or 332 or in Panchayats and Municipality levels as under 243
(D) or 243 (T). In these circumstances, OBCs may be extended all the required benefits
and special provisions including reservation in promotion etc. as warranted by their social,
educational and economic disabilities only by amending the Constitution’ separately (Pages
31 and 32).
(4) I would also respectfully differ from Hon’ble Chairman and other Hon’ble Members of the
Committee in the recommendation to have three separate legislations for Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. Instead I would propose that there should
be two legislations, one for SCs and STs and the other for Other Backward Classes. A
combined legislation for SCs and STs would be consistent with the tradition of the
Executive Instructions as also the Constitutional scheme in which they have been clubbed
together, e.g. Articles 335, 15(4), 16 (4-A), 330, 332, 243 (D) and 243 (T). Moreover the
clubbing would be mutually beneficial to both the SCs and STs and separating them at this
stage would create confusions and conflicts and may eliminate mutually beneficial aspects.
However, clubbing SCs and STs with OBCs may be inconsistent with the Constitutional
schemes, as envisaged by the Founding Fathers. Such clubbing in fact would water down
the rationale, and significance as well as the nature and extent of the rights of the SCs and
STs on the one hand and that of the OBCs on the other (Pages 31 and 32).
(5) I would also differ with regard to the deletion of the words “Creamy Layer” under Clause
2(c) as also to the deletion of the proviso to sub-clause (1) of Clause 3. Let me make it
very clear that I don’t subscribe to the views taken by the Supreme Court that creamy layer
of the OBCs should be outside the purview of the reservation for OBCs, which in fact is
not according to the Constitutional scheme. Nevertheless the deletion of the exclusion of
creamy layer in the Bill cannot be sustained because of the imminent conflict which it may
invite between the legislature and the judiciary by the said deletion in view of the
declarations and directions by the Supreme Court regarding the Creamy layer issue in the
‘Mandal Case (1992 Suppl. 3 SSC 217). Such a deletion would either be of no result as
intended because the said declarations and directions of the Mandal Case would still survive
and would operate, in spite of the deletions or it would invite judicial interference as was
occasioned by similar legislative provisions by the Kerala Assembly in relation to creamy
layer (2000 (1) SSC 168). It is important to note that the Supreme Court has already
declared in 1999 that “Any executive or legislative action refusing to exclude the creamy
layer from the benefit of reservation will be violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) and also of
Article 16 (4)” (2000 (1) SSC 168). Hence in my humble view the proposed deletion would
require Constitutional amendment (Pages 18 and 19).
(6) I would also respectfully disagree with regard to sub-clause 2 of Clause. 3. The Standing
Committee has proposed the deletion of whole sub-clause 2 fully which will have the effect
of nullifying the provisions for reservation in promotion in favour of SCs and, STs. Hence
I would suggest that the first part of sub-clause 2 of Clause 3 which provides for the
reservation in promotion for SCs and STs may be retained and only the remaining part of
sub-clause 2 may be deleted (Pages 21 and 22).
(7) With regard to Clause 4 while agreeing that those exclusions are unwarranted, I would
propose the complete deletion of Clause 4 and renumbering of other clauses accordingly.
In my view there is no place for additional ‘desire’ for efficiency and competence with
regard to scientific and technical posts, since the said ‘desire’ has been fully taken care of
by Article 335 of the Constitution in the case of SCs and STs even with regard to posts
and services which are not scientific and technical in nature. Hence any additional ‘desire’

27
for efficiency and competence would be applicable only in the case of OBCs, who are not
covered under Article 335 (Pages 22, 23 and 24).
(8) The Draft does not contain any firm recommendation or suggestion for a penal provision.
In my humble view general observations lack firmness, do not seem to tantamount to a
recommendation and gives an impression of non-seriousness on the part of the Committee.
The Committee had the benefit of suggestions by some Hon’ble Members on the adoption
of UP Model which may be mutatis mutandis incorporated in the Bill. This would provide
teeth to the proposed legislation failing which the law would be as good or as bad as the
executive instructions which are in existence today, which have yielded no results and
which situation has necessitated the enactment of the instant Bill (Pages 30 and 31).
(9) The Committee also had the benefit of suggestion by some Hon’ble Members for the
provision for reservation of posts and services in favour of the Minorities, for which, in
my view, no amendment to the Constitution is needed. This may also be considered by
Government (Page 33).
(10) The Committee also had the benefit of some averments by some Hon’ble Members on
making a provision for reservation in private sector without reference to the extent of equity
participation by Government, etc. In my view specific provision for reservation in the
private sector ought to have been included in the present Bill. In addition, a number of
valuable suggestions were available to the Committee from various individuals and
organizations and they were also discussed. Details of these do not find mention in the
Committee’s recommendations, which should have been specifically commented upon in
extenso and recommendations made (Pages 13 to 18).

MINUTES

31
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC
GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XXIII
TWENTY-THIRDMEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 17th February, 2005, in Room No. ‘53’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Dr. P.C. Alexander
5. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
6. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
7. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of All India Bank of Baroda SC/ST Employees’ Welfare Association
1. Shri Raj Kumar, President
2. Shri Dharam Singh, General Secretary
II. Representative of All India Punjab National Bank Employees’ Welfare Association
Dr. R.S. Sauran, President
III. Representatives of DDA SC/ST Employees’ Welfare Association
1. Shri. H.S. Dharamsattu, President
2. Shri M.L. Nigam, General Secretary
IV. Representative of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Memorial Foundation
Shri Subash Kankheria, General Secretary

32
V. Representatives of Akhil Bharat Anusuchit Jati-Janjati Karamchari Parisad
1. Shri T.L. Bharti, Chairman
2. Shri Dinesh Kumar, Secretary General
VI. Representative of Samarpit Samaj
Shri Swami Nath, Acting President
VII. Representatives of All India General Insurance SC/ST Welfare Association
1. Shri P.R. Arya, President (North Zone)
2. Shri Shiv Kumar, Senior Vice President
VII. Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the witnesses to the meeting to depose on the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and
Services) Bill, 2004. The witnesses highlighted the need for reservation in promotion in Group A
posts. They suggested that punitive clause should be included in the Bill and that reservation
should be made applicable to Corporations also wherein Government holding was not less than
33 percent. They raised concern over the backlog of vacancies in reserved categories.
3. The witnesses clarified the points raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The Committee adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.

33
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 3rd February, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Dr. P. C. Alexander
5. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
6. Justice (Retd.) N.Y . Hanumanthappa
7. Shri Harin Pathak
8. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
11. Shri A.K. Moorthy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
1. Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary
2. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Legislative Department Ministry of Law
and Justice and his colleagues to the meeting.
3. * * *
4. * * *
33
*** Relate to other matters.

34
5. The Chairman invited the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
to make a presentation on the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
(Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
6. The Secretary enlightened the Committee that the main driving force for piloting this Bill was
to codify, various Office Memoranda (OMs) governing reservations, which were issued by
Government, through a legislative action so that any ambuguity that existed becasue of the
multiplicity of the OMs could be reduced and confidence might be instilled among the members
of the Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Castes (STs) about their rights and privileges. He
apprised the Committee that the Government had issued executive instructions for reservation in
direct recruitment for SCs, STs and Other Backward Classes (OBCs) in 1947, 1950 and 1993
respectively and that reservation in promotion for SCs and STs was introduced in 1957. He further
narrated the background which necessitated the bringing forth of the Bill. He then elaborated upon
the salient features of the Bill.
7. The Members of the Committee opined that private undertakings which received grants from
Government should also be brought within the purview of the Bill and that there should be more
clarity as regards the definition of ‘‘creamy layer’’. They were also of the view that reservation
should be enforced in respect of appointments made to posts which were classified as ‘‘scientific’’
or ‘‘technical’’ also and that in case of non-implementation of the provisions, the concerned
authority had to be penalised. The Secretary clarified that SCs and STs were entitiled for
reservation in promotions also.
8. He replied to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses thereafter withdrew).
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 1.41 
P.M.

35
XXVI
TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 6.00 P.M. on Thursday, the l0th March, 2005, in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
6. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar
8. Justice (Retd.) N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri S. K. Kharventhan
11. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
12. Shri A. K. Moorthy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri H. C. Sethi, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of SCs, STs and OBCs (Reservation in Post and Services) Bill, 2004
1. Dr. M. Jagannath, Member, Lok Sabha;
2. Prof. M. Ramadass, Member, Lok Sabha;
3. Dr. R. Senthu, Member, Lok Sabha;
4. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu, Member, Lok Sabha;
5. Shri R. S. Gavai, Member, Rajya Sabha;
6. Shri Jesudasu Seelam, Member, Rajya Sabha;
7. Shri K. Paramalai, Member of Legislative Assembly, Tamil Nadu:
8. Dr. K. Krishnasany Former Member of Legislative Assembly, Leader of Pushiy
Tamilagam Party, Tamil Nadu;
35

36
9. Shri K. Veeramani, President, Dravidar Kazhagam, Chennai;
10. Shri B. S. A. Swamy, Retd. High Court Judge, Hyderabad;
11. Shri Swami Nath, IAS (Retd.) former Economic Advisor, Government of India;
12. Shri Ganga Das, IAS (Retd.), former Chairman, Siddhartha Educational and Cultural
Trust, New Delhi:
13. Shri G. Karunanidhi, General Secretary, All India Federation of Backward Classes
Employees Association, Chennai;
14. Shri A. Subba Rao, Managing Trustee, Lowers Forum for Social Justice, New Delhi;
15. Dr. M. P. Raju, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi; and
16. Dr. N. Ramachandran, Executive Council Member, Dravidar Kazhagam.
II. * * *
III. Representative of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Shri R. K. V erma, Deputy Secretary
IV. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri T. K. Vishwanathan, Secretary
2. Shri Z. S. Negi, Additional Secretary
3. Shri N. L. Meena, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman, welcomed the witnesses and apprised them that the purpose of
inviting them was to elicit their views on the SCs, STs and OBCs (Reservation in Post and
Services) Bill, 2004.
3. The witnesses were of the view that the purpose of providing reservation was to empower
the weaker sections but the laws made, had not been properly implemented by the State and the
Central Governments. The Representatives were unanimous on certain issues  e.g.  a definite time
frame to fill the backlog vacancies, enhancement of percentage for SC, ST and OBC in promotions
and uniform age relaxation for SC and OBCs.
4. Representatives were concerned about the persons getting Government job in the name of
SC & STs on bogus Caste Certificates. They were of the opinion that stringent action must be
taken against those who were found in possession of those Certificates. An idea of appointing an
independent body in every institution having powers similar to Election Commission to identify and
verify the Bogus Certificate was also put forth. They also stressed that there should be an
imprisonment upto 5 years and a fine upto one lakh rupees for those who were found in possession
of Bogus Certificate. As far as ‘creamy layer’ concept was concerned, the opinion was that it was
not going to help the communities and, therefore should be dispensed with. The witnesses also felt
that the Commissions for SC, ST, and OBC already in existence, should have some teeth and only
then it would become a purposeful and meaningful Commission. Creation of a Grievance Redresses
Commissioner in the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment was also mooted by one of the
witnesses. The Committee was also apprised that there was a gross under representation of OBC
and SC judges in the judiciary even after about 60 years of Independence, which they felt, needed
immediate attention.
(Thereafter the witnesses withdrew).
*** Relate to other matters.

37
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 7.53 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

38
XXXII
THIRTY-SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19th April, 2005, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
6. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
7. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Dahyabhai V . Patel
10. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
11. Shri S. K. Kharventhan
12. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
13. Shri A. K. Moorthy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
1. Shri P. Madhu, Member, Rajya Sabha
2. Shri J. Seelam, Member, Rajya Sabha
3. Dr. M. Jagannath, Member, Rajya Sabha
4. Shri R. S. Gavai, Member, Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Gandhi Azad, Member, Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot, Member, Lok Sabha
7. Shri Nandi Yellaiah, Member, Lok Sabha
38

39
II. Representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
1. Shri A. N. Tiwari, Secretary
2. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary
III. * * *
IV. * * *
2. Thre Chairman welcomed the Hon'ble Members of Parliament to the meeting to depose
before the Committee on the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
(Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
3. Some of the witnesses highlighted the need for two separate Bills-one for the benefit of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the other for thc benefit of Other Backward Classes.
They opined that State Governments should be given powers to divide castes into groups,
depending on development and other aspects and that the Central Government should be given the
power of exclusion or inclusion of sub-castes. They stressed upon the need for reservation for
technical and super-speciality posts also and also a monitoring mechanism to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the instant Bill which would ensure accountability. They opined
that reservation should be extended to the private sector also.
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the
Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 5.55 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

40
XXXIII
THIRTY-THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 20th April, 2005, in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
6. Shri Dahyabhai V . Patel
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri H. C. Sethi, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
1. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu, Member, Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Narayanaswamy, Member, Rajya Sabha
3. Shri B. K. Hari Prasad, Member, Rajya Sabha
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao, Member, Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Vittal Rao, Member, Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Avtar Singh Badana, Member, Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi, Member, Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav, Member, Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Kadar Mohindara, Member, Rajya Sabha
II. Representative of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary
40

41
2. The Committee heard presentation by the Hon'ble Members of Parliament belonging to the
OBCs on the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Othcr Backward Classes (Reservations in
Posts and Services) Bill, 2004. Initiating the presentation one of the witnesses stated that there
should be no distinction between the SC, ST and OBC categories while implementing reservation.
The witnesses recommended for the implementation of reservation in Technical and Scientific posts
also and desired that the Backward Class Commission be given power to scrutinize the
implementation of reservation. Thereafter, another witness referring to Article 16(4) of the
Constitution stated that OBCs like SCs/STs be allowed to enjoy the benefits of reservation in
proportion to their population. He further desired that the percentage of reservation should be
mentioned compulsory in the Bill itself. He expressed concern that the OBC community was not
equally represented in various categories of posts in the Government service. One Member of the
Committee drew the attention of the Committee about the creamy layer and 50 percent ceiling limit
as imposed by the judiciary and stated that the Constitution only envisaged the social and
educational backwardness criteria and economic criteria was nowhere mentioned while another
Member of the Committee was of the opinion that the benefits of reservation should be given to
those in the backward classes who were yet to avail the facility up till now. The Member further
advocated for the upliftment of the socially and educationally backward classes. One witness
emphasized that the classification of OBCs through out the country was not proper. Some castes
were forward in some states and backward in other states. The Member suggested that proper
reservation and equal opportunities must be given to socially and culturally backward or oppressed
classes in jobs and education. Another witness deposed that reservation had ensured representation
of SCs and STs in Parliament however, consequential benefits in jobs and promotions were yet to
be achieved. A witness further enlightened the Committee by stating that the OBCs were
economical backward classes not socially and educationally. He referred to Article 15(4) and 29(2)
of the Constitution which contained the term socially and educationally backward classes. Another
witness while deposing before the Committee stated that the policy of 27 percent reservation to
the OBCs should be implemented fully. He further suggested for implementation of reservation in
promotions and in other organisations viz. the Banks, Railways and other Government institutions.
One of the witnesses drew the attention of the Committee to the UPA Governmet’s Common
Minimum Programme which stated that the UPA Government was committed for suitable protection
for SC/ST/OBC. A Member of the Committee opined that the question of reservation in the private
sector should be addressed to urgently. As regards the 50 percent limit on reservation, he
mentioned the States of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, where more than 50 percent reservation was
being implemented, a witness specifically mentioned the conditions of other backward classes in
the northern States and requested the Committee to take immediate appropriate steps to improve
their conditions. Another witness expressing his view point stated that the reservation was a
necessity to bring about social justice. He further stated that the jobs were being diverted to the
public sector nowadays. He submitted that the public sector gets Government land and funds which
otherwise could have been used for the socially and economically Backward Classes and for that
matter the private sector could not keep it self away from this social obligation.
3. Almost all the Members endorsed the memorandum and suggested amendments in the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and Services)
Bill, 2004 submitted by one of the witnesses. All the witnesses were of the unanimous view that the
SCs/STs and OBCs should be treated as one class, creamy layer limitation should be removed and
there should be reservations in judiciary, other higher posts, and in private sector too.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The Committee adjourned at 5.29 
P.M.

42
XXXV
THIRTY-FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3rd May, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. P. C. Alexander
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
7. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
8. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri Dahyabhai V . Patel
11. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
1. Shri A. N. Tiwari, Secretary
2. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri T. K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri Z. S. Negi, Additional Secretary
III. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri R. L. Meena, Secretary
2. Shri R. L. Koli, Joint Secretary
42

43
2. The Committee while welcoming the representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions referred to the points raised in the previous meeting on the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and Services)
Bill, 2004. The Chairman further requested the Members to formulate their views and suggestions
on the various clauses of the Bill.
3. The Committee considered sub-clause (c) of clause 2 defining the term ‘creamy layer’ and
decided for deletion of sub-clause (c).
4. In sub-clause (1) of clause 3, the Committee recommended for deletion of the proviso. In
sub-clauses (2), (3) and (4), which curtailed the scope of reservation for the candidates belonging
to SC and ST the Committee, recommended for their deletion.
5. The Committee recommended that benefit, such as relaxation in the maximum age limit and
reduction of fees etc. for direct recruitment which was applicable to SC and ST candidates, should
also be extended to the candidates belonging to OBCs and the clause be amended accordingly.
6. The Committee recommended for deletion of proviso to Clause 8 of the Bill, since it had
no relevance to sub-clause (2) of clause 8.
7. As regards, clause 13 of the Bill, which provided for appointment of liaison officers to
ensure that reservation policy was followed, the Committee rceommended that instead of appointing
a single liaison officer for SC, ST and OBC, there should be separate liaison officers for each
category. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the clause should be amended accordingly.
8. The Committee adopted the clauses, Enacting formula and Title of the Bill subject to above
decisions.
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.55 
P.M.

44
XXXVII
THIRTY-SEVENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 7th June, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
7. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
9. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
10. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Dahyabhai V . Patel
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
15. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
16. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
I. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
44
*** Relate to other matter.

45
5. Some of the Members expressed reservations about certain points in the draft Report on
the Bill. After some discussions it was decided that they might submit their dissent notes which
would be incorporated in the Report.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
Bill No. LX of 2004
THE SCHEDULED CASTES, SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER
BACKWARD CLASSES (RESERV ATION IN POSTS AND
SERVICES) BILL, 2004
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts in civil services for members of the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward
Classes in establishments and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and
Services) Act, 2004.
(2) It shall be apply to every establishment.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appointing authority’’, in relation to a service or a post
in an establishment, means the authority empowered to make
appointment to such service or post;
(b) ‘‘backlog of reserved vacancy’’ means a vacancy
which was earmarked as reserved in an earlier recruitment year but
remained unfilled;
49
Short title,
application and
commencement.
5
Definitions.

50
(c) ‘‘creamy layer’’ means those members of Other
Backward Classes who constitute the forward section from
amongst such Backward Classes;
(d) ‘‘establishment’’ means—
(i) any office or department of the Government;
(ii) any public sector undertaking or statutory
authority constituted under any Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-
one per cent. of the paid-up share capital is held by the
Government;
(iv) a university established by a Central Act and
its affiliated colleges, including medical or engineering colleges;
(v) primary and secondary schools and other
educational institutions which are owned or aided by the
Government;
(vi) any industry, trade, business or occupation
owned, controlled or managed by the Government;
(vii) any Government company as defined in
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 or any corporation
established by or under a Central Act; and
(viii) any autonomous body or other institution
receiving money from the Consolidated Fund of India or
grant-in-aid from the Government;
(e) ‘‘Government’’ means the Government of India;
(f) ‘‘Group A, Group B, Group C or Group D post’’
means a post which is classified as such by the President in
exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article 309
of the Constitution and includes an equivalent post in other
establishments;
(g) ‘‘Other Backward Classes’’ means the castes and
communities notified as Other Backward Classes by the
Government;
(h) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(i) ‘‘promotion by non-selection’’ means promotions made
by seniority-cum-fitness;
(j) ‘‘promotion by selection’’ means promotions made by
merit-cum-seniority;
(k) ‘‘recruitment year’’ means the calendar year for which
a recruitment is made;
(l) ‘‘reservation’’ means the reservation in posts and services
for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Classes;
1 of 1956.

51
(m) ‘‘Scheduled Castes’’ and ‘‘Scheduled Tribes’’ shall
have the same meanings assigned to them respectively under
clause (24) and clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution;
(n) ‘‘scientific or technical posts’’ include posts for which
qualifications in the natural sciences or exact sciences or applied
sciences or in technology are required and the incumbents of
such posts have to use that knowledge in the discharge of their
duties.
3. ( 1) There shall be reserved such percentage of posts in civil
services as may be prescribed for the members of the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes for appointment
by direct recruitment to such posts:
Provided that the members of the Other Backward Classes
falling in the creamy layer shall not be deemed to be as members of
the Other Backward Classes for the purpose of this Act.
(2) There shall be reserved such percentage of posts in civil
services as may be prescribed for the members of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes for appointments by promotion to the
grades of such posts where element of direct recruitment does not
exceed seventy-five per cent and where posts are filled by promotions—
(a) through limited departmental competitive examination
in Group B, Group C and Group D posts;
(b) by selection from Group B post to Group or A post
or in Group B or Group C or Group D posts; and
(c) by non-selection in Group A or Group B or Group C
or Group D posts.
(3) In the case of promotions by selection trom one Group A
post to another Group A post which carries the scale of pay, maximum
of which is equal to the maximum of the scale of pay of a Director
in the Central Secretariat Service or equivalent posts in other
establishments, the Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled Tribe officers
who are senior enough in the zone of consideration for promotion so
as to be within the number of vacancies for which the select list is
to be drawn up, shall be included in the select list provided they are
not found unfit to hold the post.
(4) All the vacancies reserved for the members of the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes under sub-
sections (1) and (2) shall be filled in such manner as may be
prescribed.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, there shall
be no reservation where appointments are made—
(i) for a period of less than forty-five days;
(ii) for the work charged posts;
No reservation
in certain cases.
Reservation in
direct recruit-
ment and
promotion.

52
(iii) for the posts higher than the lowest grade of Group
A post and classified as scientific or technical, which are
required for conducting research or for organising, guiding and
directing research.
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause ( ii), ‘‘work charged
posts’’ means such posts which are required for any emergency relief
like flood relief work or accident restoration relie fwork.
5. ( 1) Recruitment to an unreserved vacancy shall be open to
any eligible candidate including a candidate belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes.
(2) Where an unreserved vacancy is filled by a candidate
belonging to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or an Other
Backward Class on the basis of merit, either by direct recruitment or
by promotion, then such candidate shall not be adjusted against the
vacancy reserved for the Scheduled castes or the Scheduled Tribes or
the Other Backward Classes, as the case may be:
Provided that promotions made by the method of non-selection
shall not be treated as made on the basis of merit.
6. ( 1) The maximum age limit, fixed for direct recruitment to
a service or post shall be increased by five years in the case of a
candidate belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The maximum age limit fixed for direct recruitment to a
service or post shall be increased by three years in the case of
candidates belonging to the Other Backward Classes.
(3) The maximum age limit fixed for promotion to a grade, if
any, shall be increased by five years in the case of candidates belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes:
Provided that the maximum age limit so fixed is not more than
fifty years.
7. The examination fee and application fee fixed for recruitment
to a service or post through competitive examination or otherwise may
be reduced to such extent for the members of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes, as may be prescribed.
8. ( 1) The qualification regarding experience required for direct
recruitment to a post may be relaxed in the case of members of the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, if,
at any stage of selection, sufficient number of candidates from such
communities possessing the requisite experience are not likely to be
available to fill the vacancies reserved for them.
(2) Any general standard of suitability for direct recruitment
may be lowered in the case of members belonging to the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, if sufficient
number of candidates belonging to these communities are not available
on the basis of the general standards to fill all the vacancies reserved
for them:
Unreserved
vacancies to
be filled by
members of
the Scheduled
Castes, etc.
Relaxation of
age, etc.
Fee to be
paid.
Relaxation in
qualifications
regarding
experience.

53
Provided that no candidate who is found unfit to hold the post
shall be appointed.
9. ( i) Where a qualifying examination is held to determine the
fitness of candidates for promotions by method of non-selection but
sufficient number of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribe with general qualifying standard are not available to
fill the vacancies reserved for them, the qualifying standard may be
lowered consistent with the minimum standard of fitness for
appointment to the post in the case of candidates belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
(2) Where merit is determined by qualifying examination in
promotion by selection but sufficient number of candidates belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with general qualifying
standard are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, the
qualifying standard may be lowered consistent with the minimum
standard of merit for appointment to the posts in the case of candidates
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
10. Total number of vacancies reserved for the members of the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in a
cadre in a recruitment year shall not exceed fifty per cent of the total
number of vacancies in the cadre:
Provided that the backlog of the reserved vacancies for the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall not be counted while
determining the aforesaid fifty per cent of the total number of vacancies
in the cadre.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, ‘‘cadre’’ means
such posts in any grade of a service which are earmarked to be filled
by direct recruitment, promotion by selection or promotion by non-
selection, as the case may be.
11. ( 1) The vacancies reserved for members of the Scheduled
Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes in the matter
of appointments by direct recruitment shall not be filled by candidates
not belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Other
Backward Classes, as the case may be.
(2) The vacancies reserved for members of the Scheduled
Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the matter of appointment by promotion
shall be filled only by the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be.
12. Where posts in a cadre are to be abolished and the employees
are required to be, surrendered or their services are required to be
terminated as a result thereof, a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe
or an Other Backward Class employee shall not be surrendered or his
services shall not be terminated if it results in lowering the representation
of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward
Classes, as the case may be, in relation to percentage of reservation
fixed for them.
Operation of
reservation in
case of
promotion by
non-selection.
Reservation not
to exceed fifty
per cent of the
vacancies.
Appointments
for reserved
vacancies to be
made by
candidates from
reserved
categories.
Abolition of
posts not to
affect the
number of
reserved posts.

54
13. ( 1) In every Ministry or Department of the Government, an
Officer of such rank as may be prescribed, shall be designated to act
as the Liaison Officer to ensure that the provisions of this Act or the
rules made thereunder or instructions issued by the Government
regarding reservation are not violated in any establishment.
(2) In offices under the control of Heads of Department, an
officer of such rank as may be prescribed, shall be designated to act
as the Liaison Officer to ensure that the provisions of this Act or the
rules made thereunder or instructions issued by the Government about
reservation are not violated in the office.
(3) Where any case of negligence or lapse in relation to providing
reservation for members of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes
or Other Backward Classes come to the notice of the Liaison Officer
during the course of the inspection carried out by him, or otherwise,
he shall submit his report to the concerned Secretary to the Government
or to the Head of the Department, as the case may be, and that
Secretary or Head of the Department, shall issue appropriate orders in
the matter to the concerned appointing authority.
14. (1) Every appointing authority or any other officer authorised
by him in this behalf shall maintain such records or documents, and
furnish every year to the Government a report on the appointments
made by direct recruitment and promotions, in such manner and at
such time, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Government may by order authorise any officer to
inspect the records or documents maintained under sub-section ( 1) to
verify the report furnished to it in relation to appointments made by
direct recruitment or by promotion.
(3) It shall be the duty of the appointing authority or of any
other officer authorised by the appointing authority in this behalf to
make available such records or documents to the authorised officer to
inspect the records or documents and to furnish such information and
render such assistance to the authorised officer to inspect as may be
necessary for carrying out his functions under this Act:
15. Whoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is a
member of the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe or the Other
Backward Class, as the case may be, and whoever knowingly issues
a false certificate to this effect, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both.
16. The Government may, from time to time, give such directions
to the establishments as it may deem fit, to give effect to the provisions
of this Act, and every establishment shall be bound by such directions.
17. All memoranda issued or purported to have been issued
immediately before the commencement of this Act by the Central
Government in relation to reservation of posts in civil services for the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
shall, in so far as they relate to matters for which provision is made
Report to be
made by
every
appointing
authority.
Penalty for
making false
claim.
Power to give
directions.
Existing office
memoranda to
continue.
Liaison
officers to be
appointed.

55
in this Act and are not inconsistent therewith, be deemed to have been
issued under this Act as if this Act had been in force on the date on
which such memoranda were issued and shall continue in force unless
and until they are superseded by any rule made under this Act.
18. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the percentage of reservation for the members of the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
for appointment by direct recruitment to posts under sub-
section ( 1) of section 3;
(b) the percentage of reservation for the members of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for appointments by
promotion to the grades of posts under sub-section (2) of
section 3;
(c) the manner of filling vacancies reserved for the
members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes under sub-section (4) of section 3;
(d) the examination fee and application fee to be paid by
the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
under section 7;
(e) prescribing the carry forward method for reserved
vacancies;
(f
 ) prescribing for the rank of the officer in every
Ministry or Department and in the offices under the control of
Head of Department to be designated as the Liaison Officers
under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 13;
(g) the records or documents to be maintained, reports to
be furnished on appointments and promotions made, the time
within which and the manner in which the report be furnished by
the appointing authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 14; and
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case maybe; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that notified order or rule.
Power to make
rules.

56
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sensitive to the need for providing adequate representation for the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in civil
services and posts under the control of Central Government, the Government
resolved to enact a Reservation Act to codify instructions on reservation. At
present, administrative instructions issued by the Central Government, from time
to time, provide for reservation to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the Other Backward Classes in civil services and posts under the control of
Central Government. Instructions have also been issued to provide for
reservation in promotion for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. These instructions have
been issued in pursuance of clauses (4) and (4A) of the article 16 and the
proviso to article 335 of the Constitution of India which empower the State to
make provisions for reservation in favour of the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes to ensure their adequate
representation in the services and posts under the State.
Statutory backing to instructions on reservation will elevate the
provisions of the reservation to a statutory right and will instill greater
confidence amongst members of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
the Other Backward Classes. It will go a long way in meeting the constitutional
goal of securing justice, liberty and equality for all citizens of the country and
in promoting fraternity amongst them all.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; SURESH PACHOURI
The 18th December, 2004.

57
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to
provide for—
(a) the percentage of reservation for the members of the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes for
appointment by direct recruitment to the posts;
(b) the percentage of reservation for the members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for appointments by
promotion to the grades of posts;
(c) the manner of filling vacancies reserved for the members of
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes;
(d) the examination fee and application fee to be paid by the
members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes;
(e) the carry forward method for reserved vacancies;
(f
 ) designation of the Liaison Officers; and
(g) the maintenance of records, reports and other documents.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
administrative details and procedure and, it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

58
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts in civil services for members of the Scheduled Castes,
the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in establishments and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Suresh Pachouri, Minister of State for Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions and
Parliamentary Affairs)

59
ANNEXURE-II
LIST OF WITNESSES ATTENDING THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE AT 5.00 P.M. ON 10TH MARCH, 2005 IN ROOM
NO. ‘63’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
1. Witnesses on the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reser-
vation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004
1. Dr. M. Jagannath, M.P. (Lok Sabha)
2. Shri K. V eeramani, President, Dravidar Kazhagam, Chennai
3. Shri G. Karunanidhi, General Secretary, All India Federation of Backward Classes Employees
Associations
4. Justice B.S.A. Swamy, Retd. High Court Judge, Hyderabad
5. Shri K. Paramalai, MLA, Tamil Nadu
6. Shri A. Subba Rao, Managing Trustee, Lourgers form for Social Justice, New Delhi
7. Shri Ganga Das, IAS (Retd.), Former Chairman, Siddhartha Educational and Cultural Trust,
New Delhi
8. Dr. M.P. Raju, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
9. Dr. N. Ramachandran, Executive Council Member, Dravidar Kazhagam
10. Prof. M. Ramadass, Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha)
11. Dr. R. Senthu, Member of Parliament Dharmapur, Tamil Nadu
12. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu, MP, Chairman Parliamentary Forum Indian Backward Classes Federation,
New Delhi
13. Dr. K. Krishnasany MD, Ex. MLA, Leader Pushiy Tamilagam Party, Tamil Nadu
14. Shri Swami Nath, IES (Retd.) Former Economic Advisor Government of India, New Delhi
15. Shri K.S. Gavai, M.P. (RS)
16. Shri K.G . Verma, Deputy Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, New Delhi
Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
1. Shri R.K. V erma, Deputy Secretary

60
60
LIST OF WITNESSES ATTENDING THE MEETING OF COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE AT 11.00 A.M. ON 17TH FEBRUARY , 2005 IN
ROOM NO. ‘53’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
General discussion on the SCs, STs and OBCs (Reservation in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004
1. Shri Raj Kumar, President, All India Bank of Baroda SC/ST Employees’ Welfare Association
4th Floor, Rajendra Bhawan, Rajendra Place, New Delhi
2. Shri Dharam Singh, General Secretary, All India Bank of Baroda SC/ST Employees’ Welfare Association
4th Floor, Rajendra Bhawan, Rajendra Place, New Delhi
3. Dr. R.S. Sauran, President, All India Punjab National Bank Employees’ Welfare Association
4. Shri Bharat Singh, All India Punjab National Bank Employees’ Welfare Association
5. Shri H.S. Dharamsattu, President, DDA SC/ST Employees’ Welfare Association
6. Shri M.L. Nigam, General Secretary, DDA SC/ST Employees’ Welfare Association
7. Shri Subash Kankheria, General Secretary, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Memorial Foundation
8. Shri T.L. Bharti, Chairman, Akhil Bharat Anusuchit Jati-Janjati Karamchari Parisad
9. Shri Dinesh Kumar, Secretary General, Akhil Bharat Anusuchit Jati-Janjati Karamchari Parisad
10. Shri Swami Nath, Acting President, Samarpit Samaj
11. Shri P.R. Arya (President North Zone), All India General Insurance SC, ST Welfare Association
12. Shri Shiv Kumar, Senior Vice President
Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
1. Shri R. Ramanajam, Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.G. V erma, Deputy Secretary

61
ANNEXURE-III
PART-I
COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
CLAUSE NO. 1
Sl. Comments/Suggestions V iews of the Department of Personnel and Training
No.
12 3
1. After sub-clause (3), another sub-clause may be added as Sub-clause (2) of Clause 1 of the Bill provides that the Act shall
under:– apply to every establishment. Definition of ‘establishment’ given in
Clause (d) Clause of 2 includes all Ministries/Departments/offices/PSUs/
(4) This act shall be applicable to whole of India including Autonomous Bodies/Universities and other Educational Institutions/
state of Jammu and Kashmir I ndustries/Trades/Businesses/Companies and other Organisations which
come under the control of Government of India directly or indirectly
or and fall under the definition of State, wherever such establishments
may be located — within India or outside India. Incorporation of a
‘‘The Act shall apply to the whole of India’ ’. Sub-clause as suggested is not considered  necessary.
2. New sub-clause should be added in Clause 1 as under: The Act can be kept in the 9th Schedule by an amendment to the
Constitution only. Therefore, such a provision which may have no
‘‘The Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other meaning, need not be included in the Bill.
Backward Classes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Act,
2004, will be added in the 9th Schedule of Constitution of
India after entry No. 284 as entry No.285’’.
CLAUSE No. 2
The term ‘backlog vacancies’ should include the shortfall There is a distinction between ‘shortfall of reservation’ in a cadre
of reservation with reference to the post-based rosters and ‘backlog of reserved vacancies’ in the cadre. The term ‘shortfall
introduced by the Government in 1997. of a particular reserved category in a cadre’ means the difference
between the ‘total number of posts reserved for that category as per
the post based reservation roster in that cadre’ and the ‘number of
persons belonging to that category who are holding the post in the

62
12 3
cadre’. On the other hand 'backlog reserved vacancies' are those
vacancies which were earmarked reserved in an earlier recruitment
year but remained unfilled in the previous recruitment attempts on
account of non availability of suitable candidates belonging to that
category and are still lying unfilled.
The Supreme Court has held that it is not possible to complete the
shortfall at one go and total reservation in a year should not be
allowed to exceed 50% of the total vacancies in a year. The 81st
Amendment Act permits to treat the backlog-reserved vacancies as
a separate and distinct group not subject to a limit of 50%. But it
does not permit to complete the shortfall without applying the limit
of 50%. Completion of shortfall without application of the limit of
50% would be against the judgment of the Supreme Court and
would not be in line with the provisions of the Constitution.
2. Backlog vacancies determined as per vacancy based roster The Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Singh-II has held that
which were in operation before 2.7.1997 should also be vacancy based reservation was ab initio ultra vires the provisions
treated as backlog vacancies for the Post Based Rosters. of the Constitution. Keeping in view the judgment of the Supreme
Court, it would not be possible to treat the vacancies as per vacancy
based roster as backlog vacancies.
3. ‘‘Creamy Layer’’ should be defined clearly. The definition of the ‘Creamy Layer’ has been framed by the
Legislative Department. Details as to who would fall in the ‘Creamy
Layer’ would be provided in the Rules.
4. Concept of ‘‘Creamy Layer’’ should be removed. The Supreme Court in the case of lndra Sawhney has made it
mandatory to exclude the OBCs falling in ‘‘Creamy Layer’’ from the
scope of Reservation.
5. Definition of the term ‘‘creamy layer’’ given in Sub- Provision as proposed has ambiguity. The provision kept in the draft
clause (c) of Clause 2 may be modified to read as Bill is better worded and expresses the intention very clearly.
follows:–
‘‘(c) ‘‘creamy layer’’ means those members of Other
Backward Classes who are not eligible for reservation’’.

63
6. In the definition of ‘‘establishment’’ given in Clause 2 (d), The Constitution enables the State to make provision of reservat ion
following may be added:– for backward classes of citizens in the services under the State. A
corporation/subsidiary company/bank/financial institution/insurance
(a) A Corporation in which not less than thirty three per cent company having a share of less than 51% may not be covered under
of the paid up share capital is held by the government. the definition of State. In such a case, a provision as suggested
would make the proposed Act legally unsustainable. The proposed
(b) A subsidiary company floated by parent corporation/ Act covers the services under the State only. The Ministry of Social
company wherein not less than thirty three percent of the Justice and Empowerment is the nodal Ministry to examine the
paid up share capital is held by the parent corporation/company. possibilities of rese rvation in private sector.
(c) All Banking Companies, Non Banking Financial Companies
(NBFC) and other Financial Companies where not less than
thirty three percent of paid up share capital is held jointly
by Nationalised Banks Government financial Institutions, LlC,
GIC, UTI, SFC, EPF, etc.
7. Clause 2 (d) (iv) may be amended as: The term ‘University’ would include deemed university also.
However, if the Committee suggests that 'deemed universities' should
A University established by a Central Act and its affiliated also be included, the Ministry of Law and Justice would be
colleges including medical or engineering colleges; deemed consulted so that a legally sound provision is kept in the proposed
universities. Act.
8. Clause 2 (d) (vi) may be amended as: The industry, trade, etc. owned, controlled or managed by
Government are already covered in the definition. But, the
Any industry, trade, business or occupation owned, controlled corpo rations where share of the Government is less than 51% may
or managed by the government and/or a Corporation in which not fall under the definition of State and therefore, beyond the scope
not less than thirty three percent of the paid up share capital of this Bill.
is held by the government, directly or indirectly.
9. Clause 2 (d) (vii) may be substituted as under: The term, ‘establishment’ has been so defined that all organisations
as suggested and which fall under the definition of State are
‘‘any government company as defined in clause 617 of the covered. Such an elaboration does not appear necessary.
Companies Act, 1956 or any corporation established by or under
a Central Act; and all Scheduled Banks of RBI, Nationalised

64
12 3
Banks of RBI and Scheduled Commercial and Financial
Corporations managed and controlled by Government of India,
Constituted or Body Corporated under Central Act or maintained
by or with the help of the Government of India or Government
of India has share capital in an establishment.
10. Sub-clause (ix) may be added to Clause 2 (d) as under: There may be a number of cooperative societies which are registered
under the Cooperative Act or deemed to have been so registered but
‘‘Cooperative Societies established under the Central which would not fall under the definition of State. The Government
Government Cooperative Societies Act under the Government has tried to ensure that the proposed Act should be legally
of India or deemed to have been registered under the above sustainable. Inclusion of such a provision will make it legally
Act’’. unsustainable.
11. Reservation should be provided in the privatized PSUs and in Reservation in Private Sector is being examined by the Ministry of
all private organisations. Reservation should be provided in the Social Justice and Empowerment. All the Joint Sector ventures w hich
Joint Sector ventures. are established under the Central Act would be covered by the Act.
12. All Industries should be brought under the purview of As far as Industries under the control of Govt. of India are
Reservation. concerned, those would be covered by the Act. However, reservation
in private industries will be taken care of by the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment.
13. Reservation should be provided in the Non-Governmental NGOs are private organisations. Grants-in-aid does not bring them
Organisations (NGOs) getting benefit/aid from the Government. within the definition of State. However, there are instructions which
provide that non-Governmental organisation would be given grant
subject to the condition that they would implement reservation in
their organisations. Such provisions may be continued by way of
instructions. Keeping a provision in the proposed Act may make it
legally unsustainable.
14. Judiciary should be brought under the purview of reservation The Bill is regarding reservation in services under the Government of
policy of the Government. India. As per Articles 233, 234 and 235 of the Constitution of India,
the matters relating to appointment, promotion and posting of
persons in District and Subordinate Judiciary are within the. purview
of the respective State Governments and High Courts.

65
No provision exists in the Constitution of India for reservation in
respect of any class or category of persons for appointment as
Judges of High Courts and Supreme Court.
15. Armed forces should be brought under the purview of The Ministry of Defence when contacted had expressed the view,
reservation of Government. ‘‘Nation’s Armed Forces must be provided with the best available
material from the youth of the country and any attempt to introduce
reservations for any class or community cannot but impair the
fighting efficiency of the Army. It is thus desirable that, as at
present, recruitment to the Defence Services is kept open to all, on
common standards irrespective of caste, creed, or religion.’’
16. Lok Sabha Secretariat and Rajya Sabha Secretariat should be Reservation in the establishments of the Lok Sabha and the Rajya
brought under the purview of the reservation policy of the Sabha will be covered by the definition of the ‘‘establishment’’ give n
Government. under Clause 2 (d) of the Bill.
17. The definition of Public Sector Undertaking or Statutory In the Bill ‘‘establishment’’ includes any public sector undertaking  or
authority constituted under any Central Act should also include statutory authority constituted under any Central Act. The definition
such establishments that are funded jointly by the Central of establishment would, thus, include — any public sector
Government and the State Government. undertaking or statutory authority constituted under the Central Act
including those funded jointly by the Central Government and a State
Government.
18. Para 2(d)(v) may be amended to include ‘Public schools and Keeping such a provision would make the Bill inconsistent with the
other schools or other institutions like hospitals etc., which, Provisions of the Constitution inasmuch as Constitution enables State
though not funded by the Government have received or are to provide for reservation under the State only. Allocation of funds
receiving concessions from the Government in respect of or any concessions or any facility like electricity, water, public
acquisition of land, buildings or other concessions in regard to transport, etc. to the public schools and institutions like hospitals,
recognition/affiliation in respect of running of those institutions etc. does not bring them within the definition of the State. It may
like electricity, water, provision of public transport etc. be noted that the question of providing reservation in private secto r
is being examined by the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment separately.
19. Para 2(d) (iii) of the Bill provides for ‘‘a corporation in which A corporation in which paid up share capital of the Government is
not less than 51% of the paid-up share is held by the less than 51% would not fall under the definition of the State. The
Government. The conditionality of 51% paid-up share capital Constitution en ables the State to give reservation under the State only

66
12 3
should be dispensed with and it should be reworded as ‘‘a and, therefore, making such a change would make the Bill
corporation in which the paid-up share capital is held by the inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution.
Government irrespective of its percentage’’.
20. The proposed bill provides that reservation shall be applicable The intention of the proposed Bill is to provide reservation in the
for the members of SCs/STs and OBCs in the matter of civil services under the Government of India and under the public
appointment by direct recruitment to civil posts and civil sector undertakings, etc., of the Government of India including civil
services. The scope of this clause needs to be in line with services under the Ministry of Defence and para Military Forces.
the constitutional scheme. The intention of the Constitution The Bill, however, does not cover the Military services.
does not appear to confine reservation to civil post only.
21. Sub-clause may be added immediately after Clause 2 (d) to There appears to be no need for defining the term ‘service’.
define service as follows:
‘‘service’’ means any of the service or part or office for
remuneration, for a continuous period of not less than forty-
five days in connection with the affairs of the establishment.
22. In Clause 2 (f), the phrase ‘‘the President’’ may be replaced The Bill is regarding Reservation in Services under the establishment
by ‘‘the Competent Authority’’ with a view to extend the Act which to fall under the control of Government of India. Services
to posts and services etc. under the State Governments and under the States/UTs are not covered by it.
Local Bodies also besides the posts and services etc. under
the Central Government.
23. In Clause 2 (i), the under-mentioned Clause may be substituted The definition given in the Bill adequately serves the purpose.
in place of proposed Clause: ‘‘promotion by non-selection’’
means promotions made by ‘‘seniority-cum-fitness’’ or
‘‘seniority subject to rejection of the unfit’’.
24. Following clause may be added below Clause 2 (j): There is no recognised method of pr omotion by upgradation/
restructuring in the Government of India. Inclusion of definition of
‘‘Promotion by upgradation/restructuring shall mean promotion such a term which is not relevant for the Act does not appear
against additional posts arisen due to restructuring of cadre/ desirable.
or upgradation of posts’’.

67
25. The word ‘‘Civil Services’’ should be defined. The term ‘civil services’ is well understood and has been used in the
broadest sense. Elaboration of the term may create confusion than
avoiding any.
26. Clause 2 (n) should be deleted. Clause (n) of Clau se 2 defines the term, ‘scientific or technical
posts’. There is nothing in the clause which can be termed as
against the spirit of the Constitution.
27. The concept of ‘own merit’ should be defined clearly. The term ‘own merit’ is well understood. Rules will elaborate the
concept in detail.
28. The concept of ‘experience’ should be clearly elaborated. The qualifications are prescribed in the Recruitment Rules. The
provisions of the Act read with the recruitment Rules would make
the things clear.
29. The word ‘Government’ should be defined to include the The reservation in services under the State Governments is the
Central Government or the State Government or both, as concern of respective State Governments and it would not be
the case may be. possible to make the Act applicable to the services under the State
Governments.
30. After Clause 2 (n), new sub-clause (o) should be added as: It is not desirable to keep such a provision.
‘‘Mode of recruitment for filling the posts or services in
direct recruitment for candidate among other backward
classes under recruitment rules or in services in a certain
percentage of ratio, for direct recruit and any promotion,
the percentage of reservation for other backward classes
for direct recruit shall not be applied for ratio for direct
recruit but percentage shall be calculated with reference
to total strength of the cadre and after deducting the said
post so as to remain percentage of reservation for other
backward classes constant’’.
31. Define method to decide selection and non-selection posts. Method to decide whether a post is filled by promotion by selectio n
or by non-selection is given in the Rules/Regulations/Instructions
regarding framing of Recruitment Rules/filling up of posts by
promotions. It is not required to include it in the Reservation Bill.

68
CLAUSE No. 3
Sl. Comments/Suggestions V iews of the Department of Personnel and Training
No.
1. The provision in Clause 3(2), ‘‘There shall be reserved The purpose of reservation is to ensure adequate representation to the
such percentage of posts in civil services as may be backward class of citizens in services. When majority of posts are
prescribed for the members of the Scheduled Castes and filled by direct recruitment this goal is taken care of by providing
Scheduled Tribes for appointments by promotion to the reservation in direct recruitment.
grades of such posts where element of direct recruitment
does not exceed seventy five per cent’’ should not be
made applicable in case of promotion from Group D
posts to Group C, as there are more than 75% direct
recruitment in Group C services.
2. Clause 3 of the Bill may be modified so as not to confine The proposed Act proposes to make law in respect of reservation
reservation to civil posts only. in civil posts and civil services only. It does not cover Military
Services viz. Army, Air fo rce and Navy.
3. The proposed Clause 3(2) (a) (b) (c) are not comprehensive The expression ‘promotion in Group A posts’ includes promotions
as they do not incorporate the promotion from one group to made f rom Group A to Group A, from Group B to Group A and
another group i.e. from Group ‘D’ to Group ‘C’ to Group from Group C to Group A also. Likewise for other expressions.
‘B’ and from Group ‘B’ to Group ‘A’ which are also Thus, the language used in the Bill has no ambiguity and there is
channel of promotions. Therefore, these sub-clauses (a) (b) no need to modify it.
(c) should incorporate appropriately the words ‘‘or From
Group ‘D’ to Group ‘C’, from Group ‘C’ to Group ‘B’ and
from Group ‘B’ to Group ‘A’.’’ Clause 3 (2) should be so
worded that the promotions from one group to another group
are also covered.
4. Reservation in promotion should be available within ‘‘Group The proposed Act provides that reservation in promotion by non-
A’’ posts also meaning thereby that reservation should be selection will be available within Group A also. However, in case of
made available at all the levels and should not be restricted promotion by selection within Group A posts, reservation is not
upto the lowest rung of Group A. The reserved category considered desirable keeping in view the main provisions of Article
candidates should be given two or three assured promotions. 335 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court held that the
reservations have to be balanced with the command contained in
Article 335 of the Constitution which requires the State to consider

69
the claims of members of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration.
Higher posts in Group A which are filled by selection are such that
merit has to be accorded relatively greater weightage. It is also
noteworthy that reservation in promotion for SCs/STs is permissible
under clause (4A) of Article 16 which was incorporated by the 77th
amendment. The objects and reasons of the Amendment Bill clearly
stated that the amendment was made to continue the then existing
provisions of reservation in promotion. Accordingly, same provisions
are proposed to be continued by the proposed Act also. Deviation
from it may not be constitutionally sustainable. The Government
have already made provision for 2 assured promotions in the entire
career under the ACP scheme.
5. There should be reservation in deputation postings in India There is no proposal to apply reservation in appointments by
and abroad. deputation or by transfer because it would not make any effect on
overall representation of backward classes of citizens. It is
noteworthy that reservation is already applied at the stage of entry
in the Government service.
6. Reservation should be provided to the OBCs in promotion. The Constitution enables the State to give reservation in promotion
to the SCs and STs only. Inclusion of a provision as proposed will
make the law unsustainable.
7. The concept of ‘zone of consideration’ should be clearly Zone of consideration is prescribed in the DPC guidelines. However
specified. it would never be less than the number of vacancies. It would,
therefore, not affect the interests of SCs/STs.
8. (i) Add Clause 3(2) below Clause 3(1) as under: ‘‘the Quantum of rerservation may be changed from time to time keeping
reservation of posts/classes of posts in the services the in view the various factors like proportion of SCs/STs/OBCs in the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes covered by Sub- total population, limit of 50% of total reservation etc. It has,
clause (1) shall be at such percentage of population of therefore, been considered not desirable to specify the quantum of
the latest census, as the Union of India may from time to reservation in the Bill. It would be fixed by way of rules under the
time prescribe, but not less than fifteen percent for the Act after the Bill is passed. It may also be stated that Supreme Court
Scheduled Castes and seven and a half percent for the in the case of Indira Sawhney has held that Clause (4) of Article 16

70
12 3
Scheduled Tribes respectively as presently in operation or at empowers the State to provide adequate representation and not
such higher percentage as is applicable to the concerned proportionate representation. The apex court has also observed that
establishment in case the recruitment/promotion/upgradation it is not possible to accept the theory of proportionate representation
is made on local/regional basis. that the proportion of population of Backward Classes to the total
population would certainly be relevant. The apex court held that
(ii) The percentage of reservation for each communities power conferred by Clause (4) of Article 16 should be exercised in
should be specified clearly so that the same is not reduced a fair manner and within the reasonable limits so that reservation
in any recruitment process both direct or in promotion e.g. does not exceed 50%. These aspects will be taken care of when
OBC-27%, SC-15% and ST-7.5%. framing the rules.
9. Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other This aspect can be taken into consideration when making rules. The
Backward Classes in direct recruitment on all India basis by Bill does not indicate the percentage of reservation available to
open competition is it present 15%, 7.5% and 27% respectively different categories of backward classes.
and it is 16.66%, 7.5% and 25.84% respectively in case of
direct recruitment on all India basis otherwise than by open
competition. There is no justification for reducing the percentage
of reservation in favour of OBCs from 27% to 25.84% in
case of direct recruitment on all India basis by otherwise than
open competition when the reservation for SCs and STs have
been enhanced in proportion to their population. The population
of OBCs has been increasing and even 27% reservation for
OBCs is not in proportion to their population. Therefore, they
may be provided the same 27% reservation in recruitment
done on all India basis by otherwise than open competition also.
10. Reservation should be made with reference to vacancies and As per the Supreme Court judgement in the R.K. Sabharwal case,
not to posts. reservation has to be with reference to posts and not vacancies.
Learned Attorney General had opined that the post based rosters are
consistent with the judgement of the Supreme Court and that the
Government could not continue the old vacancy based rosters.
11. The clause should specify that reservation shall be in proportion Quantum of reservation will be specified in the rules to be framed.
to the population of SCs/STs but not less than fifteen per cent However, the Government does not propose to link the quantum of
for the Scheduled Castes and seven and a half per cent for the reservation with the census. It would be relevant to point out that
Scheduled Tribes. the Supreme Court in the Indra Sawhney case has held that Clause

71
(4) of Article 16 empowers the State to provide adequate
representation and not proportionate representation. The apex court
has also observed that it is not possible to accept the theory of
proportionate representation though the proportion of population of
Backward Classes to the total population would certainly be relevant.
The apex court held that power conferred by Clause (4) of Article
16 should be exercised in a fair manner and within the reasonable
limits so that reservation does not exceed 50%. The Government
does not propose to make a law which may not be sustainable in the
Court of law.
12. Reservation should be available in case of promotions by By the time SC/ST officers are eligible for promotion from Group
selection from one Group A post to another Group A post A post to another Group A post, they are as good as other officers.
also. Besides, higher posts filled by promotion by selection carry duties
and responsibilities where there should be no compromise with
quality. Therefore, the Government does not propose to provide
reservation in case of promotions by selection from Group A to a
Group A posts. However, the Bill contains special concession to SC/
ST candidates when promotions are made upto the post or Director
of CSS or equivalent.
13. Condition that reservation in promotion will be available only The purpose of reservation is to ensure adequate representation to
when element of direct recruitment does not exceed 75% the backward class of citizens in services. When majority of posts
should be removed. are filled by direct recruitment this goal is taken care of by providing
reservation in direct recruitment. When 75% or more posts are filled
by direct recruitment, number of posts in promotion quota remains
quite less. In such cases, it would not be desirable to provide for
reservation in promotion.
CLAUSE No. 4
1. Sub-clause (i) may be deleted. When posts are filled for such a short period it will not be possible
to resort to reservation.

72
12 3
2. Reservation should be available in case of appointment to Sub-clause (ii) of Clause 4 should be read along with the explanatio n
work charged posts also. given below the Clause which makes clear that only such work
charged posts will be excluded which are required for any
emergency relief like flood relief work or accident restoration relief
work. It is worth noting that while engaging people for such jobs,
it may not be possible to resort to reservation.
3. Clause 4 (iii) of the Bill should be deleted. The Supreme Court in the case of Indra Sawhney has stated that
there are certain services and positions where either on account of
the nature of duties attached to them or the level (in the hierarchy)
at which they obtain, merit alone counts and in such posts, it may
not be advisable to provide for reservations. As an illustration the
Court has given some examples of the posts like technical posts in
research and development organisations/departments/institutions, in
specialities and super-specialities in medicine, engineering and other
such courses in physicals sciences establishments connected
therewith, Professors (in Education), Pilots in Indian Airlines and Air
India, Scientists and Technicians in nuclear and space application,
etc. The Government has tried to exclude only such posts from the
the purview of reservation where it is considered absoletely
necessary.
4. Clause 4 may be deleted for the following reasons:
(a) There should be reservation in appointments for work (a) Only such work-charged posts are excluded from the purview
charged posts as well as for appointments for a period of reservation which are needed for emergency relief to. When
of less than 45 days. appointments are made for such work or for very short period, it
may not be practical or of material help to the concerned categories.
(b) The reservation policy of the Government should not (b) Clause (iii) of Clause 4 provides that there would be no
only be extended to the lowest grade, of Group A in reservation in ‘scientific or Technical’ posts which are higher than
respect of Scientific or Technical posts which are the lowest grade of Group A and which are required for conducting
required for conducting research or for organizing or research or for organizing, guiding and directing research. As per
guiding and directing research, but also the grades higher definition given in the Bill ‘‘Scientific or technical posts’’ includ e
than the lowest grade of Group A in such posts. posts for which qualification in the natural sciences or exact

73
sciences or applied sciences or in technology are required and the
incumbents of such posts have to use the knowledge in the
discharge of their duties. Such posts exist in organization like the
Department of Atomic Energy, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, etc.
The Supreme Court in the Indira Sawhney case has held that such
posts and other specialist posts should be excluded from the purview
of reservation.
(c) As per Clause 4(iii) no reservation shall be made to (c) This aspect has already been taken care of in the Bill and all
appointment to posts classified as scientific or technical scientific and technical posts have not been excluded from the
which are required for conducting research or for or purview of reservation. Only such higher posts which are categorized
organizing, guiding and conducting research and which as Scientific or technical are excluded. To be very clear, the term
are above the lowest grade of Group A. In this regard ‘scientific or technical post’ has also been defined. ‘‘Scientific or
attention is drawn to Supreme Court’s order in Indra technical posts’’ include posts for which qualifications in the natural
Sawhani’s case which lays that in certain position at the sciences or exact sciences or applied sciences or in technology are
highest level merit alone counts. All scientific and technical required and the incumbents of such posts have to use that knowle dge
cannot be excluded from preview of reservation. This in the discharge of their duties. There is no need to modify the
clause needs to be modified. clause.
CLAUSE No. 5
1. Clause 5 (2) may be amended as under : If a candidate avails any relaxation he/she cannot be treated as
selected on his/her own merit. Such a candidate can be adjusted
‘‘Where an unreserved vacancy is filled by a candidate against reserved vacancy only. If a provision in the law is made as
belonging to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribes or suggested, it will make it unsustainable.
an Other Backward Class on the basis of merit, either
by direct recruitment or by promotion after availing
relaxation of age, then such candidate shall not be
adjusted against the vacancy reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes,
as the case may be’’.

74
12 3
2. In the proposed clause 5(2) the word even after availing If any candidate avails any concession, he can not be treated as own
the relaxation of age may be added after the word by merit candidate.
promotion. Thus the para may be read as under:
‘‘Where an unreserved vacancy is filled by a candidate
belonging to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or an
Other Backward Class on the basis of merit, either by
direct recruitment or by promotion after availing relaxation
of age, then such candidate shall not be adjusted against
the vacancy reserved for the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Tribe or an Other Backward Class, as the case may be.’’
CLAUSE No. 6
1. Relaxation in maximum age limit for direct recruitment be The social, educational and economic conditions of OBCs are not as
increased from present 3 years to 5 years for the OBCs. bad as that of SCs and STs. Therefore, comparison of OBCs
Other concessions like fee concession, etc. should also be with the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes is not justified.
extended to Backward Classes on par with the other Representation of OBCs in services is still less because reservation
reserved groups like Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for them was introduced as late as in 1993. In due course of time,
as the condition of Backward Classes after excluding the it would be made up. It is felt that relaxation in age limit or in fee
‘‘creamy Layer’’ is in no way different from the Scheduled for OBCs at par with Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes is not
Castes and Schedules Tribes. needed.
2. The following may be inserted in the Clause 6: There is a separate Act dealing with reservation for the handicapped
persons. Such a provision is beyond the scope of this Bill.
‘‘Nothing in these rules shall prevent a SC/ST/OBC, if
he/she is handicapped and producing a certificate to the
effect, to get the benefit of age relaxation permitted to a
handicapped’’.
3. In Clause 6(1), (2), (3) minimum age limit should also be Such a provision is not required.
prescribed for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and
other Backward Classes.

75
4. The Ex-Defence personnel who are members of SC, ST and There are separate provisions for age-relaxation for ex-servicemen.
OBC should be provided 2 years more relaxation in maximum Such a provision is not called for in the given Bill.
age limit as provided in the Bill.
5. Clause 6(2) has to be amended as: No reservation or relaxation in promotion is contemplated for OBCs.
Therefore, such a change is not required.
‘The maximum age limit fixed for direct recruitment to a
service or post shall be increased by five years in the case
of candidates belonging to SCs, STs and OBCs.
6. It is suggested that OBC category citizens should also be No reservation or relaxation in promotion is contemplated for OBCs.
provided relaxation in maximum age limit in case of promotion.
CLAUSE No. 9
1. The following may be added as Clause 9(3) in the Bill:– Experience is prescribed keeping in view the duties and responsibiliti es
attached to higher posts. Such a relaxation would not be in public
interest.
‘‘The experience required for promotion to a post shall be
relaxed in the case of members of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes if at any stage of their consideration
for such promotion, sufficient number of candidates from
these communities possessing the requisite experience is not
available to fill the reserved post’’.
2. The following sentence may be added in Clause 9 (1): It will give extensive powers to the appointing authority which may
be misused.
‘‘The decision in this regard of appointing authority shall be
final’’.
3. Clause 9 of the Bill may be omitted as it is opposed to the This suggestion is not in accordance with the amended provisions o f
law laid down by the Apex Court. the Constitution.

76
CLAUSE No. 10
Sl. Comments/Suggestions V iews of the Department of Personnel and Training
No.
1. The ceiling of 50% on reservation in a recruitment year The Supreme Court in the case of Indra Sawhney has held that
should be removed. power conferred by Clause (4) of Article 16 should be exercised in
a fair manner and within the reasonable limits so that reservation
does not exceed 50%. If the proposed Act provides for more than
50% reservation, there are all possibilities of it being held legally and
constitutionally unsustainable. Government does not propose to keep
any provision which may make the proposed law unsustainable.
2. Backlog and shortfall of Reservation shall not count towards There is a distinction between ‘shortfall of reservation’ in a ca dre
the limit of 50%. and ‘backlog of reserved vacancies' in the cadre. The term ‘shortfall
of a particular reserved category in a cadre’ means the difference
between the ‘total number of posts reserved for that category as per
the post based reservation roster in that cadre’ and the ‘number of
persons belonging to that category who are holding the post in the
cadre’. On the other hand ‘backlog reserved vacancies' are those
vacancies which were earmarked reserved in an earlier recruitment
year but remained unfilled in the previous recruitment attempts on
account of non availability of suitable candidates belonging to that
category and are still lying unfilled.
The Supreme Court has held that it is not possible to complete the
shortfall at one go and total reservation in a year should not be
allowed to exceed 50% of the total vacancies in a year. The 81st
Amendment Act permits to treat the backlog-reserved vacancies as a
separate and distinct group not subject to a limit of 50%. But it does
not permit to complete the shortfall without applying the limit of
50%. Completion of shortfall without application of the limit of 50%
would be against the judgment of the Supreme Court and would not
be in line with the provisions of the Constitution.
3. In proviso to Clause 10, the words ‘‘and Other Backward Such a change would leave small number of unreserved vacancies
Classes’’ may be added after the words ‘‘Scheduled Tribes’’, which may result into denial of equality to general category candid ates.

77
so that the amended proviso be read as follows:
‘‘Provided that the backlog of the reserved vacancies for the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Classes shall not be counted while determining the aforesaid
fifty percent of the total number of vacancies in the cadre’’.
4. After the proviso the following may be added: Procedures of filling up of the reserved posts will be taken care of
‘‘Recruitment shall be made on the basis of a Roster in the Rules.
prepared for a Cycle of 100 vacancies. While preparing the
Roster, care must be taken that not more than 2 vacancies
go to a particular category consecutively. The Roster
prepared shall be shown as an Annexure to the Act.
CLAUSE No.11
1. A provision may be added as Clause 11(3) — All Such a provision need not be incorporated. When there is to be
appointments, promotions in posts made in contravention followed and any act done in contravention of the law would be
of this Act shall be ab initio  void. unsustainable.
CLAUSE No.13
1. Secretary/Head of the Department shall send a Report to Such a provision is not considered desirable.
the DOPT and the National Commission for SCs.
2. The following may be added after Clause 13(1) so that the It is not considered desirable that only Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Liaison Officer may discharge his duties effectively. Tribe officers should be appointed as Liaison officers. While it may
not be possible to locate such officers in some organizations, such
‘‘The Liaison Officer shall have power to inspect the a provision may not be in line with the provisions of the Constitution
proceedings of the recruitment(s)/selection(s)/ seniority-cum- also. Delegating the power of inspection of the proceedings of the

78
12 3
suitability lists. The Liaison Officer shall be from the recruitment, selection, etc. to the Liaison Officers may create very
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.’’ odd situations. Inspection of other papers/documents may enable
the Liaison Officer to discharge his duties effectively.
3. A proviso may be added as Clause 13(4)– Every establishment There is already a provision of Liaison Officer. A provision of Cell
shall set up a Cell for enforcement of the provisions of this under the Liaison Officer may be considered while framing the Rule s.
Act, under the direct control of a Liaison Officer who shall, The Rules may also incorporate duties, responsibilities, qualifications,
in particular be responsible for:– etc. of the Liaison Officer.
(a) coordination and due and proper implementation of the
provisions of this Act and rules made or any order,
instructions or directions issued by the Central Government
thereunder;
(b) timely submission of the report and returns to the Central
Government;
(c) annual inspection of records in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(d) performing such other incidental work as may be necessary
for above purpose.
4. A provision may be added as Clause 13(5) — every establishment There are National Commissions for the Scheduled Castes and the
shall set up Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Grievances Scheduled Tribes. These Commissions are already taking care of
Redressal Cell for consideration of grievances of the Scheduled their grievances. A provision of Liaison Officer has also been made
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes employees. for the purpose.
5. Separate Liaison Officers for OBCs and SCs/STs should continue For better coordination of Reservation provisions, there should be
and to be extended to all administrative offices where single Liaison Officer for all the 3 categories. Therefore, no change
recruitments are made. is required.
6. No provision has been made to dispose the representation(s) The role of Liaison Of ficer is to ensure that provisions of the Act
received from any complainant by the Liaison Officer for are implemented scrupulously. The role will be specified in the Rules.
violation of any provision of this Act in prescribed time. It
is suggested that a definite time period of three months may
be prescribed in the Act for disposal of the same.

79
CLAUSE No. 14
A provision for Annual Report on appointments and promotions/ The aspect is already covered by Clause 14 of the Bill.
upgradation of SCs/STs and OBCs personnel during the previous
years; number of unfilled posts/vacancies and steps taken to
fill up the posts/vacancies and reasons for not filling them is
desirable.
CLAUSE No. 15
1. The word ‘knowingly’ which occurs twice in Clause 15 of Removing of the word ‘knowingly’ would make the officers
the bill may be delete as it will be very difficult to establish susceptible for penalty even if they do their duty consciously and in
whether a false claim/certificate has been issued knowingly. right earnest. The Courts of law would be able to establish whether
false claim was made knowingly or not.
2. A punitive clause for officers who are negligent in It is expected of every Government servant to maintain at all
implementation of reservation should be added. times absolute integrity and devotion to duty and ensure the same of
his subordinates under the CCS (Conduct) Rules. Any deliberate
flouting of the provisions of the Act would clearly amount to
misconduct within the meaning of the conduct rules and the
delinquent officials would make themselves liable for disciplinary
action under the CCS (CCA) Rules. Further, making such a provision
in the Bill will go adversely against the integrity of Government
servants who generally discharge their duties assigned to them
diligently.
CLAUSE No. 16
The provisions contained in Clause 16 should be deleted. It would enable the Govt. to take care of the situations which are
not covered by the Rules.

80
CLAUSE No. 18
Sl. Comments/Suggestions V iews of the Department of Personnel and Training
No.
1. A provision should also be made under this Act conferring Framing of Rules with retrospective effect are neither required nor
power to Central/State Governments to make rules with would be legally tenable. The existing instructions have the force of
retrospective effect to remove any difficulty, if any, arise in law.
the implementation of the provision of this Act.
2. Clause 18(2)(b) may be substituted by the following:  It is not relevant to the Clause.
‘‘The percentage of reservation in favour of the reserved
categories shall not, be left to the discretion of the
appointing authority or, as a matter of right to any authority’’.
3. A new sub-clause as follows may be added in Clause 18: It is not relevant to the Clause.
.
‘‘The Selection Committees to be constituted under the Act
should include officers belonging to all the reserved
categories.’’

81
PART-I
OTHER IMPORTANT ISSUES THAT ARE NOT COVERED BY THE BILL
Sl. Comments/Suggestions V iews of the Department of Personnel and Training
No.
12 3
1. The following may be added: The proposed Act relates to reservation in services. Seniority of
employees is governed by separate rules/regulations/orders. This
‘‘Notwithstanding anything in any other Law, Judgement, aspect is beyond the scope of the proposed Act.
Decree, Order, Direction of a Court/Tribunal or authority to
the contrary, the seniority of a person belonging to the
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes appointed, on direct
recruitment/promotion/up gradation or on transfer to a reserved
post on regular basis in accordance with the prescribed
procedure, shall be counted from the date of his appointment/
promotion/up gradation in each cadre/grade/service/appointment/
category. His placement of seniority, would be as per the
date of promotion and as the case may be. The roster point
occupied in the lower grade, cadre, service or category shall
not have relevance irrespective of the later promotion/up
gradation of his erstwhile senior general category person’’.
2. Retirement age for the reserved category candidates should It is a matter which is beyond the scope of the Reservation Act.
be increased. Decision in this regard would have to be taken by the Government
separately.
3. Exchange of reservation between SCs and STs should be The basic principle of post based reservation is that the prescribed
made permissible. percentage of reservation for SCs, STs and OBCs should be
maintained at any point of time. Exchange of reservation between
SCs and STs, if permitted, results into an increase in the number of
persons of one category appointed by reservation beyond the quota
of reservation prescribed for that category and a decrease in the
number of persons of another category appointed by reservation.
This is against the spirit of the Supreme Court judgement in the R.K.
Sabharwal’s case.

82
12 3
4. To fulfil the legitimate aspirations of Other Backward Classes Such details need not be included in the Bill. Inclusion of such
for adequate representation in services and participation in provisions can be considered while framing the rules.
the national mainstream, it is necessary to give representation
to OBCs in the Selection Committee.
5. A Provision should be there to provide that the Central Inclusion of such a provision in the Bill does not appear desirable.
Government shall prepare an Annual Report on the working
of the Act and lay the same before both the Houses of
Parliament within first 30 days of the new Calendar year.
6. Following provision may be included in the Bill: It goes without saying that the law would be binding on all the
establishments as defined in the Bill and inclusion of such a provision
‘‘Every establishment shall be bound by the Act, Rules or would be redundant and unnecessary.
such existing rules, directions/instructions by whatever name
may be called not contrary to or inconsistent with the provision
of the Act or as the Central Government of India may be
general or special order, give in writing from time to time
to give effect to the provision of this Act’’.
7. A proviso may be added to the effect that – there shall be Bill is for Reservation in Services and not in respect of admission
reservation for Scheduled Castes (15%) in awarding to educational institutions.
Fellowships and/or in granting scholarships to members of
these communities.
8. A provision should be added that – there shall be reserved Such provisions can be made separately in the instructions relating
such percentage of slots in training and assignments inside to training programme. It is beyond the scope of this Bill.
or outside the country as may be prescribed for the member
of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Other Backward
Classes for such trainings, etc.
9. A provision may be added – The provisions of this Act shall Such a provision may not be legally sustainable.
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law, order, judgement or decree of
any court, tribunal or authority for the time being in force
or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law
other than this Act.

83
10. For protection of the interest of the SC/ST/OBC candidates It would be against the interests of SCs/STs. There is a provision  of
in the matter of direct recruitment, a provision may be made interviewing them in a separate seating, etc. If their identity is not
in the proposed law providing to keep the identity of SC, disclosed, such provisions will become redundant.
ST and OBC candidates secret till the recruitment process
is completed. The members of the Selection Committee or
the persons involved in the recruitment process should not
be provided with the details of the social status of the SC,
ST and OBC candidates appearing for the examinations.
11. Scavengers and Fishermen should get separate reservation. Such demands may arise from other castes also. Constitution
provides for reservation for backward classes and not for particular
castes or group of persons following some specific profession. It
would not be desirable to provide separate reservations for groups as
suggested.
12. Add New Sub-Clause: A provision for penalty for submitting false certificates is included
in the Bill. The Bill need not have such provisions.
‘‘To curb the practice of getting appointment with the help
of false social status certificate the list of selected candidates
and the case which he is claiming should be prominently
published in newspapers so that either interested persons or
public-spirited persons can oppose the fraud played by them.’’
13. New Sub-Clause: It does not appear to be practical proposition. The National
Commissions are already doing the job of watchdog.
‘‘From time to time the information required by the
associations, who are acting as watchdogs, over the
implementation of the reservation policy, should be furnished
to them.’’
14. Representations of OBCs in the Interviews/Selection Committees Such provisions are there in the Rules/Regulations/Instructions
both in direct recruitment and in departmental promotion regarding constitution of selection committees, etc. It need not be
committees whether reservation exists or not. kept in the Bill.

84
12 3
15. Reservation should be made for the members of SC and ST Separate legislations for SCs/STs and OBCs are not considered
separately. Backward classes or OBC can be provided desirable. For better coordination, one Act is better proposition.
reservation, through separate executive order or separate
legislation.
16. It is suggested that 20 per cent reservation should be provided The Bill is regarding Reservation for SCs/STs/OBCs, and not for
to the women belonging to SC, ST and OBC category and Reservation for Women.
these women selected against this quota will be adjusted in
the appropriate category of the SC/ST/OBC.
17. Reservation in deputation vacancies should be made because It is not considered desirable.
it is a appointment by transfer.
18. It should be mentioned in this Bill that Age should not be Such a provision would be unnecessary.
any hindrance to get the Certificate of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes candidates.
19. Use only the term ‘ POST’ in the Bill in all places instead of It cannot be accepted inasmuch as ‘‘Post’’ and ‘‘Vacancies’’ are two
‘vacancies’. separate concepts though inter-linked with each. These terms have
been used as per requirement.
20. The provision for reservation of posts for physically It is beyond the scope of this Bill. There is already a separate Act
handicapped, sportsmen etc. should also be covered under in the matter.
this Act.
21. The under-mentioned clause may be substituted at suitable There appears to be no need such a provision.
place, in this Act,. ‘‘For the provisions made under Clause
3 of this Act, the vacancies shall be taken into consideration
separately for every recruitment years.’’
22. ‘‘The DPC shall be convened every year.’’ Convening/constitution of DPC, etc. are governed by separate rules/
regulations/instructions. It is beyond the scope of Bill.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.