 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE 52ND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2013) 
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 20th MARCH, 2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH,  2013 / PHALGUNA, 1934 (SAKA) 
57 


 
CS(P&L) - ....... 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE 52ND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2013) 
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 20th MARCH, 2013) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2013 / PHALGUNA1934 (SAKA) 


 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii)     
   
3. REPORT 1 - 70 
(i) CHAPTER I         
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY  
(ii) CHAPTER II        
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY  
(iii) CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY   
(iv) CHAPTER IV         
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY NOT BEEN RECEIVED        
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 71 - 77 
 
5. ANNEXURES 78 - 84  
 
*6. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE  
                                                                                                                                                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________ 
*    TO BE APPENDED AT PRINTING STAGE. 
         
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2012-13) 
 
1. Shri Shantaram Naik    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
3. Shri Jesudas Seelam 
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav  
6. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
8. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
9. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
10. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
LOK SABHA 
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
13. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda 
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
15. Shri Jitender Singh Malik 
16. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
17. Shri Pinaki Misra 
18. Shri S. Semmalai 
19. Shri S.D. "Shariq" 
20. Smt. Meena Singh 
21. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh 
22. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad 
23. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
24. Shri Madhusudan Yadav 
25. Vacant@ 
26. Vacant 
27. Vacant 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
 Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
 Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director 
 Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director 
            Smt. Catherine John L., Committee Officer  
 
 
                                                 
@  Vacancy caused due to induction of Smt. Chandresh Kumari in the Council of Minister w.e.f. 
28th October, 2012. 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty -seventh 
Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendati ons/observations 
contained in the Fifty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-
13) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. 
2. The Fifty -second Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Pe rsonnel, Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to Rajya 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st May, 2012.  
3. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs, Department of 
Justice and Legislative Department) furnished the Act ion Taken Reply on the Fifty -
second Report of the Committee on  28 th January, 2013, 7 th February, 2013 and 5 th 
September, 2012 & 14 th January, 2013. The Committee considered the draft Report 
and adopted the same at its meeting held on 13th March, 2013. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the 
body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  SHANTARAM NAIK 
March 13, 2013       Chairman,    
 Department Related Parliamentary 
 Standing Committee on Personnel,  
 Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
REPORT 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action 
taken by Ministry of Law and Justice on the recommendations/ 
observations of the Dep artment Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its 
52nd Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry. The 
Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the table of Lok Sabha 
on the  21st May, 2012.  
2. Action taken replies were received from the Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Department of L egal Affairs, Department of Justice  and 
Legislative Department) on 28th January, 2013, 7th February, 2013 and 5th 
September, 2012 & 14th January, 2013 in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the above mentioned report. These replies have been 
categorized as follows :  
Chapter – I – The recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry in respect of Paras 2.5, 2.9, 5.4, 5.12, 3.8, 3 .11, 
3.23, 4.12, 4.16, 4.47, 4.52, 6.14, 6.22, 6.31, 6.58, 6.61, 6.67, 7.5 and 7.7. 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Law and Justice  
has accepted its recommendations as dealt with  in the Chapter – I of the 
report.  
Chapter – II – The recommendations/observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry of 
Law and Justice,   in respect of Paras 3.15, 3.16, 3.22, 3.27, 4.7, 4.10, 
4.21, 4.24, 4.34, 4.35, 4.44 and 5.6  of the report. The Co mmittee is 
convinced with the explanations advanced by the Ministry  and does not 
desire  to pursue as of now.  
Chapter – III – The recommendations/observations which  Committee 
has not accepted replies given by Ministry of Law and Justice,  in respect 
of  Paras 3.6, 3.10, 3.12, 3.17, 3.18, 3.19, 4.39, 4.51, 5.9, 6.71, 6.72, 6.73, 
7.2, 7.3 and 7.9 of the report.  The Committee expresses its concern over 
non acceptance of its recommendations dealt with in Chapter  – III of this 
report and desires that Minist ry should furnish logical explanations in 
respect of these recommendations.  
Chapter – IV – The recommendations/observations on which final 
replies of the Ministry of Law and Justice have not been received,  in 
respect of  Paras 4.30, 6.15, 6.25, 6.39, 6.4 5, 6.46, 6.51 and 6.52 of the 
report.   The Committee observes that Ministry has furnished interim 

 
replies. The Committee desires that Ministry should furnish action taken 
notes in respect of recommendations categorised in Chapter – IV.  
3. The recommendat ions/observations of the Committee in its 
52nd report, the ATRs furnished by Ministry of Law and Justice and the 
Committee‟s further recommendations/observations have been dealt with 
in the succeeding chapters.  
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER - I 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH 
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
Legislative Department 
Recommendation/observation 
1. The Committee notes that the budget allocated to the Ministry 
in the Plan side is as per the demands projected while there exist a 
meager shortfall in the Non -Plan allocation. While the Committee 
appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in following the guidelines of 
the Ministry of Finance to take austerity measures in expenditure, it 
is also of the considered view that the efficient and smooth 
functioning of th e Government machinery should not be 
compromised. The Committee, during its interaction with the various 
autonomous bodies and institutions under the Ministry‘s 
administrative control, was informed of the shortage of funds and 
thereby adversely affecting t heir performance. In that backdrop, the 
Committee hopes that the Ministry will be judicious in the utilization 
of the budgetary allocation.  (Para 2.5 of the Report)  
Action Taken Reply 
1.1. The Legislative Department is concerned only with the Non -Plan 
Budget. The budget allocated for 2012 -13 will be sufficient for the 
remaining period of the financial year. In case any shortfall is arisen 
during the financial year, the request will be made to the Budget & 
Accounts Section of this Ministry in this regard.  
1.1.1. Further, there is no autonomous body under administrative control 
of the Legislative Department. 
Committee’s further observation 
1.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation/observation 
2. The Committee takes note of the justifications furnished by the 
Ministry for the overall increase in the Plan and Non -Plan budgetary 
allocations for the year 2012 -13 as against 2011 -12. It, however, 
advocates that each Department should be made accountable for the 
performance of every spending unit under its  administrative 
jurisdiction. Accordingly, Department of Justice, Legislative 

 
Department and the Department of Legal Affairs should closely 
monitor the utilization of funds by the spending units under them 
and make at least a quarterly report of the progre ss of these 
spending units. (Para 2.9, ibid)  
Action Taken Reply 
2.1. The advice of the Committee has been noted for future compliance. 
Further, all the spending units have been requested to furnish a quarterly 
report in respect of the expenditure made by them during the period. 
Committee’s further observation 
2.2. The committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation/observation 
3. The Committee notes the increase in the overall Budgetary 
allocation to the Department. The Committee hopes that the 
increased amount would be sufficient for the activities to be taken up 
this year by the Department.  (Para 5.4, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
3.1. It is stated that there is a minor increase in the Budgetary allocation 
in respect of the Legislative Department and the increase a mount would 
be sufficient for the activities to be taken up this year by the Department 
in normal course. 
Committee’s further observation 
3.2. The committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation/observation 
4. The Committee appreciates the work done by the Depar tment 
on the issue of ―Office of Profit‖ which needs proper definition. The 
Committee hopes that the Department will take appropriate steps to 
get the Bill introduced in the Parliament as early as possible. 
  (Para 5.12, Ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
4.1. The J oint Committee to examine the constitutional and legal 
position relating to office of profit presented its report to the Lok Sabha 
on 22 nd December, 2008, which was laid down in Rajya Sabha on the 

 
same day. On the basis of the recommendations of the Commit tee, a 
Constitution (Amendment) Bill further to amend the Constitution of 
India, inter alia,  to define the expression „Office of Profit‟ for the 
purposes of Articles 102(1) (a) and 191(1) (a) of the Constitution has 
been attempted and forwarded to various Ministries/Departments of the 
Government of India, the Planning Commission and the Election 
Commission as well as the State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations seeking their views/comments on the proposed Bill. So 
far, views/comments from 72 Minist ries/Departments including the 
Planning Commission and the Election Commission and 22 State 
Governments and 6 Union Territory Administrations had been received. 
Periodical reminders are being issued to the remaining State 
Governments and Union Territory Ad ministrations. Necessary steps for 
introducing the Bill in the Parliament shall be initiated after receipt of 
comments from the remaining State Governments/Union territory 
Administrations. 
Committee’s further observation 
4.2. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the matter should 
be pursued with the remaining States and Union Territories on regular 
basis so that the bill is presented to Parliament at the earliest. 
ELECTION COMMISSION 
Recommendation/observation 
5. The Committee takes note of the de crease in the budgetary 
proposals under various heads of the Commission such as ‗Office 
Expenses‘ and ‗Domestic Travel Expenses‘ in compliance with the 
guidelines of the Ministry of Finance to observe austerity measures in 
expenditure. Gradual yearly decre ase in expenditure is seen under 
‗Office Expenses‘ and ‗Publication‘. The lower expenditure by the 
Election  Commission under ‗Office Expenses‘ appears to be the 
result of efficient and prudent office management. The Committee 
appreciates this trend but hopes that this would not have any adverse 
impact on the functioning of the Commission. (Para 3.8, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
5.1. In this connection it is stated that the proposal in various sub -heads 
has been worked out keeping in view the estimated requirem ent of the 
Commission and guidelines of the Ministry of Finance regarding austerity 

 
measures. The Commission acknowledges appreciation of the hon‟ble 
Committee and of the Parliament and states that because of 
Commission‟s efficient and prudent office manag ement, the office 
expenses of the Commissions is lower. The Commission further assures 
that it has not affected adversely the functioning of the Commission  
5.1.1. It may be stated that the Commission‟s budget is totally Non -Plan. 
Therefore, in case of req uirement of additional fund, the Commission 
proposes for the additional fund through Supplementary Demands/ 
Revised Estimates for the respective financial year. 
Committee’s further observation 
5.2. The Committee notes the reply of the Commission. 
Recommendation/observation 
6. The Committee is optimistic that the setting up of Voters 
Education Division by the Commission will go a long way in bringing 
about conscious participation of the public in the election process. It 
is, however, apprehensive that the es timated allocations of the 
Commission would be sufficient to match the effective 
implementation of the training programmes it has envisaged to 
impart, which, from view point of their relevance, should under no 
circumstances be compromised.  (Para 3.11, ibid)  
Action Taken Reply 
6.1. The Voter Education Division was set up in the Election 
Commission of India (ECI) in 2009 and subsequently named SVEEP 
(Systemic Voters‟ Education and Electoral Participation) Division. Under 
SVEEP, initiatives and activities ar e carried out to educate voters for 
enhancing their participation in the electoral and democratic process. 
6.1.1. In 2012-13, part of the funds from Training sub -head was utilized 
for SVEEP activities as well as training also has a component of 
education of voters. However for the year 2013 -14 the budget estimates 
for Training and Voter Education has been de -linked and separate budget 
of Rs. 18.50 crores have been projected for Voter Education under the 
respective head. The Voter Education programme includi ng training 
related programme will not be allowed to be compromised and if 
necessary, supplementary funds will be proposed at appropriate stage. 
Committee’s further observation 
6.2. The Committee notes the reply. 

 
Recommendation/observation 
7. The Committee  also puts on record it‘s appreciation for the 
transparency that the Election Commission of India has brought into 
the electoral system in the country. There has been good progress in 
making the elections transparent, although there is still much scope 
for doing more. Acknowledging that Electoral Reforms being too 
vast a subject for a one -time re-look, the committee suggests that the 
Commission may invite suggestions from all sections of the 
population and initiate a streamlining process.  (Para 3.23, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
7.1. The Commission has, from time to time, sent to the Govt. 
proposals on electoral reforms. List of the various letters/communications 
issued in this regarded by the Commission is enclosed. A Core 
Committee on Electoral Reforms under the Chairmanship of the then 
Additional Solicitor General, Shri Vivek K. Tankha was constituted by 
the Ministry of Law and Justice in October, 2010 to work as nodal 
committee for considering the various pending proposals on electoral 
reform made by the Com mission. Seven regional consultations have 
already been organized by the Law Ministry in collaboration with the 
Election Commission for eliciting views from the public, including 
NGOs, Students, political parties etc. on issues of electoral reforms. The 
national level consultation is pending and the Law Ministry is well aware 
of the progress/current status of the pending electoral reform proposals. 
The background paper prepared for the consultation which also contains 
the Commission‟s proposals are availabl e with the Ministry of Law & 
Justice.  
Committee’s further observation 
7.2. The Committee desires that it may be appraised of activities and 
outcomes of the core Committee. 
Department of Legal Affairs 
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT) 
Recommendation/observation 
8. The Committee wishes to point out that out of Rs.15.00 Crore 
earmarked in 2010 -11 for Capital Outlay on Other Administrative 
Services Major Head ‗4070‘ for acquisition of land/construction of 

 
building for the Tribunal, a mere Rs. 8.30 Crore was  utilized. In this 
backdrop, the Committee expresses its apprehension whether the 
proposed construction of office -cum-residential building for various 
Benches of the ITAT is being tackled with sincerity. It, therefore, 
strongly recommends that the Ministry  should conduct a fresh look 
into the performance and progress of the project vis -à-vis the yearly 
utilization of the allocations to assess and monitor its progress. The 
Committee also desires that the outcome and findings of this exercise 
may be furnished to it. (Para-4.12, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
8.1. As per the factual position reported by ITAT, only Rs. 8.33 crore 
has utilized during the year 2009-10, under the head “Capital Outlay”. 
Initially, when the consolidated proposal was submitted by ITAT to th e 
Ministry in the year 2006, the estimated cost submitted by the respective 
CPWD authorities towards construction of ITAT‟s own buildings at 
Bangalore, Pune and Jaipur was Rs.22.21 crores.  In the ITAT Vice 
Presidents‟ Conference in the year 2009, the matter was considered and it 
was decided to get revised estimates from the respective CPWDs and to 
get approval from the Ministry. Accordingly ITAT submitted revised 
proposal for the administrative approval and expenditure sanction of the 
competent authority fo r an amount of Rs.39.20 crores towards 
construction of its own buildings at Bangalore, Pune and Jaipur.  During 
the Current Financial Year (2012-13), the Ministry had made a budgetary 
provision of Rs.20.00 Crores to ITAT under the Head “Capital Outlay”, 
towards construction of ITAT‟s own buildings.  The present status in this 
regard is as under:- 
8.1.1. JAIPUR:- ITAT had subsequently submitted re -modified 
Preliminary Estimate received from the Executive Engineer, CPWD, 
Jaipur, regarding construction of thei r office-cum-residential complex at 
Jaipur.   In view of this the sanction for release of the grant of Rs.20.00 
crores for the above purpose was issued in September 2012. 
8.1.2. BANGALORE:- ITAT has subsequently received the re -modified 
Preliminary Estimate for Rs.18,74,18,000/- towards construction of office 
complex at Bangalore, from the CPWD, Bangalore in June, 2012.   Due 
to budgetary constraints, the Ministry of Finance has not sanctioned any 
additional funds to this Ministry in the Revised Estimates 2 012-13.  
Therefore, the issue regarding provision of the above amount will be 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance in the next financial year.   

 
8.1.3. PUNE:-  ITAT has informed that re -modified Preliminary 
Estimate in respect of proposal of Pune is still  awaited from the CPWD, 
Pune. 
Committee’s further observation 
8.2. The committee notes the reply. 
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY (NALSA) 
Recommendation/observation 
9. The Committee appreciates the successive increase in the 
allocation of funds for imple menting the various schemes pertaining 
to the legal services which reflects the increase in the spending 
capacity of NALSA. The Committee, particularly, wishes to place on 
record its appreciation for the yearly growth in the number of 
persons benefitted th rough legal aid and services which is 
encouraging. It, however, feels that ensuring the timely release of 
funds and monitoring the progress made are equally important. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Government should 
focus on strengthening the monitoring mechanism of the schemes and 
adopt the practice of collecting activity -wise expenditure from the 
States. (Para-4.16, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
9.1. The above recommendation of the Committee regarding 
strengthening the monitoring mechanism of th e various schemes 
pertaining to the legal services and adopting the practice of collecting 
activity-wise expenditure from the States, has been noted for compliance. 
Committee’s further observation 
9.2. The Committee notes the reply of the Department of Legal Affairs 
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE 
RESOLUTION [ICADR] 
Recommendation/observation 
10. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the ICADR to 
encourage Government Departments and PSUs etc. for including 
Arbitration/Conciliation Clause s of the ICADR in the Agreements 
with other parties. The Committee understands that optimum use of 

 
the services of the ICADR would benefit the Centre in generation of 
its own resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Government should take c onscious efforts to publicize the activities 
of ICADR to encourage more Government Departments and PSUs to 
refer their cases to it. (Para4.47, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
10.1. As regards the recommendation of the Committee that the 
Government should take con scious efforts to publicize the activities of 
ICADR to encourage more Government Departments and PSUs to refer 
their cases to it, it may be mentioned that former Law Secretaries viz. 
Shri T.K. Viswanathan and Shri D.R. Meena had written letters dated 25th 
October, 2007 and 7 th June, 2010, respectively, urging Government 
Deptts./PSUs to include Arbitration/Conciliation Clauses of ICADR in 
their Agreements with other parties. ICADR also wrote similar letters 
dated 16 th June, 2009 to Government Departments/PSU s. ICADR also 
wrote separate letters to approximately 171 Companies requesting them 
to include Arbitration/Conciliation/Mediation Clauses of ICADR and also 
to utilize the facilities and expertise available with ICADR for conducting 
Arbitration and Concilia tion proceedings. As a result about 31 
PSUs/Companies have approached ICADR for further information for 
inclusion of Arbitration and Conciliation/Mediation Clauses. After 
correspondence M/s. NHPC Limited, M/s. Fertilizers and Chemicals 
Travancore Limited (FACT), Kerala and M/s. National Institute of Ocean 
Technology, Chennai have included ICADR‟s Clauses in their 
Agreements. In view of the said efforts, three cases were referred by 
FACT, Kerala and one case referred by NIOT, Chennai. 
Committee’s further observation 
10.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
INDIAN LAW INSTITUTE 
Recommendation/observation 
11. On the other hand, the Committee would like to be apprised by 
the ILI the justifications for the surrenders in the financial years 
2009-10, 2010 -11 and 2011 -12. The Committee is of the view that 
huge surrenders reflect the poor spending capacity of the unit, and as 
such, spending units should abstain from this. (Para-4.52, ibid)  
 

 
Action Taken Reply 
11.1. The grants received by the ILI in the financial years 20 09-2010, 
2010-2011 and 2011 -2012 have been fully utilized during the respective 
years in which the grant was sanctioned and the Institute has also 
furnished duly audited Utilization Certificates for these financial years 
within the prescribed timeframe. Th e Institute has never surrendered any 
part of grant to the Ministry in these years. 
Committee’s further observation 
11.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
Department of Justice 
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME RELATING TO 
INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES FOR THE JUDICIARY 
Recommendation/observation 
12. The Committee appreciates the revision of the funding pattern 
of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) to 75:25 (90:10 for North -
East States) and hopes that it will encourage the States to come up 
with more proposals for in frastructural development. It, however, 
wishes to point out that the pendency of utilization certificates as 
reflected in the Ministry‘s Outcome Budget (2012 -13) is disturbing. 
The very fact that there are pending UCs of projects as old as (2002 -
03) reflec ts the apathy of the Ministry in its monitoring of the 
physical progress made by the States. The Committee, therefore, 
urges the Ministry to actively pursue the States on their utilization of 
the funds. The Ministry should also look into the causes of timely and 
non-submissions of UCs to evolve a way to plug the shortfall. 
  (Para 6.14, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
12.1. Prior to 2011 -2012 on account of lower allocation for the scheme, 
as well as sharing pattern of 50:50 basis between Centre and States, 
States were slow to take up new projects under this scheme. As such 
submission of certificate for fund Utilization was not regular and 
satisfactory and this affected the further release of funds.  
12.1.1.  It may be mentioned here that funds are released only aft er UCs 
pertaining to the period one year prior to the year of release are received 
i.e. for release of funds for the year 2012 -13, UCs for the period up to 
2010-11 are necessary.  

 
12.1.2.  However, with increase in budget allocation for the scheme and 
revised pattern of funding, States are showing keen interest and 
requesting for more funds and, thus, have started submitting the 
Utilization Certificates (UCs). The Department would be pursuing with 
the States aggressively but would like to apprise the Committee that since 
the inception of the scheme, funds to the tune of around Rs. 2000 crore 
have been released so far. Against that, UCs are pending for an amount of 
Rs. 111.15 crores only now.  
Committee’s further observation 
12.2. The Committee notes the repl y of the Department. The 
Committee feels that delay in receipt of UCs in effect amounts to 
slowing down of activity which is not at all desirable. The Committee 
therefore, recommends that Government should take adequate steps to 
ensure that the UCs, do not go in arrears. 
Recommendation/observation 
13. The Committee welcomes the new instrument of services, 
namely, ―National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms‖ 
which is aimed at tackling major core problematic issues of 
Judiciary. The Committee is appreciative that the scheme has been 
designed to ensure the much needed co -ordination between the 
executive and the judiciary, which, it is certain will result in a much 
more efficient delivery of justice in the country. (Para 6.24, ibid)  
Action Taken Reply 
13.1. Noted. 
Committee’s further observation 
13.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
ACTION RESEARCH AND STUDIES ON JUDICIAL REFORMS 
Recommendation/observation 
14. The Committee appreciates that the Department recognizes the 
need for action research for p olicy initiatives and judicial reforms 
measures, effect of pendency reduction drives and the impact of 

 
grants provided by the 13 th Finance Commission. The Committee 
however, feels that since the Department has contemplated 
commissioning of these schemes to already established organizations, 
it recommends that such research work may be assigned to 
organizations under its administrative control, i.e. ILI, NJA, etc. and 
the allocations for the purpose also be reflected in their allocation so 
as to avoid multip licity of the research work. It further points out 
that these organizations are already bringing out their publications 
on various issues of judicial reforms and conducting various research 
work in that field. Therefore, the Committee opines that the 
commissioning of the work to them would enhance the financial 
capacity of the Organizations. Also, their expertise would be utilized 
to the maximum benefit if the research work is assigned to them. 
  (Para 6.31, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
14.1. The Department has  assigned Action Research Study on the 
following to Indian Law Institute: 
i. Meaning and status of pendency in Allahabad High Court 
and Calcutta High Court; and 
ii. Functioning of Gram Nyayalayas in Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan.  
14.1.1.  The Department has also sought the willingness of Indian Law 
Institute for evaluation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme for development 
of infrastructure facilities for the subordinate Judiciary. The Department 
has noted the suggestion made by Committee.  
Committee’s further observation 
14.2. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Department and 
desires that the Action Research Studies for policy initiatives and 
judicial reforms measures may be assigned to some other reputed 
institutes also. 
FAMILY COURT 
Recommendation/observation 
15. The Committee assumes that the States not being too keen on 
setting up Family Courts is most likely due to their requirement to 

 
provide matching share of Rs. 10 lakh per court. It therefore, is of 
the opinion that the Ministry should endeavour t o survey the 
apprehensions of the States in setting up of Family Courts and if 
financial constraint is one of the cause, it should revise the funding 
pattern as has been done in the case of Gram Nyayalayas to 
encourage more States to come up with proposals . The Committee is 
of the strong belief that the setting up of Family Courts will come a 
long way in reducing pendency of cases especially due to the fact that 
it has been reflected in the Budget Outcome (2012-13) of the Ministry 
that 20056 cases were disposed of by Family Courts upto 2009. It also 
anticipates a more efficient delivery of justice to the people by setting 
up of more Family Courts in the States. Therefore, the Ministry 
should envisage ensuring setting up of maximum number of Family 
Courts across the length and breadth of the country. (Para 6.58, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
15.1. All the State Governments/UT Admn. has been requested to set up 
at least one Family Court in each District. In the CM/CJ Conference held 
on 16/8/2009, Hon‟ble Minister of Law & Justice had requested the Chief 
Ministers of States and the Administrators of UTs to consider the 
suggestion received from the Hon‟ble Chief Justice of India requesting 
the Government to set-up at least one Family Court in those 465 Districts 
in which no such court had been set up. As per the Action Taken Notes 
received from the State Governments of Goa, Himachal Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Tripura, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep, 
there is no need of such courts. As per the reports received, 2 12 Family 
Courts are functional in the country and 18 more Family Courts have 
been notified. State-wise number of Family Courts is indicated at Annex.  
Higher assistance sought by the states for establishment of Family 
Court 
15.1.1.  As per information rec eived from the State Governments, 
Government of Kerala has indicated that approximately Rs. 43.00 lakh is 
required for running expenditure of per Family Court in the State. 
15.1.2.  Government of Uttar Pradesh has demanded Rs. 13.80 Crore. As 
recurring exp enditure @ Rs. 23 lakh per court besides the 100% 
nonrecurring expenditure for establishment of 60 Family Courts in 58 
Distts. of Uttar Pradesh and further 100% non -recurring expenditure for 
establishment of 24 Family Courts. 
15.1.3.  Government of Maharas htra has mentioned their BE 2010 -11 as 
15.98 Crore (for salary) and Rs. 16.85 crore (total including salary and 
OE etc.) 

 
15.1.4. Government of Chhatisgarh has mentioned Rs. 0.40 Crore as total 
financial burden on one Family Court. 
15.1.5.  Government of Tripura has stated that funding pattern of Family 
Courts may be changed to 90:10, 90% being the State share. 
14.1.6.  During the regional meeting in Goa, Chief Justice of Bombay 
High Court stated that 100% central grant should be provided for Family 
Courts. 
15.1.7.  During the Regional meeting at Chennai, Law Minister of Tamil 
Nadu raised the issue that Central grant for meeting expenditure of 
Family Courts is inadequate and may be raised to Rs. 25 lakhs for 
recurring and Rs. 2.5 Crore for non-recurring expenses. 
Annexure 
STATEMENT INDICATING NUMBER OF FAMILY COURTS 
FUNCTIONAL IN THE STATES 
S.No. Name of the State Number of Family Courts 
functional in the State 
1. Andhra Pradesh 27 
2. Assam 2 
3. Bihar 30 
4. Chhattisgarh 19 
5. Delhi 5 
6. Gujarat 9 
7. Jharkhand 8 
8. Karnataka 10 
9. Kerala 16 
10. Madhya Pradesh 15 
11. Maharashtra 22 
12. Manipur 1 
13. Mizoram * - 
14. Nagaland 2 
15. Odisha $ 5 
16. Pondicherry 1 
17. Rajasthan # 6 
18. Sikkim 1 
19. Tamil Nadu 6 
20. Tripura 3 
21. Uttar Pradesh 15 

 
22. Uttarakhand 7 
23. West Bengal 2 
Total  212 
* Four Family Courts notified.  
# Seven more Family Courts notified  
$ Seven more Family Courts notified. 
Committee’s further observation 
15.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
THIRTEENTH FINANCE COMMISSION 
Recommendation/observation 
16. The Committee is overwhelmed at the length of efforts taken to 
streamline justice delivery. It is however, distressed that the 
Thirteenth Finance Commission has recommended an impressive 
grant of Rs. 5000 crores to be utilized  over a period of 2010-15 out of 
which a mere Rs. 1353.62 crores has been utilized. This reflects the 
tardy pace of the Department in its implementation of schemes. 
Furthermore, the Committee observes that the States of 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhan d and Meghalaya have not so 
far utilized grants under this scheme. The Committee, in this regard 
desires that the Department may furnish the justification for such 
absence of proposals to it while submitting its ATRs. It further 
recommends that the Departm ent should beef up monitoring of 
schemes while encouraging more States to come up with proposals 
under this scheme. At the time of sending ATRs to this Report, the 
Committee would like to be appraised of the steps taken in this 
aspect and the outcome thereof. (Para 6.61, Ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
16.1. The Central Government had released the grants for the first year 
of Thirteenth Finance Commission, i.e., 2010 -11, in full, and had 
requested the State Governments to meet the following three conditions 
to qualify for release of grant for the second year, i.e., 2011-12:- 
(a) The State Litigation Policy (SLP) must be in place before the 
end of fiscal year to be eligible to draw instalments for the 
succeeding years. 
(b) The Perspective Plan for 2010-2015 and Annual Action Plan 
for each financial year in respect of all the components is 

 
required to be submitted, duly approved by the High Level 
Monitoring Committee (HLMC) 
(c) Utilisation Certificates in the prescribed format, duly 
countersigned by the State Finance Secretary. 
16.1.1.  In 2011 -12, only 13 States had met these conditions. 
Accordingly, additional Rs.353.12 crores were released to them. As some 
States has conveyed their difficulties in implementing some of the 
activities under the award and had requested for relaxation of some of the 
conditions for utilization of the funds. The following relaxation were 
made and conveyed to the State Governments in 2011 -12, after 
consultation with the Department of Expenditure:- 
(a) The funds earmarked for morning/evening /shift courts can 
also be utilised for other types of temporary/special courts 
with the objective of clearing backlog of pendency cases 
subject to the condition that the amount will be restricted to 
creation of temporary additional staff, on contract and n o 
amount can be defrayed for any infrastructure expenditure; 
(b) In case of setting up of ADR Centres, a flexibility has been 
provided and restriction of Rs.1 Crore per centre has been 
relaxed. States can now spend less than Rs.1 Crores for 
smaller distric ts and more than Rs.1 Crores for bigger 
districts, as per requirement, with in overall allocations for 
this component; and 
(c) The grants under TFC include construction activities in 
Heritage Court Buildings, Judicial Academies and ADR 
Centres. The State G overnments may incur expenditure on 
their construction according to actual requirements. Further 
release of grant for these construction activities will depend 
upon the utilisation of earlier releases. 
16.1.2.  As regards the utilisation of grants by the S tates of Goa, Gujarat, 
Jharkhand, Meghalaya and Chhattisgarh, the status is as under:- 
(i) Government of Goa has still not formulated and notified its 
State Litigation Policy, which is a pre-requisite for release of 
further grants under TFC. Department of Justice, during the 
meetings and through communications has impressed upon 
the State Government to formulate its SLP; 
(ii) In case of Gujarat, SLP has been notified and a High Level 
Monitoring Committee, under the Chairmanship of Chief 
Secretary has been c onstituted. However, Action Plan for 
various activities was approved by HLMC only on 16 th 

 
March, 2012 and Action Plan for Heritage Court Buildings 
and State Judicial Academy has still not been approved. 
Only Rs.5.40 Crores have been utilised so far. State 
Government has been advised to expedite approval of Action 
Plan and ensure optimal utilisation of TFC grants. 
(iii) State of Jharkhand has formulated State Litigation Policy 
and constituted HLMC. However, utilisation has been in 
respect of only four activi ties, namely (i) ADR Centres (ii) 
Lok Adalat & Legal Aid (iii) Training of Judicial Officers 
and (iv) Training of Public Prosecutors. Only Rs.3.30 Crores 
have been utilised so far. State Government has been advised 
to ensure full utilisation of grants in r espect of these and 
other remaining activities. 
(iv) State of Meghalaya has formulated and notified SLP and 
Action Plan/Perspective Plan have been approved by 
HLMC. However, no Utilisation Certificates have been 
received despite repeated requests through l etters and during 
the national level meetings. The revised action plan has been 
approved by the HLMC in its meeting held on 6 th March, 
2012. 
(v) State of Chhattisgarh has formulated its SLP and copies of 
Action Plan and Perspective Plan have been received.  
However, from the Utilisation Certificate, it has been 
observed that only Rs.0.13 Crores have been utilised for 
training of Public Prosecutors. State has been advised to take 
steps to utilise funds in respect of all the activities.  
16.1.3.  In order to improve the pace of utilization of the grants, meetings 
have been held with four States during 2012 -13(Tamil Nadu, Punjab, 
Haryana and West Bengal). The meetings of the Review Committee 
under Chairmanship of Secretary (Justice) are regularly held in order t o 
facilitate the implementation of TFC recommendation & sort out 
problems being faced by implementing agencies. During 2012 -13, two 
such meetings have already taken place. 
16.1.4.  A national level meeting with the Law/Home Secretaries and 
Finance Secretar ies States/UTs and Registrar General High Courts was 
organised on 19th and 20th April, 2012, wherein the issue of the poor pace 
of the utilization of grants released under Thirteenth Finance Commission 
was raised. During the meeting, some of the States rai sed the issue of 
little or no progress in establishment of Morning/Evening/Shift Courts 
due to their respective geographical and other conditions. The State 
Governments were advised to review the progress in this regard and in 

 
case it is felt that funds allocated for this activity cannot be utilized due to 
geographical or other conditions or any other local constraints, the 
possibility of utilizing these funds under other activities, identified by the 
Thirteenth Finance Commission, may be explored and propo sal for 
modifying the guidelines may be sent in consultation with the concerned 
High Court. This was followed by another conference of Law/Home 
Finance Secretaries of the States and Registrar Generals of the High 
Court on 26 th June, 2012, wherein the progr ess of the utilization of funds 
under Thirteenth Finance Commission was reviewed. States were again 
urged to take effective steps to ensure that funds under Thirteenth 
Finance Commission are fully utilised, so as to fulfil the objective of the 
grants. State Government were also advised to forward the best practices 
adopted while implementing the activities in order to enable the 
Department to circulate the same amongst other States for replication. In 
spite of these additional efforts, however, only Rs.72.1 1 crores have been 
released to the States during 2012 -13 so far. However, efforts are 
continuing to improve the pace of utilization of funds by the States. 
16.1.5.  An amount of Rs. 1425.23 crores has been released to the States 
as of 31.01.2013 (Annexure - I). An updated state wise status of Physical 
progress in respect of different activities under 13 th Finance Commission 
is enclosed (Annexure - II). 
Committee’s further observation 
16.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
NATIONAL JUDICIAL ACADEMY 
Recommendation/observation 
17. In this backdrop, the Committee notes the information given 
by the Director, National Judicial Academy and desires that the 
Academy should take up the role and have the objective to educate 
and train judges and help them make judicious judgments in courts 
to create a healthy civil society.  (Para 6.67, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
17.1. Noted. 
Committee’s further observation 
17.2. The Committee notes the reply. 

 
Recommendation/observation 
18. The Committee appreciates that the Minstry has rep lied in 
affirmative and  forwarded the abovementioned Committee‘s 
recommendations to the Supreme Court Registry for necessary 
action. The Committee hopes that the Supreme Court Registry would 
positively take decisions in this regard.  (Para 7.5, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
18.1. The Action taken has been recorded at Para No. 7.4 of the Report. 
No further action is required in the Department of Justice. 
Committee’s further observation 
18.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
ENABLING THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURT S TO 
GENERATE REVENUE 
Recommendation/observation 
19. The Committee is pleased to note that the Department is in 
agreement with the Committee‘s recommendation regarding 
enabling the Supreme Court and High Courts to generate revenue 
themselves which can also  be utilized by the subordinate judiciary. 
The Committee would, however, would appreciate if the Department 
pursues the matter with the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance and the State Governments to consider the matter 
expeditiously. The Commi ttee may be apprised their feedback, 
accordingly. (Para 7.7, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
19.1. The Department of Justice had earlier proposed that a National 
Judicial Infrastructure Fund may be created that would be managed by 
the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV ) for carrying out the work of 
infrastructure development of the subordinate courts in the country by 
2015. It was proposed that the required fund could be raised by either one 
or a combination of (i) Enhancement of Central Plan assistance; (ii) 
Enhanced c ourt fees and using the incremental revenue for court 
infrastructure needs; (iii) Cost imposed on litigants; (iv) Donations from 
private persons or corporate bodies allowing tax rebates or exemptions 
from income tax of such donations to the corpus fund; (v ) Contributions 
from Corporates as part of their corporate social responsibility; (vi) 
Contributions from Bar Councils / Associations; (vii) External assistance 

 
from multilaterals to supplement Government efforts. However, since 
there is ban on creation of  Reserve/Corpus funds; the proposal was 
dropped. This has been replaced by modified Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme for development of infrastructure facilities for the judiciary. 
Committee’s further observation 
19.2. The Committee notes the reply. 

 
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
Legislative Department 
ELECTION COMMISSION 
Recommendation/observation 
1. The Committee welcomes the proposal of granting an 
attractive honorarium to observers engaged during elections. It also 
desires that these officials may be given precise and complete 
training on the responsibilities bestowed upon them so that they may 
function more efficiently. As regards complaints under the Model 
Code of Conduct, the Committee urges that these may be verified 
before cases are filed against candidates.  (Para 3.15, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
1.1. Before every election, the Observers are briefed by the 
Commission at Delhi before they are put on active duty. This is done 
invariably without fail. Apart from briefing they are also provided with a 
kit containing material related to their duties & responsibilities, Model 
Code of Conduct and other instructions of the Commission. All 
complaints filed under Mod el Code of Conduct are verified through 
office of Chief Electoral Officers/District Election Officer/Returning 
Officer before cases are filed against candidates and other concerned.  
Committee’s further observation 
1.2. The Committee notes the reply and fu rther desires that the 
Commission will provide in detail the total expenses on the heads of 
training and honorarium payment to consultants and observers. While 
taking note of the reply of the Commission with regard to verification of 
complaints filed under  Model Code of Conduct, the Committee desires 
that under no circumstances should there be delay in the verification of 

 
such cases which could result in delaying candidates decisions of filing 
nomination to do in time. 
Recommendation/observation 
2. Members were also of the considered view that some contents 
of the Model Code of Conduct, such as, the jurisdiction of 
applicability of the Code especially when elections were held not in 
the entire State, the mode of filing cases against candidates/parties on 
charges of violation of the Code of Conduct, the extents of publicity 
and broadcast during elections amongst many others call for a 
thorough review. In this context, the Committee recommends that 
the recommendations of the All -Party Committee on Electoral 
Reforms which submitted its report in May 1990 on the subject 
matter may be taken into consideration. (Para 3.16, ibid)  
Action Taken Reply 
2.1. During General Election to Legislative Assembly of the State (s), 
the provisions of the Model Code of Conduct are enforced in the whole 
State (s) concerned, which is also applicable to State as well as Central 
Government at the same time, from the date of announcement of election 
schedule by the Commission. Similarly, the provisions of the Model 
Code of Conduct are en forced in the entire country and on all State 
Governments as well as Central Government during General Election to 
Lok Sabha. 
2.1.1.  Earlier during bye -elections, the provisions of Model Code of 
Conduct used to be enforced in the district (s) in which the  Constituency 
(ies) was/were wholly or partially comprised. 
2.1.2.  The Commission has recently rationalized the application of 
Model Code of Conduct during bye -elections to the Parliamentary 
Constituency/Legislative Assemblies of the States of Andhra Prad esh, 
Goa, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal held in April -June, 2012. Since 
the aforesaid bye-elections:- 
1. All instructions of the Commission issued regulating the 
implementation of the scheme s of MNREGA, extending 
relief and starting works in case of Natural Calamities, 
Drought, Flood, Drinking Water, Digging of Bore -wells, 
Fodder, Agricultural inputs & input subsidies to farmers, 

 
New Developmental Work (whether beneficiary or work 
oriented) i ncluding work under MPLAD, MLA and 
MLCLAD Scheme, Announcement and commencement of 
New Projects, Programme, Concessions, Financial Grants, 
Defacement of Property, Use of Govt. Property for 
campaign purpose, etc. are applicable only in respect of the 
areas falling in the Assembly constituency (s)/Parliamentary 
constituency going for bye -election and not to the entire 
district (s) in which such constituency is situated.  
2. However, all other existing instructions of the Commission 
on Model Code of Conduct on ma tters like Tours of 
Ministers, Vehicles, Advertisements, use of Govt. Guest 
Houses, and all prevailing Commission‟s instructions other 
than those mentioned in Para (1), transfers of officers etc. 
continue to remain applicable to the entire district (s) in 
which the constituency having the bye-election is situated. 
2.1.3. Apart from above, a lot of relaxations are given on issues related 
to Model Code of Conduct depending on the ground situation and 
according to the merit of the case when these are referred to the 
Commission for issuing suitable clarification. 
2.1.4.  All-Party Committee on Electoral Reforms submitted its report in 
May, 1990 with following observations: - 
(i) Statutory backing for model code of conduct. 
(ii) The Committee considered the vario us items in Part VII, 
Party in Power, in the present Model Code of Conduct 
evolved by the Election Commission. 
(iii) The Committee is of the view that only such of the 
provisions of the Model Code as are vital and important in 
nature should be brought unde r the Statute. The Committee 
feels that to make any violation of the Model Code by 
Ministers and others as a corrupt practice would result in 
penalising the contesting candidate who might not have any 
part to play in regard to such violation. However, the 
Committee agrees that the items enumerated in para 11.6 of 
the Notes should be brought under the Statute as an electoral 
offence instead of corrupt practice. 
(iv) The following are the items which according to the 
Committee, should be brought within the am bit of the 
proposed electoral offence: - 

 
a. Combining of official visit with work relating to 
elections or making use of official machinery or 
personnel in connection with any such work; 
b. Using Government transport, including official 
aircrafts, vehicles, mach inery and personnel in 
connection with any work relating to elections; 
c. Restricting or monopolising the use of public places 
for holding election meetings or use of helipads for 
air flights in connection with any work relating to 
elections; 
d. Restricting or m onopolising the use of rest houses, 
dak bunglows or other Government accommodation 
or the use of such accommodation (including 
premises appertaining thereto) as a campaign office 
or for holding any public meeting for the purpose of 
election propaganda; 
e. Issuing of advertisements at the cost of public 
exchequer in the newspapers and other media; 
f. Using official news media for partisan coverage of 
political news and publicity of achievements with a 
view to furthering the prospects of any party or 
candidate; 
g. Announcing or sanctioning of any financial grants in 
any form or making payments out of discretionary 
funds; 
h. Laying of foundation stones of projects or the 
inauguration of schemes of any kind or the making of 
any promises of construction of roads or the provision 
of any facilities; 
i. Making of any ad -hoc appointments in Government 
or public undertakings during the election period for 
the furtherance of the prospects of any party or 
candidate; 
j. Entering any polling station or place of counting by a 
Minister except in his capacity as a candidate or as a 
voter or as an authorised agent; 
k. Ban on transfer of officers and staff specified in 
section 28A when election is in prospect.” 
2.1.5. Statute related to elections is made by Parliament under Article 
327 and in case p rovision in that behalf is not made by Parliament, the 

 
Legislature of a State may by law make provision in respect to the House 
or either House of Legislature of the State under Article 328 of the 
Constitution of India.  
2.1.6. Under Article 324 of the Con stitution of India, the 
superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the electoral 
rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and to the 
Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices of President and 
Vice-President are vested in the Election Commission. 
2.1.7. In the absence of any law or statute, the Election Commission 
uses its power conferred by Article 324 of the Constitution and issues 
need based instructions/ directions regulating the conduct of free and fa ir 
elections. This is necessitated because even after the lapse of 22 years 
after the All-Party Committee on Electoral Reforms submitted its report, 
no statute covering issues in respect of these reforms has been framed 
empowering the Commission to conduct  free and fair election. The 
Commission cannot avoid its responsibility by remaining a silent 
spectator and merely paying lip service to the cause of electoral reforms 
and conduct of free and fair elections in the country.  
Committee’s further observation 
2.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation/observation 
3. Amidst all the drawbacks that exist, the Committee notes with 
appreciation the impressive EPIC coverage of the States. It, however, 
feels that unless 100% coverage is achieved, the intent of  the scheme 
is not realized. Moreover, it also constitutes a denial of the right to 
franchise to those not covered by the scheme. Therefore, the 
Committee impresses upon the Commission to take all -out effort for 
100% EPIC coverage of the States in a time -bound manner. It also 
suggests that the funds may be enhanced, if needed, so that the 
resources could be strengthened to accomplish the task in the 
minimum time span.  (Para 3.22, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
3.1. As has been said earlier, preparation and issue of EPIC to electors 
is a continuous and ongoing process and for the completion of such 
continuous process no time limit can be fixed. The names of substantial 
number of eligible persons are added in the electoral rolls every year and 

 
consequently a fresh EPIC is issued to all such new electors whose name 
has been registered in the electoral roll for the first time. 
3.1.1. All the Chief Electoral Officers of the States/UTs, where EPIC 
scheme is implemented, have been asked to set a goal in order to achieve 
100% EPIC coverage of electors on the electoral rolls in their States/UTs, 
during ongoing revision of electoral rolls. 
3.1.2. Recently, the Commission has decided to bring the State of 
Assam also under EPIC Scheme. 
3.1.3. Regarding observation of the Commi ttee that it also constitutes a 
denial of the right to franchise to those not covered by the EPIC scheme, 
it is to mention here that, EPIC is issued to an elector to establish his/her 
identity at the polling station at the time of poll during an election. 
3.1.4. For exercising the right to franchise, the name of person should 
be enrolled in electoral roll. EPIC is used as one of the documents 
prescribed for establishing his/her identity at an election. There are 
various other alternative documents, which are prescribed by the Election 
Commission, at the time of election for establishing the identity of voter, 
hence it may be said that no elector is deprived of his/her franchise on the 
ground that he/she is not-having/issued EPIC. 
Committee’s further observation 
3.2. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that 
financial aspects of EPIC coverage have not been touched upon by the 
Commission in their ATR. The Committee presumes that funds are not 
a constraint in the EPIC coverage. This being so, the C ommittee, 
reiterates its recommendation to actually have in place 100% EPIC 
courage. 
Recommendation/observation 
4. The Committee acknowledges the explanation given by the 
Election Commission and the Legislative Department. The 
Committee feels EVMs are very  much needed in a vast democratic 
country like ours and have been used effectively in the elections in 
the country. The lacunae pointed out by Members in the machine, 

 
needs to be looked into and removed to repose complete trust in the 
voter. In this contex t, the Committee desires that a detailed note on 
the status of reliability of EVMs may be furnished to the Committee 
at the time of furnishing ATRs.  (Para 3.27, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
4.1. Since their introduction in the year 1982 on pilot basis, EVMs, 
later, had been used in all bye -elections/General Elections to 
Parliamentary & Legislative Assemblies since 2000 and also in country 
wide General Election to the Lok Sabha in 2004 & 2009. The use of 
EVMs for taking poll was preceded by long ranging politic al, technical 
and administrative consultations. Independent Committees and Technical 
Experts, and even Courts have endorsed the efficacy and transparency of 
the machine time and again. Various preventive and precautionary/ 
administrative/technical measures  have been put in place by the 
Commission for the operation, maintenance, movement, security and 
storage of the EVMs. The Election Commission has always been of firm 
conviction and complete satisfaction that EVMs can not be tampered 
with. The Election Commission of India strongly believes that the use of 
EVMs has helped to prevent several electoral malpractices and resulted in 
the more efficient and hassle-free conduct of elections. 
4.1.1. EVMs of ECI were endorsed by a technical experts subcommittee 
appointed by the Government of India at the initiative of the Goswami 
Committee on Electoral Reforms in 1990. This Committee was headed by 
Prof. S. Sampath, then Chairman RAC, Defence Research and 
Development Organization, with Prof. P.V. Indiresan, then working  in 
IIT, Delhi and Dr. C. Rao Kasarbada, the then Director, Electronic 
Research and Development Center, Trivandrum as members. 
Subsequently, the Commission has regularly been consulting a group of 
technical experts comprising Prof. P.V. Indirsan ( member o f the earlier 
Committee), Prof. D.T. Shahani and Prof. A.K. Agarwala of IIT Delhi, on 
all EVM related technical issues. In November, 2010, the Commission 
expanded its Technical Expert Committee by including two more experts, 
namely, Prof. D.K. Sharma from Department of Electrical Engineering, 
IIT of Mumbai and Prof. Rajat Moona from Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering, IIT of Kanpur (presently Director General, C -
DAC, Pune) 
4.1.2. In the past, various courts have upheld the use of EVMs. The 
Madras High Court, after elaborate consideration of the issue in a batch 
of Writ petitions in 2001, rejected allegations that the EVMs could be 
tampered with. In the year 2002, the Kerala High Court also upheld the 

 
use of these machines. The Karnataka High Cour t, in its ruling in 2004, 
hailed the EVM as “a national pride”. The Mumbai High Court, in a 
decision in 2005, came to similar conclusion after examining some 
experts. 
4.1.3. Following criticism of the EVM from certain quarters after the 
General Election 20 09, the Commission has revisited the whole journey 
of the EVM from the point of manufacturing to polling stations and 
counting centres. In this review, the Commission has associated the two 
manufacturers: public sector BEL and ECIL and the Technical Expert s 
Committee on the EVMs. The Commission has had a number of critical 
appraisals of the administrative and procedural checks and balances that 
have been in place put by the Commission to secure the EVM based 
voting system. 
4.1.4. Facts about EVMs used by ECI:-  
a. The machine is both mechanically and electronically protected 
to prevent any tampering/manipulation. The programme 
(software) used in these machines is burnt into a One Time 
Programmable/Masked chip (Hardware) so that it cannot be 
altered or tampered with. Further these machines are not 
linked either by wire or by wireless to any other machine or 
system. Therefore, there is no possibility of its data 
corruption. 
b. The software for this chip is developed in -house by BEL and 
ECIL independently. 
c. The vote ca n be recorded on the ballot unit only after the 
Presiding Officer enables the ballot on the Control Unit, the 
machine does not receive any signal from outside at any time. 
d. During production in the factory, functional testing is done by 
production group as per the „Standard Quality Plan & 
Performance Test Procedures‟. 
e. Random samples of EVMs from production batches are 
regularly checked for functionality by Quality Assurance 
Group, which is an independent unit within the manufacturing 
firms. 
f. Certain additiona l features were introduced in 2006 in post -
2006 version of ECI -EVMs such as dynamic coding between 
Ballot Unit and Control Unit, installation of real time clock, 
installation of full display system and date and time stamping 
of every key pressing in EVM. 

 
Complete Procedural Security:- 
4.1.5.  The Commission has put in place elaborate administrative 
measures and procedural checks-and-balances aimed at prevention of any 
possible misuse or procedural lapses. These safeguards are implemented 
transparently with the involvement of political parties, candidates and 
their representatives at every stage to build their confidence on efficacy 
and reliability of EVMs, as they are actually representatives of electors. 
These safeguards are: - 
a. Before every election an exte nsive first level checking (FLC), 
using prescribed protocol, is done for each and every EVM to 
be used in the election by the engineers of the manufacturers 
in the presence of political parties‟ representatives. Any 
malfunctioning EVM is kept separately an d is not used in the 
election. 
b. Manufacturers, i.e. M/s Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) & 
M/s Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL), do 
certify at the time of FLC that all components in the EVM are 
original. After this, the plastic cabinet of Con trol Unit of the 
EVM is sealed using a “Pink Paper Seal”(having unique serial 
number), which is signed by representatives of political 
parties also. After this, the plastic cabinet of control unit of the 
EVMs cannot be opened and there is no access to any 
component inside of EVMs. 
c. Using a decoding machine, a printout of the results of mock 
poll as well as a sequential print out of every vote polled 
during the mock poll at the time of First Level Checking of 
EVMs are taken out for at least 5 % of EVMs and sh own to 
the representatives of political parties. Representatives of 
political parties are allowed to pick machines randomly for 
this purpose. In these machines minimum 1000 votes are cast, 
in rest of the machines, number of votes polled during the 
mock pol l are to the satisfaction of the representatives of 
political parties. Representatives of political parties are 
allowed to do mock poll themselves.  
d. Subsequently, EVMs are further randomized at two stages in 
the presence of candidates or their representati ves before they 
are distributed for use in individual polling stations. Such lists 
are provided to the political parties/candidates. 
e. Candidates and their representatives are allowed to witness the 
conduct of further mock polls on EVMs at the time of 
candidate setting and also before the actual poll on the poll 

 
day to satisfy themselves about the satisfactory functioning of 
EVMs being used. 
f. Once the candidate setting is done the Ballot Unit of the EVM 
is also sealed with thread/Pink Paper seals so that nobod y has 
access to the inside of the Ballot Unit too. 
g. A printout of the results of mock poll as well as a sequential 
print out of every vote polled during the mock poll at the time 
of Preparation of EVMs and candidate setting are taken out 
for at least 5 % of  EVMs and shown to the representatives of 
political parties. Representatives of political parties are 
allowed to pick machines randomly for this purpose. 
h. On the poll day, another mock poll is done by casting at least 
50 votes. After the mock poll is over, another thread seal and 
green paper seals are put on the EVM to block access to all 
buttons on the EVM, except those, which are used for the 
conduct of poll. These paper seals and thread seals are 
allowed to be signed by the polling agents also. After this , the 
entire EVM is sealed. Candidates and their agents are allowed 
to put their signatures on the seals, which they can check for 
the intactness of the seal before counting.  
i. After the poll is over, the Presiding officer presses the “Close” 
button on the EVM. Thereafter, no votes can be polled in the 
EVM. 
j. In addition to this, the strong rooms where EVMs are stored 
are also sealed and watched round the clock. The candidates 
and their representatives are allowed to put their own seals on 
the locks of strong rooms. They also allowed to keep a watch 
on the strong room. 
Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT):- 
4.1.6.  The Commission had a meeting of all political parties on 4 th 
October 2010. Political parties expressed satisfaction on the EVM and 
other issues. However, some political parties requested the Commission 
to consider introducing Voter Verifiable Paper Trail for further 
transparency in the system. The Commission referred the matter to 
aforesaid Technical Expert Committee on EVM for examining and 
making a recommendation in this regard. The Expert Committee has had 
several rounds of meeting with BEL and ECIL on this issue and met the 
recognised political parties and some civil society members who were 
engaged with the Commission on the issue of EVMs on  23rd December, 
2010, to explore the possibility of introducing the VVPAT system in the 
EVM.  

 
4.1.7.  On the direction of the Expert Committee, the BEL and ECIL had 
made a prototype and demonstrated before the Committee and the 
Commission on 15 -04-2011 and  27-05-2011. The Expert Committee 
recommended that the prototype should be tested in the field in extreme 
environmental conditions to get an actual assessment of the trial. The trial 
should be in real election like condition. 
4.1.8.  Two field trials of VV PAT were then conducted in simulated 
elections under conditions similar to real elections in Ladakh, 
Thiruvnantpuram, Cherapunjee, East Delhi District and Jaisalmer. First 
trial was done in July 2011 and second trial was done in July -August 
2012. 
4.1.9.  In order to ensure full participation of all stakeholders, the 
Commission had written to political parties and civil society members 
engaged with the Commission on the issue of EVMs to participate in the 
field trial. Several steps were taken by the Commissi on to ensure full 
participation of the Public including a press conference, a press release, 
and local publicity in the area of the polling stations where the field trial 
was held. All stake holders including senior leaders of political parties 
and civil society members participated enthusiastically in the field trial.  
4.1.10.  After these trials the Commission has made a detailed 
reassessment of the VVPAT system. Several rounds of meetings between 
the Expert Committee and the manufacturers, namely; M/s. B harat 
Electronics Limited and M/s. Electronics Corporation of India Limited, 
were held to further fine tune the VVPAT system. Both the 
manufacturers are making necessary improvements in the prototype of 
the VVPAT system used in the field trials held in July-August, 2012. 
4.1.11.  It may however be pointed out that Commission is considering 
introduction of VVPAT purely as a measure of increased transparency. 
The Commission is fully satisfied that EVMs used by ECI are completely 
tamper proof.  
Committee’s further observation 
4.2. The Committee notes the reply. However, the EVMs being an 
issue of immense importance in the working of Indian democracy in a 
smooth and transparent manner the question of its tamper ability leaves 
doubt in the minds of both electors and the elected. Along with this, the 

 
various cases of EVMs malfunctioning during the polling stations need 
to be addressed seriously. The Committee hopes that these aspects 
would receive adequate attention of Government. 
Department of Legal Affairs 
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT) 
Recommendation/observation 
5. The Committee while acknowledging the efforts made by the 
Tribunal for reduction of cases pending before the ITAT, expresses 
concern over the performance of the Tribunal in disposal of cases in 
the last two years and desires that it may be appraised of the reasons 
for this downward performance. The Ministry may also furnish steps 
taken by it to plug this drawback at the time of furnishing Action 
Taken Replies to the Committee. (Para-4.7, ibid). 
 
Action taken Reply: 
5.1. There are 63 Benches of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
(ITAT) wherein the required strength of the Member is 126.  Beginning 
of the year of 2010, 90 Members were in position. However, 21 Members 
have retired from Government service during the  period from 01.01.2010 
to 31.12.2012.  Due to shortage of Members, some of the Benches could 
not regularly function.  Further,  most of the appeals which were pending 
with the tribunal involved complex issues like International Taxation, 
Transfer Price etc.  Hence, it consumed lot of time to dispose of the said 
appeals resulting in increase of pendency thereof during the relevant time.  
The last round of appointments of Members in ITAT has been completed 
recently with the appointments of two new Judicial Members in 
November 2012.  Action is being taken to fill up the vacancies of 
Members in ITAT.  
5.1.1.  The I.T.A.T. introduced E Courts/E -Benches to make non -
functioning Benches operational to reduce pendency of these Benches.  
Accordingly, Nagpur Bench has been connected to Mumbai Benches and 
started „e‟ court hearing of appeals by videoconferencing since 
10.12.2012.  Further, the Allahabad Bench has been connected to Delhi 
Benches and will start „e‟ court hearing of appeals from 04.02.2013.  

 
5.1.2.  In addition, with a view to expedite disposal of cases, the 
following instructions have been issued by the ITAT to all its Benches:- 
(a) To scrutinize and identify cases which are   covered by 
decisions   of   I.T.A.T. ,  High  Courts,   and   the Supreme   
Court  and  post  them   on   priority  basis.   This   includes 
group and small matters.  
(b) The Bar is also requested to bring to the notice of   I.T.A.T., 
all   such covered cases   for out   of   turn   posting.   
(c) Search & Seizure and Ap peals u/s 263 are also being given 
priority in their disposal.   
Committee’s further observation 
5.2. The Committee notes the direction issued by ITAT to its 
Branches. The Committee is, however, is of the considered view that 
timely filling up of vacancies  of Members in ITAT will go in long way 
in having a positive impact on reduction of pendency. The Committee 
therefore, urges ITAT to initiate the process of filling up of anticipated 
vacancies much ahead of the actual retirement of a Member so as to 
ensure that no gap arises between the time of retirement and filling up 
of the vacancy caused by retirement. 
Recommendation/observation 
6. With reference to the Committee‘s recommendation on the 
filling up of vacancies in the various posts in ITAT in its 39 th Report 
on the Demands for Grants (2010-11) on this Ministry and the replies 
furnishing thereto, the Committee observes that replies of the 
Ministry are too evasive to assess the progress properly. Further, the 
detailed Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Min istry shows that 
only 698 out of the total number of 1016 posts are in position as on 
01-03-2011. It has also been noted that majority of the vacancies are 
in Group ‗A‘ and Group ‗B‘ posts. Therefore, the Committee 
reiterates its recommendations made in it s 39 th Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2010-11) that the Ministry should expeditiously 

 
make all out efforts to fill up the vacancies without further delay. 
  (Para-4.10, ibid). 
Action Taken Reply 
6.1. (a) As stated in reply to Para 4.7 above, action is b eing taken to 
fill up the vacancies of Members in ITAT.  
 (b) The ITAT has conducted  Written Test/Interview to fill up 
the vacancies of Sr. PS/PS (Group „B‟ gazetted) and 41 
candidates  (19 for the post of Sr.PS & 22 for the post of  
PS) were declared suc cessful.  Presently, Medical 
examination/ Police verification of the successful candidates 
are in progress.  They are expected to join duties within a 
month or two.  
 (c) The proposals to conduct the DPC for the appointment of 
Registrar, Deputy Registrars and Assistant Registrars are 
under active consideration. 
Committee’s further observation 
6.2. The Committee’s views in the matter has been reflected in its 
observation vide Para 1.4 above. 
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY (NALSA) 
Recommendation/observation 
7. The paradigm shift in the interpretation of ―Legal Services‖ in 
the Legal Services Authorities Act and moving towards taking legal 
services to the door -steps of the people is a welcome approach. The 
Committee commends this progressive concept of the N ALSA. While 
lauding the inception of community based para -legal volunteers and 
legal aid clinics, the Committee also urges the organization to 
circumspect every aspect of its execution so that undertaking of the 
programme is not hampered in any way, be it funding, logistics or 
methodology. Therefore, the Committee recommends that NALSA 
should chalk out a mechanism for the implementation of the plan of 
action to evaluate the anticipated expenditure and project related 
demands for the same at RE stage of budgetary allocations. 
  (Para-4.21, ibid) 
 
 

 
Action Taken Reply 
7.1. The scheme for Para Legal Volunteers (legal services -volunteers) is 
the flagship programme of National Legal Services Authority (NALSA). 
NALSA has been making all efforts to implement the pro gramme 
effectively. Till November, 2012, various District Legal Services 
Authorities have trained 71,815 para legal volunteers. NALSA has been 
monitoring the implementation of the Scheme so that Legal Services 
Authorities can reach the persons in need of l egal aid in a practical, 
physical and responsive manner. 
7.1.1. With a view to establishing Legal Aid Clinics in villages or for a 
cluster of villages, a new project under the National Plan of Action of 
NALSA, has been launched.  For this purpose the Natio nal Legal 
Services Authority (Legal Aid Clinic) Regulations 2011, have been 
framed.  The Legal Aid Clinics are identical to the functioning of the 
primary health centres.  Under this scheme para legal trained Para Legal 
Volunteers are engaged in the Legal Aid Clinics and in the front offices 
of all legal services institutions under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 
1987.   
7.1.2.  As recommended by the Committee, NALSA has been advised to 
chalk out a mechanism for the implementation of the plan of action to 
evaluate the anticipated expenditure and project related demands for the 
same at RE stage of budgetary allocations.  
Committee’s further observation 
7.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation/observation 
8. In the back -drop of the replies of the  Department to the 
recommendation of the Committee in its 39 th Report in this 
connection as stated above, the Committee is constrained to state that 
it does not find the reply of the Ministry to be satisfactory enough as 
it gives no idea regarding the fact ors causing non -utilization of the 
funds by the State Legal Services Authorities. It is of the view that 
both the NALSA and the Department should function in co -
ordination so that timely release of funds, carrying out of the 
programmes and close monitoring  of the progress are attained. The 
Committee, therefore, desires to be apprised of the steps Central 
Government has taken to ensure the smooth flow of funds and the 
plan of the NALSA in ensuring the successful implementation of its 
proposed programmes. (Para-4.24, ibid) 

 
Action Taken Reply 
8.1. As regards smooth flow of funds, a budgetary provision of Rs. 44.5 
crores for the financial year 2012 -13 has been made by the Ministry 
towards grant-in-aid to NALSA.  So far, a sum of Rs. 29.35 crores has 
been release d and the remaining amount will be released during the 
current financial year.   
8.1.1. NALSA has informed that during the financial year 2012-13, it had 
set out a Plan of Action and Calender for Activities adopted by the 10 th 
All India Meet of the State L egal Services Authorities. The Plan of 
Action for the year 2012-13 mainly focuses on: 
• Improving the juvenile justice system and protecting the 
rights of the children. 
• Increasing Legal Services Activities for the Women. 
• Community-based Para Legal Volunteers  (Legal Services 
Volunteers) all over the country. 
• Establishment of Legal Aid Clinics in more villages and 
close monitoring of the Legal Aid Clinics. 
• Setting up of Legal Aid Clinics in Jails. 
• Establishment of Legal Aid Clinics in Law Universities, 
Law Colleges and other Institutions. 
• Legal Literacy Classes in High Schools and Colleges. 
• Setting-up of Legal Literacy Clubs and creation of Legal 
Services Cadet Corps (LCC) in all High Schools. 
• Promoting the ideals of fundamental duties under Part -IV A 
of the Constitution. 
• Legal Services to the mentally-ill and mentally handicapped. 
• Training of the District and Taluk level staff and 
functionaries of legal services, legal aid panel lawyers and 
Para-legal volunteers. 
• Invoking co-operation of Government Departments a nd the 
various training institutions under Government for spreading 
awareness about the functioning of Legal Services 
Authorities. 
• Special Programmes for the North Eastern States. 
• Giving due credits to the judicial officers who excel in legal 
services activities. 
• Put in place an effective system of monitoring the activities 
of the Legal Services Authorities through time bound 

 
feedback and reports through the District and State Legal 
Services Authorities. 
• Use of the Web-based Monitoring System of NALSA. 
• Proper and effective utilization of Thirteenth Finance 
Commission (TFC) Award. 
• Social Audit on the Legal Services Activities. 
• To prepare a Handbook of guidelines for the guidance of all 
those involved in or connected with Legal Services 
Activities. 
8.1.2. NALSA has been taking steps to ensure successful implementation 
of its programme. In the 10 th All India Meet of the State Legal Services 
Authorities held in March, 2012, resolutions were passed regarding Legal 
Literacy Programme, para -legal volunteers in Corre ctional Centres 
(Jails), Front Offices and Legal Aid Clinics, establishment of Permanent 
Lok Adalats, setting up of legal aid clinics etc. NALSA is also 
developing a monitoring system for further ensuring effective 
implementation of the schemes and project s by the State Legal Services 
Authorities. 
Committee’s further observation 
8.2. The Committee notes the reply and desires that details of the 
monitoring system for ensuring effective implementation of 
schemes/projects by the State Legal Services Authorities be furnished to 
the Committee. 
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA 
Recommendation/observation 
9. The Committee expresses disappointment that a proposal as 
promising as the Directorate of Legal Education launched by the BCI 
had to be discontinued before it‘s valuable results could be harvested. 
It is unfortunate that a scheme already effectuated had to be 
suspended due to shortage of funds. The Committee fails to 
comprehend why the Government did not accede to the request made 
by the BCI for sustaining the Directorate of  Legal Education. It, 
therefore, desires that the BCI in conjunction with the Ministry 

 
should take a re -look in the matter and explore how the scheme can 
be revived.               (Para-4.34, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
9.1. Section 7 (1) (h) of the Advocates  Act, 1961 provides that one of the 
functions of the Bar Council of India is to promote legal education and to 
lay down standards of such education in consultation with the 
Universities in India imparting such education and the State Bar 
Councils. In terms of Rule 34 of the Rules of Legal Education -2008, the 
Bar Council of India shall establish a Directorate of Education for the 
purpose of organizing, running, conducting, holding and administering 
the following:- 
a. Continuing Legal education 
b. Teachers training 
c. Advanced specialized professional courses 
d. Education program for Indian students seeking registration 
after obtaining Law Degree from a Foreign University 
e. Research on professional Legal Education and 
Standardization 
f. Seminar and workshop 
g. Legal Research 
h. Any other assignment 
9.1.1.  BCI had requested the Ministry of Law and Justice in July, 2010 to 
sanction Rs.56 crores to the Directorate of Legal Education of BCI, in a 
phased manner Rs.20 crores each year in the initial two years and Rs.16 
crores in the third  year. The matter was examined in the year 2010 and 
due to budgetary constraints it was not possible to sanction Rs.20 crores 
that year. This position was intimated to the BCI. 
9.1.2. The Directorate of Legal Education was earlier constituted by 
appointing Mr. S. Venkat Rao, Vice -Chancellor of National Law School 
of India University, Bangalore, Prof. N.L.Mitra, Prof. V.Nagraj, Registrar 
of that University, Mr. Ranbir Singh, Vice -Chancellor, National Law 
School, Delhi, Dr. Mukund Sharda, Principal, BhartiVid yapeeth (Pune), 
Dr.C. Rajkumar, Principal/Dean, Global Jindal Law School, Sonepat and 
several other renowned academicians. The Directorate has been recently 
enlarged by including more members viz. Law Secretary and Secretary 
(Justice), or their nominees. I n addition, Prof.Madhav Menon, Adviser to 
the Commonwealth Judicial Education Society (Canada), Prof. Mool 
Chand Sharma, Vice Chancellor, Central University, Haryana and Prof. 
Mohan Gopal, Director, Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Contemporary Studies, 
New Delhi  and Shri P.P. Rao, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court have also 

 
been included in the Directorate of Legal Education of the Bar Council of 
India. 
9.1.3.  As and when any request is received from the Bar Council of India 
to provide grant -in-aid to its Directorate of Legal Education, the same 
shall be considered by the Department. 
Committee’s further observation 
9.2. The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and solicits 
that appropriate steps be taken by the Ministry and the Bar Council of 
India to revive the Directorate. 
Recommendation/observation 
10. The Committee further expresses that much more contribution 
from the BCI especially in the domain of legislative drafting is 
expected. Therefore, the BCI is recommended to take concerted 
efforts in that respect as well. (Para-4.35, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
10.1. The above recommendation of the Committee has been conveyed to 
the Bar Council of India. 
Committee’s further observation 
10.2. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires that the 
response of the BCI in the matter may be furnished to it for its 
consideration. 
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE 
RESOLUTION [ICADR] 
Recommendation/observation 
11. The Committee is constrained to point out that, the casual 
approach of the Department  of Legal Affairs in releasing the grant 
for the construction of Convention Centre is puzzling. The 
Committee understands that out of the total amount of Rs.12.50 
crore sanctioned, Rs.5 crore was released in 2008 -09, Rs.3 crore in 
2009-10 and Rs.2.25 crore  in 2010-11. It has also been observed that 

 
no fund was released in 2011 -12 and a token amount of a mere Rs.1 
crore has been earmarked in the budgetary allocation for the 
financial year 2012 -13 inspite of Rs.2.25 crore pending release. The 
Committee, therefore, urges the Department to earmark the amount 
of Rs.2.25 crore pending release for the ICADR in the RE stage so as 
to enable the completion of construction of the Convention Centre as 
per schedule. (Para-4.44, ibid).  
Action Taken Reply 
11.1. As regards  release of the balance amount of Rs. 2.25 crores as 
grant-in-aid to ICADR for the construction its Convention Centre, 
Business Centre and Future Block at its premises at Vasant Kunj, New 
Delhi, it is submitted that though the demand for the above amount w as 
projected in the first supplementary grants stage, no supplementary grant 
in respect of the Ministry of Law & Justice has been passed during the 
last winter session of the Parliament. As such the provisioning for the 
above amount at RE stage could not b e done.  However, efforts are being 
made to include the above grant in the second batch of supplementary 
grants of the current financial year (2012-13).   
Committee‘s further observation 
11.2. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the efforts shall be 
made by the Ministry in the right earnest. 
Legislative Department 
Recommendation/observation 
12. The Committee appreciates the activities being taken up by the 
Official Language Wing. The Committee feels the wing should also 
translate the Bills/Acts in the regional languages so that the benefit 
reaches the lower level courts also. The Committee note, that the 
Official Language Wing could not utilize the allocated fund during 
the last three years. The Committee desires that the Official 
Language Wing (OLW) will take appropriate steps for full utilization 
of money. (Para 5.6, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
12.1. The Official Languages Wing has already been translating the 
Bills/Acts in certain Regional Languages as enshrined in the VIII 
Schedule of the Constitution by the respective State Government through 

 
departments/agencies under their control by using terminology prevalent 
and understandable in that particular region or state so as to enable a 
common man to understand the law practised in the lower courts there.  
12.1.1.   The observation of the Committee for taking appropriate steps 
for full utilization of allocated funds in future have been taken note of for 
compliance. 
Committee’s further observation 
12.2. The Committee notes the position as regards transla ting the 
Bills/Acts in regional languages. However, the Committee feels that the 
Ministry should take the translation work in maximum number of 
languages included in the VIII Schedule of the Constitution. 
 

 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN R ESPECT 
OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
Legislative Department 
ELECTION COMMISSION 
Recommendation/observation 
1. Under Training Head, an amount of Rs. 43 crore has been 
allocated for the BE —2012-13, out of which Rs.32 crore is fo r 
proposed new Sub -Head ―xx -IIIDEM, xx.00.31 -Grant in -Aid-
General‖. (Para 3.6, ibid) 
1.1. The Committee was also informed that the Commission has 
established a training division under the name IIIDEM (India 
International Institute of Democracy and Election  Management) 
launched in June, 2011 in its premises to assess training requirement 
of election staff and impart training to the officers of the country. It 
has engaged experts for making training modules etc. The 
Commission has also got requests to train t he election management 
body of the foreign countries on democracy and has already trained 
delegates of Kenya, South Africa and Nigeria in three separate 
training schedules during the year. About 25 courses have been 
conducted in IIIDEM so far and several o thers are lined up for the 
upcoming state elections.  (Para-3.10, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
1.2. For construction of IIIDEM campus at Dwarka, finalization of 
layout plan is underway in co -operation with CPWD and Architect 
selected for the purpose. The layout plan is expected to be finalized in the 
month of December, 2012. After that, the Architect will submit a DPR 
through CPWD which will then be submitted to the Committee on Non -
Plan Expenditure (CNE) in the last week of Feb. 2013. However, 
expenditure on pre-construction work will be incurred during 2012-13. 
1.2.1. Training of election related officials has been organized in the 
entire country in the month of September -October, 2012. The 
Commission has transferred total funds amounting Rs. 3.97 crore as the  
first installment, to the Chief Electoral Officers of all States and UTs 
(except Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Tripura, Andaman& Nicobar Island) 

 
to meet the expenditure on training of election personnel. The release of 
second installment will be done in the current financial year after 
receiving of UCs from the CEOs. The total expenditure involved would 
be around Rs. 8.5 crore. 
1.2.2. Apart from the above, fund is being utilized to meet the 
expenditure towards salary of one Consultant and one Senior Advisor f or 
IIIDEM, honorarium to resource persons, procuring teaching aids, etc. 
Committee’s further observation 
1.3. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Commission 
may furnish the detail break -up of the expenses of the training 
programmes for India n and foreign officials. It desires that the 
proposed sub -heads for IIIDEM and Grant -in-Aid General be clearly 
reflected in subsequent Demands for Grants. 
Recommendation/observation 
2. The Committee is, however, constrained to point out that 
clubbing the a llocation for the proposed trainings with ‗Professional 
Services‘ is confusing especially since it is given to understand that 
the enhanced allocation under that head has been earmarked for the 
expenditure to be incurred on construction of campus and build ing 
of IIIDEM. The Committee observes that a projection for training 
has not been appropriately reflected in the details submitted to the 
Committee. The Committee, in these circumstances is not in a 
position to comment on the efficacy of the training progr ammes 
contemplated by the Commission.  (Para 3.12, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
2.1. Out of the total allocation of Rs. 43 crore provided under the sub -
head ”Training”, Rs. 32 crore has been kept to be utilized towards the 
construction of IIIDEM campus on the land purchased from DDA. 
Remaining amount of Rs. 11 crore has been kept to be utilized to conduct 
various training programmes to the election related officials throughout 
the country and from abroad as well. It may be mentioned that an amount 
of Rs.3.97 cr ore has already been sent out of this, for the training of 
election officials in various States (see also our reply to Paras 3.6 and 
3.10). 

 
Committee’s further observation 
2.2. The Committee reiterates its observation made on Paras 3.6 and 
3.10 by stating that sub -heads be reflected for each allocation in 
subsequent Demands for Grants. 
Recommendation/observation 
3. The Committee observes that Model Code of Conduct is a 
voluntary agreement between the parties for regulating the conduct 
of political parties a nd its members etc., during the process of 
elections to Assemblies and Parliament. Its legal status is a grey area. 
After hearing the views of the official of the Ministry of Law and 
considering the problems which have erupted in the country, from 
time to time, in the last few years, the Committee feels that the Code, 
which was voluntary in nature at one time has not remained so after 
insertion of para 16 A in the Election Symbols (Reservation and 
Allotment) Order, 1968, which authorizes the Election Commis sion, 
to suspend or withdraw the recognition of political parties in case of 
violation of Code of Conduct. Besides, some of the paras in the code 
attract penal provisions in other laws. (Para 3.17, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
3.1. The Commission‟s stand on th is issue was communicated to the 
Law Ministry as far back as in 1998. The Commission‟s view brought out 
on that occasion is reproduced below:- 
“The basic feature of the Commission‟s reacting to a Model 
Code Violation is to assess how far a violation has di storted the 
level playing field between the contesting candidates on ground 
and what remedial action is required to restore fully or at least 
substantially the level playing field. Therefore, responses 
thereto offer wide ranging solutions, depending on who  has 
violated the code and when, and to what extent it has affected 
the level playing field. 
The swiftness with which the violations under the Model Code 
are taken, note of and remedial steps taken in relation thereto by 
the Commission, is largely on accou nt of such actions being 
taken by executive fiat. Judicial process of examination of a 
Model Code violation, would necessarily entail delay. It has to 
be remembered that the entire process of election campaign, 

 
etc., where the Model Code of conduct is in play, is over within 
14 days. To expect that a Model Code violation, taking place 
even on the 1 st day of campaign, would result in a Judicial 
pronouncement and remedial action taken before the close of 
campaign, would, in all humbleness, be expecting too mu ch. 
The net result would be plethora of cases in various courts of 
law, which would have little relevance after elections as the 
candidates or the parties which violated the Model Code of 
Conduct would already have reaped the benefits of those 
violations. 
Therefore, the Commission now feels that, in view of the recent 
experience that it gathered in ensuring the observance of the 
Model Code of Conduct, the issue should be left where it is at 
present.” 
3.1.1. The Commission reiterates the above view. 
Recommendation/observation 
4. The Committee further observes that the power of cancellation 
of registration of a political party is substantive in nature and, 
therefore, should not be regulated or provided for under an ―Order‖ 
of the Commission. It should either be a part of the Representation of 
People Act, 1951 or the Rules framed there under. Further, the scope 
of Article 324 also needs to be examined as, many of the aspects 
which should have been covered under the Rules framed under R.P. 
Act 1951 are presently covered under instructions issued under 
Article 324 of the Constitution by the Commission. (Para 3.18, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
4.1. Para 16A of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) 
Order, 1968 provides that if a recognized National Party of St ate Party 
refuses to observe the provisions of the Model Code or refuses to follow 
the lawful directions and instructions of the Commission with a view to 
furthering the conduct of free, fair and peaceful elections or safeguarding 
the interests of the general public and the electorate, the Commission may 
either suspend or withdraw the recognition of such party after giving the 
party reasonable opportunity of showing cause in relation to the proposed 
action. 
4.1.1. In para 3.18 of the Report, it is mentioned  that „the power of 
cancellation of registration of a political party is substantive in nature 
and, therefore, should not be regularized or provided for under an 
“Order” of the Commission‟. In this connection, it is stated that neither 

 
paragraph 16A nor any other provision of the Symbols Order provides for 
withdrawal of registration of any party. Para 16A provides only for 
suspension/withdrawal of recognition of a recognized party. It is also 
relevant to point out that recognition of a party as a National o r State 
Party is governed by the provisions of the Symbols Order alone. There is 
no provision either in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 or in the 
Rules framed there under which provides for de -recognition of political 
parties. 
Recommendation/observation 
5. Accordingly, in Committee‘s view, remedial legal steps are 
required to be taken in this regard.  (Para 3.19, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
5.1. The Report recommends that the scope of Article 324 needs to be 
examined as many of the aspects which sho uld have been covered under 
the rules framed under R.P. Act, 1951, are presently covered under 
instructions issued under Article 324 by the Comission. In this regard, the 
following portion from the judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in 
Mohinder Singh Gi ll & another vs. Chief Election Commissioner & 
others (AIR 1978 SC 851) is reproduced below: - 
“When appropriate laws are made under Article 327 by 
Parliament as well as under Article 328 by the State 
Legislatures, the Commission has to act in conformity w ith 
those laws and the other legal provisions made thereunder. 
Even so, both Article 327 and 328 are “subject to the 
provisions” of the Constitution which include Article 324 and 
Article 329. Since the conduct of all elections to the various 
legislative bo dies and to the offices of the President and the 
Vice-President is vested under Article 324(1) in the Election 
Commission the framers of the Constitution took care to 
leaving scope for exercise of residuary power by the 
Commission in its own right, as a cr eature of the Constitution, 
in the infinite variety of situations that may emerge from time 
to time in such a large democracy as ours. Every contingency 
couldn‟t be foreseen, or anticipated with precision. That is why 
there is no hedging in Article 324. Th e Commission may be 
required to cope with some situation which may not be 
provided for in the enacted laws and the rules. That seems to be 
the raison d‟etre for the opening clause in Articles 327 and 328 
which leaves the exercise of powers under Article 32 4 

 
operative and effective when it is reasonably called for in a 
vacuous area.” 
5.1.1. The Law Ministry may be requested to take into consideration the 
above ruling while deliberating on this recommendation. 
Committee’s further observation 
5.2. The Committee takes note of the replies submitted by the Ministry 
of Law and Justice in respect of its recommendations contained in 
paras 3.16 to 3.19. The thrust of Committee's recommendations are that 
the recommendations of the All Party Committee on Electoral Reforms, 
which submitted its report in May, 1990, on the issue of Model Code of 
Conduct, may be taken into consideration as a part of the thorough 
review of the Model Code of Conduct. The All Party Committee 
categorically pleaded for statutory back up for model  code of conduct 
more than 20 years back. The Committee notes  the plea of Election 
Commission  that since no statute covering the issues in respect of these 
reforms has been framed for ensuring that  the Commission  conducts 
free and fair elections in the  country, the Commission is issuing only 
the need based instructions / directions regulating the conduct of 
elections under Article 324 of the Constitution. The Commission, 
recently, rationalized the Model Code of Conduct in 2012 while 
conducting the parli amentary by elections and the elections of 
legislative assemblies of some States. 

 
5.2.1. The Committee is constrained to note that such a statutory back 
up is yet to come. The Committee desires to know what action has been 
taken by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee directs the Ministry 
to furnish details of action taken by them. The Committee impresses 
upon the Government to initiate the process for legislation giving 
statutory back up to the Model Code of Conduct , and inform the 
Committee, accordingly. 
Department of Legal Affairs 
INSTITUTE OF CONSTITUTIONAL AND PARLIAMENTARY 
STUDIES [ICPS] 
Recommendation/observation 
6. The presence of incongruity between the ICPS and the 
Ministry on the issue of sharing space which, in turn has caused the 
delay in construction of building for the use of ICPS does not find 
favor with the Committee. It, therefore, desires that the matter may 
be resolved at the earliest. As regards the grants to the Institute, the 
Committee is disconcerted that the information provided  to it by the 
Department of Legal Affairs reflects grant surrender of Rs.1,25,626 
in 2009 -10, Rs.3,50,000 in 2010 -11 and a total of Rs.10,41,64,000 in 
2011-12. On the other hand, the ICPS claim that sanctioned grants 
are not released by the Ministry. To th at effect, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should release the sanctioned grants 
to the ICPS without delay. (Para-4.39, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
6.1. As regards the issue of sharing of space between ICPS and the 
Ministry, it is submitted that a meeting was held in the Ministry of Urban 
Development on 05.09.2011 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Urban 
Development) on the issue of extension of time regarding construction of 
building on the plot allotted to the ICPS by the Ministry of Urban 
Development in 1976.  During the meeting the Secretary (UD) mentioned 
that lots of requests have been received from various departments for 
allotment of land for the purpose of construction and that even after a 

 
span of around 40 years, ICPS has not been able to construct any building 
on the said plot.  It was also mentioned during the meeting that Ministry 
of Urban Development had received a proposal from the Ministry of Law 
& Justice in 2007 stating that the land earmarked to ICPS may be allotted 
to the Ministr y of Law & Justice for construction of building and that 
another request had been received from the then Minister of Law & 
Justice in February 2011 for allotment of land measuring 10,000 sq. mtrs 
to accommodate various Departments of Ministry of Law & Just ice.  In 
the light of the decisions taken in the above meeting and thereafter, the 
then Law Secretary had written to the Secretary (UD) on 21.10.2011 
requesting that the said plot of land may be allotted to the Ministry of 
Law & Justice.  The Ministry of U rban Development wrote to the 
Ministry of Law & Justice on 13.03.2012 requesting that information 
regarding the exact area of built up space in the proposed building to be 
provided to ICPS, may be furnished.   While the matter was under 
correspondence with  ICPS, the Minister of Urban Development had 
written to Minister of Law & Justice on 25.04.2012 that the plots earlier 
identified were not available for allotment to the Ministry of Law & 
Justice and that the Ministry of Urban Development is exploring the 
possibility of offering an alternative site.  Under the circumstances, no 
final decision in this regard can be taken till a conclusive decision is 
received from the Ministry of Urban Development.   
6.1.1.  As regards surrender of grant -in-aid released to I CPS by the 
Ministry of Law & Justice during the previous years, this was on account 
of unspent balances of previous years, late receipt of utilization 
certificates, restrictions imposed by the Ministry of Finance on release of 
funds during the last quarter  and last month of the financial year.  A 
budgetary provision of Rs. 92 lakhs has been made for grant -in-aid to 
ICPS during the current financial year (2012 -13), out of which a sum of 
Rs. 41, 40,000/ - has been released so far.  The release of the remaining  
amount is under consideration of the Ministry of Law & Justice, subject 
to the fulfillment of the stipulated conditions.  
Committee’s further observation 
6.2. After going through the reply submitted by the Department of 
Legal Affairs, the Committee feels that the entire issue of releasing 
funds to the ICPS by the Ministry till 2011 -12 is no longer relevant at 
this stage. The Committee observes that both the Ministry and the ICPS 

 
could not make a beginning till the land was available to them i.e. by 
25th April, 2012.  The Ministry of Urban Development has now 
cancelled the allotment of land and the Ministry of Law resultantly has 
come back to the situation where it was 40 years ago.  The entire 
episode of constructing a building for the ICPS turned out to be  a 
fiasco and it is certainly a reflection on the part of Government 
functioning.  The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the entire 
issue and now again impress upon Government to identify a suitable 
plot for the ICPS for constructing the building for itself.  
INDIAN LAW INSTITUTE  
Recommendation/observation 
7. The Committee is, however distressed to note the huge gap 
between the demand projected and allocation received. It does not 
commend that an institute of this high caliber, with the objectiv es to 
cultivate the science of law, promote advanced studies and research 
in law, promote improvement of legal education and publish 
literature relating to law which are vital in the emergence and 
advancement of the legal domain of the country should be be reft of 
sufficient funds to discharge its basic functions. The Committee, 
therefore recommends that the Ministry should revise the projections 
for the ILI and enhance the same so that they are allocated at least 
25% of their demand at the RE stage. (Para-4.51, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
7.1. A budgetary provision of Rs. 1.10 crores has been made for grant -
in-aid to ILI during the current financial year (2012 -13), out of which a 
sum of Rs. 5,00,000/ - has been released so far.  The release of the 
remaining amou nt is under consideration of the Ministry of Law & 
Justice, subject to the fulfillment of the stipulated conditions.  
7.1.2. As regards the recommendation of the Committee to revise the 
projections for the ILI and enhance the same so that they are allocate d at 

 
least 25% of their demand at the RE stage, it is submitted that since no 
supplementary grant in respect of the Ministry of Law & Justice has been 
passed during the last winter session of the Parliament, it was not possible 
to enhance the budgetary all ocation for ILI at RE stage.   In this 
connection, it may also be mentioned apart from the grant-in-aid from the 
Ministry of Law & Justice, the ILI has other sources of funds viz. UGC, 
rental income, course fee, membership fee and sale of 
journals/publications etc. 
Committee’s further observation 
7.2. The Committee is constrained to note that only Rs. 5 lac out of the 
budget allocation of Rs. 1.10 crore could be released and just a quarter 
of the year is left. The Committee considers this as an utter violat ion of 
the basic rule of the budgetary expenditure  management. Moreover, 
the Department of Legal Affairs did not come with the reasons 
explaining for such a poor release of funds. The Committee expects 
that in such a situation, Department of Legal Affairs  should have 
explained to the Committee the constraints it faced in making the 
adequate funds available to ILI or whether the ILI did not come out 
with the requisite proposals or delayed/ non -submission of utilization 
certificates by the institute.. The Co mmittee, accordingly, directs the 
Department of Legal Affairs to submit a detailed note of this issue 
before the Committee considers budgetary proposals for the year 
2013-14. 
Recommendation/observation 
8. The Committee notes that this year also the Departm ent has 
not taken any initiative either to acquire the land with the Ministry 
of Urban Affairs or with the Institute of Legislative and Drafting 
Research (ILDR) for construction of building for ILDR. Such an 
important Institution like ILDR needs its own bu ilding with 
adequate infrastructure facilities to carry out its activities. The 
Committee hopes the Department will take the issue seriously so that 
ILDR has its own building during this year. (Para 5.9, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
8.1. With a view to acquire  land and adequate infrastructure facilities 
for the ILDR, the Hon‟ble Minister of Law and Justice has written to the 
Hon‟ble Minister of Urban Development requesting to initiate urgent 
measures to get the land allotted in and around Shastri Bhavan and 
Parliament House for the Institute. 
 

 
Committee’s further observation 
8.2. The Committee desires that the Ministry should pursue the 
matter earnestly with the Ministry of Urban Development. 
Department of Justice 
VACANCIES IN SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
Recommendation/observation 
9. An appraisal of the vacancy position of Judges in both 
Supreme Court and High Courts as provided by the Department is 
disheartening. One major factor affecting this vacancies appear to be 
the procedure of appointment and the curren t proactive of the 
collegiums system also raises apprehensions. The Committee, 
therefore, is of the view that the whole system of appointment of 
judges calls for a review and rehaul. It is of the firm belief that once 
the process of appointment is set righ t, other related issues, such as 
court amanagement and pendency of cases will fall in place. The 
Department is, accordingly, exhorted to take efficacious steps in the 
domain.  (Para 6.71, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
9.1. The proposal for setting up of Nationa l Judicial Commission has 
been on the anvil since 1990. But despite the recommendations of various 
Commissions including the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, 
the proposal has not reached a logical conclusion. The Constitution 
(Amendment) Bills mov ed in 1990 as well as 2003 lapsed on both the 
occasions due to dissolution of the House. 
9.1.1.  Currently, appointment of Judges to High Courts and Supreme 
Courts is based on Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges 
of Supreme Court prepared in 1 998. Representations have been made by 
various agencies and expert bodies to review / change the present 
procedure of appointment of judges. It is generally felt that this Procedure 
is not balanced and is one sided. It has at times been criticised also for  
lack of transparency and accountability. However, the proposal to setup a 
National Judicial Commission has not yet reached a conclusive stage. 
 
 

 
Committee’s further observation 
9.2. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by Department 
of Justice highlighting the steps taken by the Government and the 
Judiciary to review pendency in the High Courts. The Committee would 
like to request the Ministry to furnish the latest details i.e. the up to date 
information about the pendency position in the High C ourts so as to 
enable the Committee to know the trends in the pendency of cases . 
9.2.1.  It is evident from the reply furnished by the Department of 
Justice that major cause of pendency of cases in the High Courts is the 
large number of vacancies in the H igh Courts. According to the reply, 
the pendency position of cases in the higher judiciary has not improved 
because of this. They have also expressed their inability that due to the 
existing procedure of appointment of Judges of Supreme Court and 
High Courts, the posts remain vacant for want of adequate number of 
proposals from the judiciary to fill them. The Government had, 
however, reminded the Chief Justice of High Courts to initiate 
proposals well in time. The Committee understands the helplessness of 
the Ministry in filling up of the vacancies in the High Courts and 
Supreme Court. The root cause of the present situation is the 
appointment of Judges in post 1998 period. In its ear lier reports, the 
Committee has  impressed upon the Government to bring out a 
comprehensive legislation which also addresses the issue of 

 
appointment of Judges. The Committee would like to draw the attention 
of the Government towards its recommendations contained in its 21 st 
Report on The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005, 28 th Report on the Supreme 
Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008, 44 th Report on 
Constitution (114th Amendment) Bill, 2010, and 47 th Report on Judicial 
Standard and Accountability Bill, 2010, wherein it has strongly 
recommended for change of the present procedu re for appointment of 
Judges of higher judiciary. 
9.2.2.  The Committee reiterates its view in the matter and impresses 
upon Government that review of the procedure of appointment of 
judges be fast-tracked. 
Recommendation/observation 
10. While deliberating on the vacancies in the higher judiciary and 
the long time taken in the disposal of cases pending before the courts, 
the Committee pointed out the feasibility of having an All India 
Judicial Service. In response, the Secretary, Department of Justice 
informed the Committee that a proposal is presently under 
Government‘s consideration and is in the channel for consideration 
by the Committee of Secretaries.  (Para 6.72, Ibid) 
10.1. The Committee feels that there is a shortage of judges at all 
levels, be it in  the higher judiciary or in the subordinate courts and 
this is one of the major factors for delay in the adjudication of cases. 
Shortage of judges is also a major constraint for setting up of new 
courts. The Committee appreciates and welcomes idea of havin g in 
place an All India Judicial Service but, in case, certain States have 
issues in this proposal, the Committee feels that the Central 
Government can at least make a beginning by holding an 
examination for recruiting judges at the all India level coverin g 
States that agree to participate or accept candidates selected on the 

 
basis of the said recruitment. The Committee feels such a move 
would ensure an all time availability of qualified and deserving 
candidates for appointment in subordinate courts.  (Para 6.73, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
10.2. The proposal to create an All India Judicial Service has been a 
subject matter of debate and discussion for long. The proposal has been 
on the Statute Book since 1977 when the Constitution of India was 
amended to make a provision in this regard in Article 312. Since then, 
despite several recommendations of various Commissions and 
Conferences, the idea has not been pursued actively. The chief reason has 
been the want of consensus amongst the States and the High Courts. A  
proposal was prepared in this regard in 2010 for consideration by the 
Cabinet. However, it was returned with the advice that it should be first 
considered by the Committee of Secretaries (COS). Accordingly, a 
proposal was placed before the COS. It was con sidered by them on 
20.06.2012. The COS made certain observations which have been 
examined in the Department. The note for COS was revised and the 
proposal was considered and approved in the meeting of COS held on 
5.11.2012.  
10.2.1.  As provided in Article  312(3) of the Constitution, recruitment to 
the position of „District Judge‟ will be made through All India Judicial 
Service. The minimum educational qualification for direct recruits shall 
be graduate degree in Law with minimum experience of 3 years 
professional practice in a court of law after enrollment/registration as an 
advocate. The selected candidates will go through 3 years‟ training before 
their appointment as District Judges, including foundation training at the 
National/State Judicial Academies a nd on -the-job training. Since a 
student normally graduates in law only at the age of 23 -24 years, the 
minimum age for recruitment may be kept at 28 years. In that case, 
maximum age for recruitment would be 35 years. The Attorney General 
of India was consul ted on this issue and he has fully endorsed the range 
of 28-35 years for making recruitment to the service. Therefore, the age 
limit for recruitment to AIJS has been kept between 28 and 35 years. In 
this age bracket, persons desirous of joinng AIJS will ge t a minimum of 
three (3) attempts as in the case of All India Services. The recruitment is 
proposed to be made through a National Judicial Service Commission to 
be set-up and 25% of the positions of District Judges are proposed to be 
filled-up through AIJS. 
Committee’s further observation 

 
10.3.  The Committee notes the stand of Government and the view of 
Attorney General on the issue of setting up of AIJS. The Committee 
recommends the Government to proceed further in the matter. 
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
Recommendation/observation 
11. The Committee is not in agreement with the Ministry and the 
opinion of the Chief Justice of India as well. The Committee feels that 
unwillingness regarding establishment of the other Benches of the 
Supreme Court cannot be justifie d on the grounds that it would 
attract a cumbersome process of constitutional amendment. The 
Committee also feels that such an amendment is the need of the hour 
and would prove to be a step in the right direction to make the 
Higher Courts accessible to all  the regions of the country. The 
Committee feels that the Constitution of India is a living document 
and has enough scope to accommodate the demands arising out in a 
changed milieu in view of the provisions under Article 130 that read- 
―The Supreme Court sits in Delhi. It can, however, meet in any other 
place or places as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the 
President.‖ (Para 7.2, ibid) 
11.1. The Committee, therefore, reiterates the need for 
establishment of Benches of the Supreme Court as it wou ld be of 
immense help to the poor who cannot afford to travel from their 
native places to Delhi. (Para7.3, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
11.2. According to the Article 130 of the Constitution, the Supreme 
Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or place s as the Chief 
Justice of India may, With the approval of the President, from time to 
time, appoint. 
11.2.1.  The matter regarding setting up of a Benches of the Supreme 
Court outside Delhi has been taken up with the Chief Justice of India on 
several occasions in the past. The successive Chief Justice have, however, 
been consistently opposed to the setting up of a Bench of the Supreme 
Court outside Delhi. 

 
11.2.2.  In addition to the justifications already brought the Committee on 
earlier occasions, it may a lso be mentioned that, unlike the High Courts 
which can be easily identified with the regions or States where they 
located, the Supreme Courts of India represents National Symbol. It is the 
single Court identified with the country. It is a unifying force w here 
regionalism of other divisive element has no role to play. Having a 
Permanent Bench of the Court in other part could easily disturb this and 
lead to various divisive elements creeping into the system. It could impair 
the unity and the integrity of the Court and undermine its importance. 
Committee’s further observation 
11.3. The reply of the Department is not convincing and, therefore, the 
Committee reiterates its view of the setting up of Benches in different 
part of the Country. 
PENDENCY OF CASES 
Recommendation/observation 
12. The Committee expresses its serious concerns over the huge 
pendency of cases in Higher Courts. Taking into account the reasons 
cited by the Registrar, Supreme Court in this regard, the Committee 
feels that the problem is not bein g addressed seriously and 
wholehearted efforts are yet to be made to deal with the problem. 
The Committee is of the view that both Executive and Judiciary 
should work in tandem to deal with the adversities arising out of 
mounting pendency. As far as the ne ed of more judges is concerned, 
the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the 
vacancies of judges in the High Court should be expeditiously filled 
up. The Government should vigorously pursue the matter with the 
Chief Justice of the High Courts for necessary actions. (Para 7.9, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
12.1. The Government of India undertook a pendency reduction drive 
from 1st July, 2011 to 31st December, 2011. The Chief Justice of the High 
Courts were inter-alia requested to initiate in campaign mode clearance of 
long pending cases, petty cases, cases relating to marginalised groups and 
undertrails under prolonged incarceration. All the High Courts 
participated in this endeavour of the Government whole -heatedly. As a 
result of the pendency re duction drive, overall pendency of cases in all 
Courts has declined by over 6 lakhs in December, 2011 as compared to 
the pendency position in December, 2010. 

 
12.1.1.  However due to large number of vacancies in High Courts, the 
pendency position of cases in Higher Judiciary has not yet improved. The 
Government has launched a similar drives for pendency reduction this 
year as well from July, 2012 to December, 2012 with the focus on 
making our judicial systems free of five plus cases.  
12.1.2.  The appointment of Judges to higher judiciary is made under the 
Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges of the Supreme 
Court and High Courts. This is based on Supreme Court Judgement dated 
6th October, 1993 in the case of the Supreme Court Advocates on Record 
and others Vs. Union of India and others and their Advisory opinion 
dated 28 th October, 1998. In this arrangement, posts have remained 
vacant for want of adequate number of proposals from the Judiciary to fill 
them. The Government has been periodically rem inding the Chief 
Justices of the High Courts to initiate proposals well in time for filling the 
existing vacancies as well as the vacancies anticipated in next sixth 
months in the High Courts.  
Committee’s further observation 
12.2. The Committee finds the action taken by the Government for 
tackling the problem of pendency of large number of cases in the 
Courts to be highly insufficient. The unusual delay in the disposal of 
cases is leading to an imbalance  in our society in the sense that people 
are becoming less and less  fearful in violating the laws as convictions, 
etc. arrive too late.   In Committee's view for prompt and timely disposal 
of cases bot h in civil and criminal is sine qua non for an orderly and  
law abiding society and, therefore, the Governm ent should take all 
possible steps to have adequate infrastructure for not only clearing the 
backlog but also for disposal of cases on an ongoing basis. In 
Committee considered opinion , Government should take this up in a 
time bound manner and also give necessary support to the States so that 
they are also able to clear their back logs. 

 
CHAPTER - IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
Department Of Legal Affairs 
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA 
Recommendation/observation 
1. The Committee takes cognizance of the programmes the BCI 
proposes to take up in 2012-13. It, however, fails to comprehend as to 
why the actual requirement was not preferred to the Ministry of Law 
and Justice for inclusion in the budgetary projections. During the 
meeting of the Committee, the representative of the Ministry had 
assured the BCI that the Ministry would support if the demands are 
made. Therefore, the Committee suggests that the BCI should prefer 
their actual fund requi rement to the Ministry so that the 
programmes envisaged by it are carried out in letter and spirit. 
Accordingly, a detailed demand for the purpose may be made at the 
RE stage. The Committee also wishes to point out that the Ministry 
has not assigned justif ications for the surrenders of Rs.4,11,900 in 
2009-10 and Rs,6,00,000 in 2011 -12 and desires that detail 
justifications for these surrenders may be made at the time of 
furnishing Action Taken Replies. (Para- 4.30, ibid)   
Action Taken Reply 
1.1. As regards  justification for surrender of grant allocated to BCI, 
during the financial year 2009 -10, although a budgetary provision of Rs. 
6 lakhs as grant-in-aid to BCI was made, it is submitted that a sum of Rs. 
1,88,100/- could only be released in March 2010 sinc e as per the 
instructions of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) only 
33% of the total budgetary provision could be released during the last 
quarter after imposing the stipulated mandatory cut of 5%.  
1.1.1. As regards justification for sur render of grant allocated to BCI, 
during the financial year 2011 -12, although a budgetary provision of Rs. 
6 lakhs as grant -in-aid to BCI was made, it is submitted that no amount 
could be released during that financial year since the earlier grant -in-aid 
of Rs. 6 lakhs released to BCI during the financial year 2010-11 remained 
unspent.    

 
Committee’s further observation 
1.2. The Committee is not happy with the casual approach of the 
Ministry in the matter. The Committee views that logistic harmony is 
wanting between the Ministry and the BCI. The Committee, 
accordingly, urges that the BCI should ensure timely utilization and 
prompt submission of UCs for the yearly grant -in-aid of the 
Government. The Department should take adequate steps to plug this 
gap by ti mely release of funds to the BCI. It further hopes that the 
Department will strive to work in tandem with the organs funded by it 
so as to achieve maximum harvest out of its schemes/projects. 
Department Of Justice 
Recommendation/observation 
2. It has also been observed that there exists vast disparity in the 
pattern of fund release. The Committee appreciates that the 
requirement of the States are not the same. However, the Committee 
is of the view that a fact -finding exercise is needed to assess the scope 
and extent of infrastructural enhancement in States. Accordingly, it 
recommends that the Ministry should explore ways of carrying out 
such an exercise. Furthermore, the Committee desires that those 
States/UTs who have not made proposals for infrastructural 
development of the subordinate Courts in their state/UT, such as, 
Bihar, Punjab, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep may be pursued and 
encouraged to avail the Scheme.  (Para 6.15, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
2.1. Based on the requirement of infrastructure needs proj ected by the 
High Courts, an assessment has been made in 2011. This has revealed 
that funds to the tune of Rs. 7346 crores would be needed. Of this, the 
Centre Share comes to Rs. 5510 crore, based on revised sharing pattern.  

 
2.1.1.  Funds are released to State Governments/ UTs as per following 
criteria.  
a) Requirement of funds projected by the respective High 
Courts for 2010-11 
b) Requirement of fund for the current year and 
c) Utilization of funds previously given to States/UTs 
2.1.2.  The matter of deve lopment of infrastructure of the subordinate 
courts is being regularly reviewed in the Supreme Court in the 
Interlocutory Application No.279/2010 in Writ Petition (C) 
No.1022/1989 in All India Judges „Association & Ors. Vs. Union of India 
& Ors. A monitoring mechanism has already been set up by formation of 
monitoring committees at Central, State and District level. 
2.1.3.  Funds to the tune of Rs. 38.17 crore have already been released to 
the State of Punjab during the current financial year. The proposal for 
release of funds to the State of Bihar is under process. The infrastructure 
required for subordinate judiciary in UTs is also being met by central 
government. 
Committee’s further observation 
2.2. The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee de sires 
the Department to supply in detail  the nature of assistance provided by 
the Central Government to meet the infrastructure needs for the 
judiciary.  
Recommendation/observation 
3. The Committee is given to understand through the Outcome 
Budget (2012-13) of the Ministry that no timeline has been fixed for 
the implementation of this Scheme. It is, however, of the view that it 
is pertinent to impose timeline in the Action Plan on certain aspects 
of the Scheme, such as, setting up of Project Management Uni ts, 
consultation with stakeholders or proposed studies on the various 
aspects of the judicial reforms. The Committee feels that the 
experience with many Schemes launched by the Government face set-
backs after its implementation for two or three years due t o absence 
of a strict timeline and ends up clogged in logjams of non -receipt of 
UCs and thereafter leading to unutilized funds. The same has been 
the case with the schemes of setting up of Family Courts, Gram 

 
Nyayalayas and the projects under the Centrally  Sponsored Scheme. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that clear targets and 
timelines may be drawn and very close monitoring and regular 
appraisal should be made to ensure the successful implementation of 
the Scheme.  (Para 6.25, Ibid)  
Action Taken Reply 
3.1. Timelines for implementation of various strategic initiatives of 
National Mission have been drawn and approved by the Advisory 
Council of the National Mission in its meeting held on 15 -5-2012. The 
progress of the same would be monitored by the Advisory Council during 
its periodic meetings.  
3.1.1.  In order to overcome the problem faced in respect of Gram 
Nyayalayas scheme, a proposal for making Gram Nyayalayas Scheme a 
sub-component of the infrastructure development scheme of Subordinate 
judiciary has been prepared & forwarded to Department of Expenditure 
and Planning Commission for comments/views before obtaining the 
approval of the Central Government.  
3.1.2.  With the revised sharing pattern and higher budgetary allocations, 
utilization of funds u nder Centrally Sponsored Scheme of infrastructure 
development for subordinate judiciary has considerably improved.  
Committee’s further observation 
3.2. The Committee takes note of the work of the Department of 
Justice. However, the Committee desires to kn ow the parameters and 
evaluation methodology employed to measure the level of improvement. 
The Committee also desires to have the progress made so far in the 
Gram Nyayalaya Scheme proposed by the Department and also updates 
on the progress of the strategies taken up by the Advisory Council. 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECT:  ACCESS TO JUSTICE FOR 
THE MARGINALIZED IN INDIA 
Recommendation/observation 
4. The Committee appreciates the approach of the A2J Project 
which has focused in empowerment of people through traini ng para 

 
legal workers of the community and creating the much needed 
linkage between Legal Services Authorities and Civil Society 
Organisations. The Committee, is however, constrained to point out 
that throughout the five years of the 11th Five Year Plan, t he 
Ministry has not been able to exhaust the allocations earmarked each 
year for the project. This is indication that the Government has a lot 
of scope for implementation of the project still left and therefore, 
should take concerted efforts in expanding i ts area and scope of 
operation when initiating the proposed new phase of the scheme to 
commence from 2013. The Committee desires that the details of the 
on-going project as well as plan of action for the proposed new phase 
of the project may be furnished to it at the time of furnishing ATRs. 
  (Para 6.39, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
4.1. Although the UNDP supported project on Access to Justice for 
marginalized people was slated to start in October 2008, it actually 
commenced in May 2009. It also took a longtim e to get other 
stakeholders, especially the Legal Services Authorities and the Judicial 
Academies on board. Moreover, the UNDP reduced its funding from US 
$ 5 million to US $ 3.8 million in 2010. Hence the project could not 
exhaust allocations earmarked for each year of the 11th Plan.  
4.1.1. Nevertheless, the Project has been successful in building synergies 
with National and State Legal Services Authorities, judicial academies, 
other Ministries including HRD, MHA, and WCD to avoid duplication 
and maximize efforts. The result is that a first -ever assessment of Legal 
Services Authorities has been done, legal literacy modules have been 
integrated in National Literacy Mission‟s adult literacy programme 
(Sakshar Bharat), adolescent girls under the SABLA scheme of WCD 
have been trained as paralegals and training modules have been prepared 
for judges‟ training.  
4.1.2.  In so far as legal empowerment of the people is concerned, the 
project has reached out to 20,00,000 people through a range of innovative 
strategies and materials on laws related to women‟s rights, tribal 
communities and the poor. Over 7,000 legal aid lawyers, paralegals, 
elected women representatives and representatives from various non -
government organizations and self-help groups have been trained to assist 
marginalized people access justice. 
4.1.3. This phase of the Project would end in December 2012. US $ 1.2 
million has been allocated for this year‟s activities, of which US $ 
748,077 was meant for supporting on -going project activities and US $ 

 
451,923 to be utilized to plan new activities. Some of the planned 
activities this year include training 60 lawyers in the 3 States of 
Jharkhand, Odisha and Chhattisgarh as local skill pool to assist 
marginalized communities; creating a judges‟ training mo dule on anti -
trafficking; digitizing simplified legal information that can be uploaded 
on voice based kiosks to enhance legal awareness of marginalized 
communities; creating a legal awareness film; and supporting action 
research. 
4.1.4.  The details for th e project for the period 2013 -17 are under 
finalization. The final approval should be available by early 2013 for the 
full Project. 
4.1.5.  In addition to this Project, the Government has decided on its own 
to undertake a similar project in the eight North  Eastern States (including 
Sikkim) and in Jammu & Kashmir. The proposed “Access to Justice –NE 
and J&K” (A2J -NEJK) project seeks to address the needs of ordinary 
people, particularly, those who are poor and vulnerable and who are not 
strong enough to ensure that their rights are guaranteed. It would support 
justice delivery systems in improving their capacities to serve the people 
and in empower the ordinary people to demand improved services and 
access to their rights and entitlements. 
4.1.6. The A2J -NEJK project will be implemented between 2012 and 
2017, i.e. during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period. Total of Rs. 30 
crores have been earmarked for the Project for five years. The proposed 
project would seek to replicate – with necessary adaptation, activitie s 
presumed under the previous A2J project through in a different context. 
Beginning with a needs assessment study, the A2J -NEJK project will 
focus on legal empowerment of the people and seek to build convergence 
with existing activities of Legal Services A uthorities, Government 
Departments and Commissions. However, some new elements such as 
community policing, assisting under-trial prisoners and strengthening law 
school based legal aid clinics, are being concerned and would be 
introduced. The project has be en approved by the SFC and process to 
appoint consultants has been initiated. 
Committee’s further observation 
4.2. As The A2J project is mainly intended for the marginalized 
sections, the Committee desires to know the sections  that  are benefitted 
from the project annually,  the detail of mechanism through which  it 

 
reaches  to beneficiaries, the impact of project on beneficiaries, section-
wise, year wise,  state wise,  major issues and problems faced by the 
Department as well as the States in their implem entation of the project. 
The Committee also also desires to have  an action plan for 2013 -14 
and also for the remaining years of 12th plan. 
Recommendation/observation  
5. The Committee appreciates the ingenious scheme of e -Courts 
and is optimistic that it will help in more efficient management of 
subordinate courts, reduction in pending cases and increasing the 
speed of justice delivery processes. The Committee is however, 
constrained to point out that the expenditure of the Ministry in 2008 -
09 and 2011 -12 were way below the allocation projected. It is of the 
view that under utilization of funds are indicative of not achieving 
targets. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should fix timelines and targets for the States while releasing the 
funds which would also play parameter for assessing their progress 
in implementation of the scheme.  (Para 6.45, ibid) 
Action Taken Reply 
5.1. Under the e -Courts Mission More Project (MMP), 14,249 district 
& subordinate courts are to be computerised by Marc h 2014. To initiate 
the computerisation of any district & subordinate court under the project, 
the readiness of the site at the court by way of preparation of a „Judicial 
Service Centre‟ (JSC) and a „Computer Server Room‟ (CSR) at a Court 
Complex along with the necessary civil and electrical works in the court 
rooms, is undertaken by the respective High Court for all the Courts 
under its jurisdiction. NIC provides the funds to the High Courts for site -
readiness on demand. Thereafter, the High Court engages a site 
preparation agency for getting the sites prepared thereafter. In majority of 
the States, the agency is the State PWD. Once the site is ready, the High 
Court intimates it to NIC. 
5.1.1. After receiving site readiness confirmation report from the High  
Court, NIC issues purchase orders for delivery and installation of the ICT 
equipments to its centrally empanelled vendors. The funds are disbursed 
to vendors in three stages: after delivery, after installation & after the 
work completion sign-off has been provided by the High Court.  

 
Under Utilisation of funds in 2011-12: 
5.1.2. The funds are earmarked for various project components such as 
creation of computer room, ICT training for judges and court staff, 
computer hardware, LAN, WAN connectivity, power b ackup, video 
conferencing, development of application software, data entry etc. The 
status of eCourt project in respect of each of these components is given in 
Annexure - III. 
5.1.3. The under-utilisation of funds in the last financial year has been on 
account of several difficulties faced in the implementation of the project. 
Out of 12,000 courts to be computerised by March 2012, a total of 9,634 
courts could be computerised. This is primarily because of the non 
availability of vendors for almost 6 months,  as well as, the delays by the 
vendors in meeting timelines committed by them. Moreover, finding 
suitable vendor who can ensure implementation at the taluka level, has 
been a challenge. The delay in site readiness thus continues to be a 
bottleneck. 
Timelines and targets for future: 
5.1.4. As on 31st December 2012, 11,810 courts have been computerised. 
The remaining 2,439 courts would be required to be computerised by 
March 2014. NIC has targeted to complete hardware installation in 
12,908 Courts by March 2013.  
5.1.5. To achieve the computerisation target within this financial year, 
DoJ has initiated monthly target setting and periodic reviews with the 
High Courts‟ Central Project Coordinators (CPC), state vendors and NIC, 
to monitor the Progress. These monthly targets are fixed on assessing the 
status of site readiness and the purchase orders issued for Hardware & 
Local Area Network (LAN) installation in consultation with NIC, 
Vendors and the Central Project Coordinators of the High Courts. Due to 
this there has been an improvement in the pace of implementation of the 
project and utilisation of funds. The month wise targets till March, 2013 
are given in a statement at Annexure - IV. 
5.1.6. In addition, a „Conference of all High Courts CPCs and NIC Co -
ordinators‟ is held periodically for review of project progress and resolve 
issues holding back the project completion . High Courts have been 
requested to have weekly follow -ups with the vendors to resolve issues 
and expedite the computerisation so that the targe ts set are achieved in a 
time bound manner.  
5.1.7. The eCommittee of the Supreme Court also convenes meetings of 
the Chairpersons of the Computer Committee of the High Courts for 

 
apprising them on the progress of the Project and discussing bottlenecks 
in implementation in each High Court.  
Committee’s further observation 
5.2. The under utilisation of funds is a serious issue and the 
Committee desires that in future the Department would  sort -out the 
issue as soon as possible. The Committee also desires to know the status 
of e -Courts established and the major challenges faced by the 
Department in running the e-Courts.  
Recommendation/observation 
6. It has also been observed that the BE (2012 -13) of Rs. 233.66 
crore has been pegged which is near two times hig her than the 
amount of RE (2011 -12) of Rs. 115 Crore. Mention may be made 
here that only roughly two -third of the RE (2011 -12) has been 
utilized. In that backdrop, the Committee is apprehensive as to 
whether the Department has the capacity to utilize the a llocation of 
Rs. 233.66 crore in 2012 -13. It, therefore, recommends that a clear 
timeline and target may be fixed and the progress of implementation 
should closely monitored so as to avoid time and cost overrun.             
   (Para 6.46, ibid)  
Action Taken Reply 
6.1. As already stated in response to recommendation number 6.45 
above, monthly targets have been fixed for each High Court till March 
2013 and a roadmap has been prepared for completion of the project by 
March 2014.  
6.1.1. Out of the allocated Rs. 233.66 Cr for the FY 2012-13, only Rs. 89. 
38 Cr has been allocated in the R.E. stage of the Project after a thorough 
exercise of fixing realistic targets for implementation of State I of the 
Project. Of the budgeted Rs. 233.66 Cr, Rs. 75 Cr had been earmarked for 
Stage-II of the project. For finalising the Stage-II of Project, consultations 
are being done with eCommittee, NIC and other stakeholders on the areas 
where the project is required to be expanded. This exercise is likely to be 
completed only after March 2013. Accordingly, the R.E. for FY 2012 -13 
has been commensurately reduced. 

 
6.1.2. Various additional measures are being taken up to monitor the 
implementation of the Project by various stakeholders to avoid time and 
cost overruns. Empowered Comm ittee, chaired by Secretary (Justice) 
which has representation from DeitY, Planning Commission, Department 
of Expenditure, Finance Ministry and NIC, gives strategic direction to the 
project as and when needed. Monthly review meetings are convened to 
monitor the Progress of the project. Weekly meetings are convened by 
NIC with the Vendors. eCommittee of Supreme Court holds meetings of 
Chairpersons of Computer Committees of the High Courts to discuss 
bottlenecks and to address them.  
6.1.3. In view of the abo ve, actions suggested by the Department related 
Parliament Standing Committee for completing the Project by March 
2014 are being taken. 
Committee’s further observation 
6.2. The Committee reiterates its views and desires the Department to 
supply information  on various additional measures taken to monitor 
the implementation of the project to avoid time and cost overruns. 
GRAM NYAYALAYA 
Recommendation/observation 
7. The Committee expresses its disappointment that in almost 
three years of the implementation of the Act, only 151 Gram 
Nyayalayas are operational. The Committee is of the firm belief that 
setting up of Gram Nyayalayas is the answer to providing access to 
justice to citizens at their door steps. Therefore, it recommends that 
the Ministry should take a ll-out efforts to root out the hindrances 
affecting their setting up by States. The Committee is given to 
understand that some States have requested for higher central 
assistance. It therefore, feels that the Ministry should explore the 
plausibility of enh ancing the central assistance for setting up of 
Gram Nyayalayas.  (Para 6.51, ibid) 
7.1. Furthermore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should 
make a serious consideration of the drawbacks and challenges in the 
setting of Gram Nyayalayas as stated by  the Secretary (Justice). 
Accordingly, feasibility of enhancement of funds may be explored so 
that the States may augment the requisite infrastructure.           
   (Para 6.52, ibid) 

 
Action Taken Reply 
7.2. A proposal for making Gram Nyayalayas Scheme a su bcomponent 
of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for infrastructure development of 
subordinate judiciary, has been prepared & forwarded to Department of 
Expenditure and Planning Commission for seeking their 
Comments/views on the matter before it is submitted f or approval of the 
Government. The proposal contains  following modifications to the 
Scheme.  
i. The States could be permitted to construct the court premises 
for Gram Nyayalaya under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
for Infrastructure Development of Subordinate  Judiciary on 
75:25 sharing basis for States other than NE Region States 
and on 90:10 sharing basis for North Eastern Region States. 
ii. Recurring Central assistance should be enhanced to Rs. 
10.00 lakh per Gram Nyayalaya per annum for initial period 
of five y ears which could be provided as Non – Plan 
assistance. The balance will be met by the State 
Government. Recurring expenditure beyond five years for 
Gram Nyayalayas, shall be fully borne by the State 
Governments. 
iii. One time Non – Plan assistance of Rs. 7.5 lakh for vehicle of 
SUV category per Gram Nyayalaya. 
Committee’s further observation 
7.3. The Committee notes the reply and desires the Department to 
provide in details the status of the proposal and the bottlenecks it faces. 

 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF  
THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
1. The Committee notes the reply. (para 1.2, 2.2, 3.2) 
2. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the matter should 
be pursued with the remaining States and Union Territories on regular 
basis so that the bill is presented to Parliament at the earliest. (para 4.2) 
3. The Committee notes the reply of the Commission. (para 5.2) 
4. The Committee notes the reply. (para 6.2) 
5. The Committee desires that it may be appraised of activities and 
outcomes of the core Committee. (para 7.2) 
6. The committee notes the reply. (para 8.2) 
7. The Committee notes the reply of the Department of Legal Affairs . 
(para 9.2) 
8. The Committee notes the reply. (para 10.2, 11.2) 
9. The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The 
Committee feels t hat delay in receipt of UCs in effect amounts to 
slowing down of activity which is not at all desirable. The Committee 
therefore, recommends that Government should take adequate steps to 
ensure that the UCs, do not go in arrears. (para 12.2) 
10. The Committee notes the reply. (para 13.2) 
11. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Department and 
desires that the Action Research Studies for policy initiatives and 
judicial reforms measures may be assigned to some other reputed 
institutes also. (para 14.2) 
12. The Committee notes the reply. (paras 15.2, 16.2, 17.2, 18.2, 19.2) 
 
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
1. The Committee notes the reply and further  desires that the 
Commission will provide in detail the total expenses on the heads of 

 
training and honorarium payment to consultants and observers. While 
taking note of the reply of the Commission with regard to verification of 
complaints filed under Mode l Code of Conduct, the Committee desires 
that under no circumstances should there be delay in the verification of 
such cases which could result in delaying candidates decisions of filing 
nomination to do in time. (para 1.2) 
3. The Committee notes the reply. (para 2.2) 
2. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that 
financial aspects of EPIC coverage have not been touched upon by the 
Commission in their ATR. The Committee presumes that funds are not 
a constraint in the EPIC coverage. This being so , the Committee, 
reiterates its recommendation to actually have in place 100% EPIC 
courage. (para 3.2) 
2. The Committee notes the reply. However, the EVMs being an 
issue of immense importance in the working of Indian democracy in a 
smooth and transparent manner the question of its tamper ability leaves 
doubt in the minds of both electors and the elected. Along with this, the 
various cases of EVMs malfunctioning during the polling stations need 
to be addressed seriously. The Committee hopes that these aspect s 
would receive adequate attention of Government. (para 4.2) 
4. The Committee notes the direction issued by ITAT to its 
Branches. The Committee is, however, is of the considered view that 
timely filling up of vacancies of Members in ITAT will go in long wa y 
in having a positive impact on reduction of pendency. The Committee 
therefore, urges ITAT to initiate the process of filling up of anticipated 
vacancies much ahead of the actual retirement of a Member so as to 
ensure that no gap arises between the time o f retirement and filling up 
of the vacancy caused by retirement. (para 5.2) 
5. The Committee’s views in the matter has been reflected in its 
observation vide Para 1.4 above. (para 6.2) 
6. The Committee notes the reply. (para 7.2) 
7. The Committee notes the  reply and desires that details of the 
monitoring system for ensuring effective implementation of 
schemes/projects by the State Legal Services Authorities be furnished to 
the Committee. (para 8.2) 
8. The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry an d solicits 
that appropriate steps be taken by the Ministry and the Bar Council of 
India to revive the Directorate. (para 9.2) 

 
9. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires that the 
response of the BCI in the matter may be furnished to it for  its 
consideration. (para 10.2) 
10. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the efforts shall be 
made by the Ministry in the right earnest. (para 11.2) 
11. The Committee notes the position as regards translating the 
Bills/Acts in regional languages. However, the Committee feels that the 
Ministry should take the translation work in maximum number of 
languages included in the VIII Schedule of the Constitution.   (para 
12.2) 
 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT 
OF WHICH COMMITTEE HAS NO T ACCEPTED 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
1. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Commission 
may furnish the detail break -up of the expenses of the training 
programmes for Indian and foreign officials. It desires that the 
proposed sub -heads for IIID EM and Grant -in-Aid General be clearly 
reflected in subsequent Demands for Grants. (para 1.3) 
2. The Committee reiterates its observation made on Paras 3.6 and 
3.10 by stating that sub -heads be reflected for each allocation in 
subsequent Demands for Grants. (para 2.2) 
3. The Committee takes note of the replies submitted by the Ministry 
of Law and Justice in respect of its recommendations contained in 
paras 3.16 to 3.19. The thrust of Committee's recommendations are that 
the recommendations of the All Party Committee on Electoral Reforms, 
which submitted its report in May, 1990, on the issue of Model Code of 
Conduct, may be taken into consideration as a part of the thorough 
review of the model code of conduct. The All Party Committee 
categorically pleaded for statutory back up for Model Code of Conduct 
more than 20 years back. The Committee notes  the plea of Election 
Commission  that since no statute covering the issues in respect of these 
reforms has been framed for ensuring that  the Commission  conducts 
free and fair elections in the country, the Commission is issuing only 
the need based instructions / directions regulating the conduct of 
elections under Article 324 of the Constitution. The Commission, 

 
recently, rationalized the Model Code of Conduct in 201 2 while 
conducting the parliamentary by elections and the elections of 
legislative assemblies of some States. (para 5.2) 
4. The Committee is constrained to note that such a statutory back 
up is yet to come. The Committee desires to know what action has bee n 
taken by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee directs the Ministry 
to furnish details of action taken by them. The Committee impresses 
upon the Government to initiate the process for legislation giving 
statutory back up to the Model Code of Conduct, and inform the 
Committee, accordingly. (para 5.2.1) 
5. After going through the reply submitted by the Department of 
Legal Affairs, the Committee feels that the entire issue of releasing 
funds to the ICPS by the Ministry till 2011 -12 is no longer relevant  at 
this stage. The Committee observes that both the Ministry and the ICPS 
could not make a beginning till the land was available to them i.e. by 
25th April, 2012.  The Ministry of Urban Development has now 
cancelled the allotment of land and the Ministry of Law resultantly has 
come back to the situation where it was 40 years ago.  The entire 
episode of constructing a building for the ICPS turned out to be a 
fiasco and it is certainly a reflection on the part of Government 
functioning.  The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the entire 
issue and now again impress upon Government to identify a suitable 
plot for the ICPS for constructing the building for itself. (para 6.2) 
6. The Committee is constrained to note that only Rs. 5 lac out of 
the budget allocation of Rs. 1.10 crore could be released and just a 
quarter of the year is left. The Committee considers this as an utter 
violation of the basic rule of the budgetary expenditure  management. 
Moreover, the Department of Legal Affairs did not come wit h the 
reasons explaining for such a poor release of funds. The Committee 
expects that in such a situation, Department of Legal Affairs should 
have explained to the Committee the constraints it faced in making the 
adequate funds available to ILI or whether the ILI did not come out 
with the requisite proposals or delayed/ non -submission of utilization 
certificates by the institute.. The Committee, accordingly, directs the 
Department of Legal Affairs to submit a detailed note of this issue 
before the Committee  considers budgetary proposals for the year 
2013-14. (para 7.2) 
7. The Committee desires that the Ministry should pursue the 
matter earnestly with the Ministry of Urban Development. (para 8.2) 

 
8. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by Departmen t 
of Justice highlighting the steps taken by the Government and the 
Judiciary to review pendency in the High Courts. The Committee would 
like to request  the Ministry to furnish the latest details i.e. the up to 
date information about the pendency position  in the High Courts so as 
to enable the Committee to know the trends in the pendency of cases . 
(para 9.2) 
9. It is evident from the reply furnished by the Department of 
Justice that major cause of pendency of cases in the High Courts is the 
large number of  vacancies in the High Courts. According to the reply, 
the pendency position of cases in the higher judiciary has not improved 
because of this. They have also expressed their inability that due to the 
existing procedure of appointment of Judges of Supreme Court and 
High Courts, the posts remain vacant for want of adequate number of 
proposals from the judiciary to fill them. The Government had, 
however, reminded the Chief Justice of High Courts to initiate 
proposals well in time. The Committee understands th e helplessness of 
the Ministry in filling up of the vacancies in the High Courts and 
Supreme Court. The root cause of the present situation is the 
appointment of Judges in post 1998 period. In its ear lier reports, the 
Committee has  impressed upon the Gover nment to bring out a 
comprehensive legislation which also addresses the issue of 
appointment of Judges. The Committee would like to draw the attention 
of the Government towards its recommendations contained in its 21 st 
Report on The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2005, 28th Report on the Supreme 
Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008, 44 th Report on 
Constitution (114th Amendment) Bill, 2010, and 47 th Report on Judicial 
Standard and Accountability Bill, 2010, wherein it has strongly 
recommended for change of the present procedure for appointment of 
Judges of higher judiciary. (para 9.2.1) 
10. The Committee reiterates its view in the matter and impresses 
upon Government that review of the procedure of appointment of 
judges be fast-tracked. (para 9.2.2) 
11.  The Committee notes the stand of Government and the view of 
Attorney General on the issue of setting up of AIJS. The Committee 
recommends the Government to proceed further in the matter.  (para 
10.3) 
12. The reply of the Department is not convincing and, there fore, the 
Committee reiterates its view of the setting up of Benches in different 
parts of the Country. (para 11.3) 

 
13. The Committee finds the action taken by the Government for 
tackling the problem of pendency of large number of cases in the Court 
to be highly insufficient. The unusual delay in the disposal of cases is 
leading to an imbalance in our society in the sense is people are 
becoming less and less  fearful in violating the laws as convictions, etc. 
arrive too late.   In Committee's view for prompt and timely disposal of 
cases both in civil and criminal is sine qua non for an orderly and  law 
abiding society and, therefore, the Government should take all possible 
steps to have adequate infrastructure for not only clearing the backlog 
but also for d isposal of cases on an ongoing basis. In Committee  
considered opinion , Government should take this up in a time bound 
manner and also give necessary support to the States so that they are 
also able to clear their back logs. (para 12.2) 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
THE R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
1. The Committee is not happy with the casual approach of the 
Ministry in the matter. The Committee views that logistic harmony is 
wanting between the Mini stry and the BCI. The Committee, 
accordingly, urges that the BCI should ensure timely utilization and 
prompt submission of UCs for the yearly grant -in-aid of the 
Government. The Department should take adequate steps to plug this 
gap by timely release of fu nds to the BCI. It further hopes that the 
Department will strive to work in tandem with the organs funded by it 
so as to achieve maximum harvest out of its schemes/projects.  (para 
1.2) 
2. The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee desires 
the Department to supply in detail  the nature of assistance provided by 
the Central Government to meet the infrastr ucture needs for the 
judiciary. (para 2.2) 
3. The Committee takes note of the work of the Department of 
Justice. However, the Committee desires to  know the parameters and 
evaluation methodology employed to measure the level of improvement. 
The Committee also desires to have the progress made so far in the 
Gram Nyayalaya Scheme proposed by the Department and also updates 

 
on the progress of the strate gies taken up by the Advisory Council.  
(para 3.2) 
4. As The A2J project is mainly intended for the marginalized 
sections, the Committee desires to know the sections  that  are benefitted 
from the project annually,  the detail of mechanism through which  it  
reaches  to beneficiaries, the impact of project on beneficiaries, section-
wise, year wise,  state wise,  major issues and problems faced by the 
Department as well as the States in their implementation of the project. 
The Committee also also desires to ha ve  an action plan for 2013 -14 
and also for the remaining years of 12th plan. (para 4.2) 
5. The under utilisation of funds is a serious issue and the 
Committee desires that in future the Department would  sort -out the 
issue as soon as possible. The Committee also desires to know the status 
of e -Courts established and the major challenges faced by the 
Department in running the e-Courts. (para 5.2) 
6. The Committee reiterates its views and desires the Department to 
supply information on various additional mea sures taken to monitor 
the implementation of the project to avoid time and cost overruns. (para 
6.2) 
7. The Committee notes the reply and desires the Department to 
provide in details the status of the proposal and the bottleneck it faces.  
(para 7.3) 
- - - - - 
 
 