PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 46
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
FORTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE AND PROTECTION 
TO PERSONS MAKING THE DISCLOSURES BILL, 2010
TH 
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 9 JUNE, 2011)TH 
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 9 JUNE, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2011/SHRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2011/SHRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 10 , AUGUST, 2011)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11 , AUGUST, 2011)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 10 , AUGUST, 2011)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11 , AUGUST, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
FORTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE AND PROTECTION
TO PERSONS MAKING THE DISCLOSURES BILL, 2010
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 9 TH JUNE, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 10 TH AUGUST, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE  RAJYA SABHA ON 11 TH AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2011/SHRAV ANA, 1933 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-91

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—20
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES R ECORD OF D ISCUSSION  OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ...... 21—32
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 33 —106
A. The Public Interest Disclosure and Protection to persons making the
Disclosures Bill, 2010 ................................................................................................. 35—62
B. Comments of the Department of Personnel and Training on the views/
suggestions contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/
experts on the provisions of the Bill ........................................................................ 63—96
C. Reply furnished by the Department of Personnel and Training to the
Questionnaire forwarded by the Secretariat ............................................................ 97—105
D. Comments furnished by the Central Vigilance Commission on the Bill. ............ 106

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Amar Singh
8. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
9. Shri O.T. Lepcha
10. Vacant*
LOK SABHA
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
13. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Dr. Monazir Hassan
16. Shri Shailendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
18. Shri Bhajan Lal
19. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
20. Ms. Meenakshi Natarajan
21. Shri Devji M. Patel
22. Shri Harin Pathak
23. Shri Lalu Prasad
24. Shri S. Semmalai
25. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
26. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
27. Shri Manish Tewari
28. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
29. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
30. Vacant**
30. Vacant***
* V acancy caused due to death of Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy w.e.f. 7 th December, 2010.
** Vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Arjun Munda from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 26 th February, 2011.
*** Vacancy existing since the reconstitution of the Committee.
.
As on 7th March, 2011

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Forty Sixth Report on The Public Interest Disclosure and Protection to Persons Making
the Disclosures Bill, 2010. The Bill seeks to establish a mechanism to receive complaints relating to
disclosure on any allegation of  corruption or willful misuse of power or willful misuse of discretion
against any public servant and to inquire or cause an inquiry into such disclosure and to provide
adequate safeguards against victimization of the person making such complaint and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the
26th August, 2010 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 15 th September, 2010 for examination
and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communiqué
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, a press communiqué was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies, in response
to which memoranda containing suggestions were received, from various organizations/individuals/
experts, by the Committee.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held
on 29
th September, 2010. The Committee also heard the views of stakeholders/NGOs  in its meetings
held on 14 th and 15 th February, 2011. The Committee further held in-house discussion on the Bill on
the 28th April, 2011.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it :–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of  Personnel and Training,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Personnel and Training thereon;
(iii) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the
stakeholders such as representatives of the PRS Legislative Research, Commonwealth
Human Rights Initiative, Shri M.N. Vijaya Kumar, I.A.S., Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat,
Shri M.P. Dubey, Shri G. Venkatanarayana, Rakshak Foundation, National Campaign for
People’s Right to Information, Dr. R. Stephen Louie, Shri P.M. Bhat, Shri Krishna H.
Rao, Shri Ajay B. Bose and Shri Rajinder Kumar Goyal in its meetings held on 14
th and
15th February, 2011;
(iv) Reply furnished by the Department of Personnel and Training to the questionnaire
forwarded by the Secretariat;
♣ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 1937) dated the 16 th September, 2010.

(v) Comments furnished by the Central Vigilance Commission on the Bill; and
(vi) Other research material/documents related to the Bill.
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 11 th May, 2011.
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
JAYANTHI NATARAJAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairperson,
11th May , 2011 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Public Interest Disclosure and Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010
was introduced* in the Lok Sabha on the 26 th August, 2010. It was referred ♣  by the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 15
th September, 2010 for examination and report.
2. The Bill (Annexure-A) seeks to establish a mechanism to receive complaints relating to
disclosure on any allegation of corruption or willful misuse of power or willful misuse of discretion
against any public servant and to inquire or cause an inquiry into such disclosure and to provide
adequate safeguards against victimization of the person making such complaint and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
3. The Statement of Objects and Reasons, appended to the Bill reads as under:-
“Corruption is a social evil which prevents proper and balanced social growth and economic
development. One of the impediments felt in eliminating corruption in the Government and the
public sector undertakings is lack of adequate protection to the complainants reporting the
corruption or willful misuse of power or willful misuse of discretion which causes demonstrable
loss to the Government or commission of a criminal offence by a public servant.
The Law Commission of India had in its 179
th Report, inter alia, recommended formulation
of a specific legislation titled “The  Public Interest Disclosure (Protection of Informers) Bill, 2002 to
encourage disclosure of information regarding corruption or  maladministration by public servants and
to provide protection to  such complainants. The Second Administrative Reforms Commission in its 4 th
Report on “Ethics in Governance” has also  recommended formulation of a legislation for providing
protection to whistleblowers. The Government of India had issued a  Resolution No. 89, dated the 21 st
April, 2004 authorising the  Central Vigilance Commission as the designated agency to receive  written
complaints from whistle-blowers. The said Resolution also,  inter alia provides for the protection to
the whistle-blowers from  harassment, and keeping the identity of whistle-blowers concealed.  It has
been felt that the persons who report the corruption or willful  misuse of power or willful misuse of
discretion which causes  demonstrable loss to the Government or commission of a criminal  offence
by a public servant need statutory protection as protection  given to them by the said Resolution of
the Government of India  would not suffice.
In view of the position stated in the foregoing paragraphs, it has been decided to enact a
standalone legislation to, inter alia, provide –
(a) for bringing within the scope of the Bill, public servants being the employees of the
Central Government or the State Government or any corporation established by or under
any Central Act or any State Act, Government Companies, Societies or local authorities
owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government and such other
categories of employees as may be notified by the Central Government or, as the case
may be, the State Government, from time to time, in the Official Gazette;
(b) adequate protection to the persons reporting corruption or willful misuse of power or
willful misuse of discretion which causes demonstrable loss to the Government or
commission of a criminal offence by a public servant;
* Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 26 th August, 2010.
♣  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.1937) dated the 16 th September, 2010.

2
(c) a regular mechanism to encourage such person to disclose the information on corruption
or willful misuse of power or willful misuse of discretion by public servants or commission
of a criminal offence;
(d) the procedure to inquire or cause to inquire into such disclosure and to provide adequate
safeguards against victimization of the whistle-blower, that is the person making such
disclosure;
(e) safeguards against victimization of the person reporting matters regarding the corruption
by a public servant;
(f) punishment for revealing the identity of a complainant, negligently or mala-fidely;
(g) punishment for false or frivolous complaints.”
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the Bill on the 29
th September, 2010.
5. In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/suggestions
from desirous individuals/organisations on the Bill. Accordingly, a press release was issued inviting views/
suggestions. In response to the press release published in major English and Hindi dailies and newspapers
all over India on the 2
nd October, 2010, a number of representations/memoranda were received.
5.1 The Committee forwarded some select memoranda from out of the ones received from the
individuals/organisations to the Department of Personnel and Training for their comments thereon. A
list of such memoranda along with the gist of views/suggestions contained therein and the comments
of the Department of Personnel and Training thereon is placed at Annexure-B.
5.2 The major points raised in the memoranda are summarized as follows:
(i) Removal of the restrictions contained in Clause 3(1) (a-d), which shield the Armed
Forces, the Security Forces and the intelligence operations from accountability;
(ii) Bill should provide for specific and exhaustive definition of the term “Victimisation”;
(iii) Protection against victimization should be more specific and exhaustive;
(iv) Clause 16 detailing punishment for frivolous disclosures ought to be removed. This
clause is a clear deterrent to those making Public Interest Disclosures and the human
rights defenders, specifically. The Bill does not provide an adequate definition of
“frivolous disclosures” which leaves things open to manipulation;
(v) There should be numerous Competent Authorities, preferably one in each Department;
(vi) Bill should provide for cash rewards;
(vii) The term “Complain ant” should not be used as it reflects narrow thinking and
prejudice against a person making the disclosure. Instead, the term “Whistle Blower”
may be used;
(viii) Names of the whistle blowers should not be revealed even to the head of Government
Department;
(ix) By seeking to make the identity of the whistleblower a secret, the Bill inadvertently
creates conditions wherein anybody with that privileged information (especially employees
of CVC/SVC) may gain crores of rupees by disclosing his identity to interested parties.
Thus, the Bill perversely endangers the whistleblowers and sets the stage for various
kinds of attacks and retributions;

3
(x) There should be a specific mechanism for moving trials on a fast track;
(xi) The Police force and armed forces should be included in the ambit of the Bill;
(xii) The action taken by the Competent Authority should be put in public domain;
(xiii) On receiving complaints, the Competent Authority should give a complaint number;
(xiv) The complainant should be apprised of the development and action completed at each
stage so that he may be able to point out the deficiencies;
(xv) The time limit as provided in Clause 5(3) of the Bill should be removed;
(xvi) The scope of disclosure should be widened to include complaints relating to illegal acts
performed by contractors/suppliers directly or through their employees and/or hired
persons;
(xvii) In Clause 2(d)(ii) the word “demonstrable” occurring at both places may be deleted
and suitably replaced with the word “wrongful”;
(xviii) In Clause 4(6)(b) of the Bill after the words “it shall close the matter” the words “and
send a copy of the closure report to the complainant” may be added;
(xix) In Clause 10(1) of the Bill after the words “Central Government” and before the word
“shall” the words “and the State Governments” may be inserted;
(xx) The Bill should cover the corporate sector also;
(xxi) If the allegations are substantiated in the preliminary enquiry, the accused should be
suspended forthwith;
(xxii) Provide retrospective operation to the Bill/Act to enable earlier whistleblowers to get
justice;
(xxiii) The Bill does not provide any protection to a private whistleblower ( e.g. RTI activist);
(xxiv) The CVC is not suitable to be the Competent Body under this Bill for the following
reasons:-
(a) it has to seek permission to initiate enquiries;
(b) it does not have jurisdiction over politicians;
(c) it does not have resources and thus will need to outsource investigation;
(d) it only has advisory powers and thus cannot mandate enforcement of its
recommendation;
(e) Appointment procedure for a CVC is non-transparent, and as seen from the
current controversy over the present incumbent’s appointment, may also lack
moral authority;
(f) There are no provisions for transparency and accountability of the CVC in the
CVC Act, or for the Competent Authority in this Bill.
(xxv) Lack of timeline for investigation may be used to shield corrupt public servants.
Further, long drawn investigation will render whistleblower protection (if needed)
irrelevant;

4
(xxvi) The burden of proof to prove victimization is on the whistleblower; whereas international
best practices lay the onus on the supervisor to show legitimate rationale for negative
action taken;
(xxvii) Bill must provide protection for two types of whistleblowers- citizen and institutional
(Government) whistleblower;
(xxviii) In case of grievous hurt to the whistleblower, a special task force under the
Competent Authority should investigate issues being probed by the whistleblower;
(xxix) Whistleblower must be provided an opportunity for rebuttal in case a complaint is
closed based on preliminary investigation.
5.3 The major highlights of the comments furnished by the Department of Personnel and Training
are given below :–
(a) As per provisions of the Bill, each and every complaint is required to be enquired into.
It may not be practically possible to entertain large number of anonymous and pseudonymous
complaints and there is likelihood that the very purpose of the Bill may get diluted.
(b) The Bill does not provide for any time frame to complete enquiry and decide upon the
complaint. However, if deemed necessary the same can be provided in the Rules/
Regulations. It may not be appropriate to provide for time-frame in the Bill because
it needs to be spelt-out what action has to be taken if the same is not complied within
the time-frame.
(c) DOP&T has already issued a circular requesting all Ministries/Departments to publicize
cases which have reached finality both in regard to conviction and major penalties of
dismissal, removal from service and compulsory retirement.
(d) Clause 10 provides for safeguard against victimization. Victimization has been clarified
as “initiation of any proceedings or otherwise merely on the ground that such person
or a public servant had made a disclosure or rendered assistance in inquiry under this
Act”. It is felt that the above provision will take care of all aspects including
fabrication of false charges, transfer, posting, promotion, etc.
(e) It was Ministry of Defence which suggested that Armed Forces may be kept out of
the purview of the bill. DOP&T is open to suggestions.
(f) The motive of the Whistle Blowers Bill and that of the RTI Act are different. Though
both are aimed at checking corruption, the exemptions provided in the Whistle Blowers
Bill and that in the RTI Act cannot be made the same. In fact, the exemption under
the RTI Act are more than that under the Whistle Blowers Bill.
(g) The term “maladministration” was used and defined in the Bill suggested by the Law
Commission of India in its 179
th report. The Group of Ministries (GoM) and also the
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) felt that such stringent clauses would hamper smooth
functioning of Government servants. Hence, the present grounds enunciated in the Bill
would suffice.
(h) At this stage, it may not be possible for the CVC to handle complaints of private
sector.
(i) It is felt that Ministers may be left out for the present.
(j) All Government officials are covered in the Bill, whether working in India or abroad,
in connection with the affairs of the Government.

5
(k) Though the Bill does not require the Competent Authority to provide guidance to
potential whistle blowers, the Bill does allow the Competent Authority to ascertain the
identity of the complainant. (Clause 4(1)(a)). This clause gives power to interact with
the whistle blower and the Competent Authority may guide potential whistle blowers,
if felt necessary.
(l) On promulgation of this Act, there may be no need for whistle blowers to make
complaints to other forums. Further, it may not be possible for the Government to
protect all whistle blowers who themselves reveal their identity to other forums.
(m) The CBI is being strengthened and additional Special Courts are being set-up.
(n) It has been suggested that if the complaint is closed, the complainant should be
informed, accordingly. This suggestion can be taken care of while framing the rules/
regulations.
(o) There is no provision in the Bill for appellate/oversight authority.
(p) There is no provision in the Bill for special task force, etc.
5.4 A Questionnaire on the Bill was also prepared by the Secretariat and forwarded to the Ministry
for their replies. The reply to the Questionnaire (Annexure C) was furnished by the Ministry on
18
th February, 2011 and the same was considered by the Committee.
5.5 The Committee also heard the views of stakeholders/NGOs viz. PRS Legislative Research,
Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, Shri M. N. Vijaya Kumar, I.A.S., Akhil Bharatiya Grahak
Panchayat, Shri M. P. Dubey, Shri G. Venkatanarayana, Rakshak Foundation, National Campaign for
People’s Right to Information, Dr. R. Stephen Louie, Shri P. M. Bhat, Shri Krishna H. Rao, Shri Ajay
B. Bose and Shri Rajinder Kumar Goyal in its meetings held on the 14
th and the 15 th February, 2011.
The Committee further held in-house discussion on the Bill on the 28 th April, 2011.
5.6 The Committee also called for the comments of the CVC on the Bill which were received vide
their communication dated 22 nd March, 2011 (Annexure D).
Major issues examined by the Committee
1. Public Interest Disclosure
(i) Scope of the Public Interest Disclosure
5.7 The Committee took note of the submissions made by some of the witnesses who appeared
before the Committee, that the ambit of wrongdoings that may be disclosed under the Bill is very
limited and that ‘willful maladministration’, ‘human rights violations’ and wrongdoings that may have
adverse effect on ‘public health, safety or environment’ should also be covered in the Bill. It was
further submitted that such provisions exist in similar laws operational in countries like Canada,
Romania and Uganda.
5.8 The Ministry, in its comments furnished to the Committee, stated that the term “maladministration”
was used and defined in the Bill suggested by the Law Commission of India in its 179
th report. The
Group of Ministries (GoM) and also the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) felt that such stringent
clauses would hamper smooth functioning of Government servants. Hence, the present grounds
enunciated in the Bill would suffice.
5.9 One of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee suggested that Clause 2(d) of the
Bill should be amended to include violation of any law operational in the country, that has been or is
intended to be, committed by public servants. A suggestion also came that the scope of disclosure

6
should be widened to include complaints relating to illegal acts performed by contractors/ suppliers
directly or through their employees and/or hired persons. However, the Ministry in its response, has
stated that this will increase the ambit of the Bill considerably and CVC may not be able to handle
complaints on such a large scale.
5.10 The CVC, in its written comments furnished to the Secretariat, has suggested that
clause 2(d)(ii) of the Bill may be amended to include wrongful gain accrued to any third party also.
The CVC further commented that the comprehensive definition of “public servant” given in the
Prevention of Corruption Act may be adopted for the purposes of this Bill.
5.11 The Committee recommends that the suggestions made/concerns raised by the
stakeholders in the above mentioned paras should be seriously considered by the Ministry and
appropriately included in the Bill to the extent feasible. Eventually, the Bill should be dealing
with all such wrongdoings. The Committee, however, specifically recommends that the suggestion
of CVC to cover accrual of wrongful gain to third party should be incorporated in clause
2(d)(ii) of the Bill. The Committee also recommends to Government to examine the suggestion
of the CVC regarding defining the term “Public Servant” in the Bill when the term already
stands defined under the IPC and the PC Act.
(ii) Ambit of the Public Interest Disclosure
5.12 The proviso to Clause 3(1) of the Bill prohibits public servants, referred to in clauses (a) to
(d) of article 33 of the Constitution, from making public disclosures related to members of the Armed
Forces, Forces charged with the maintenance of public order, persons employed in any bureau/
organization established for purpose of intelligence or counter intelligence and in telecommunication
system set up for the purposes of such Force, Bureau or Organization and matters related thereto.
5.13 The Committee, during its interactions on the Bill, with various stakeholders, came across a
persistent view that there was no rationale for such exemption. It was also cited before the Committee
that in countries like Ghana, New Zealand, South Africa and Uganda, such Services were not excluded
from the coverage of whistleblowers laws and that in the USA, special laws have been enacted to
enable armed forces to make disclosure of wrongdoing in confidence to the Inspectors General and
the Members of the US Congress. Serious apprehensions were raised in the written/oral submissions
made before the Committee that such an exemption would shield them from public scrutiny and
accountability, thereby preventing wrongdoings in such Forces from coming to light.
5.14 The Ministry, in its comments furnished to the Committee, in this regard, stated that it was
the Ministry of Defence which suggested that the Armed Forces might be kept out of the purview
of the Bill. Further, the Ministry, in its reply to the questionnaire, has stated that Government is of
the view that all personnel covered under Article 33(1) should not whistle blow against each other.
They can, however, whistle blow against all other public servants, while other public servants/persons
can blow whistle against them.
5.15 The Committee takes note of the grave concerns raised regarding the exception created
in relation to the defence/intelligence forces vide proviso to Clause 3(1) of the Bill. In
Committee’s view, the Ministry has not furnished cogent reasons for excluding such Agencies/
Forces from the ambit of the Bill. It is pertinent to note at this point that under the RTI Act,
2005, no such exemption has been given to the Armed Forces. Further, the RTI Act does not
completely exempt the intelligence and security organisations and information in relation to
such Organizations is disclosable in cases of corruption and human rights violations. Since this
Bill is ultimately aimed at tackling corruption, the Committee does not find any logical reason
behind such an exemption. The Committee feels that the Bill under examination should not
exclude the defence forces/intelligence and security organsations in this matter.

7
5.16 Government may, however, while doing away with such exemptions, come out with
suitable and reasonable exceptions, in order to keep a balance between the operational needs
of these forces and their accountability to the public. Government may, alternatively, even
consider setting up a separate authority for these exempted agencies under the Bill or special
laws may be enacted on the lines of the USA. The Committee directs the Government to
examine this proposal in more detail so that no organisation of the Government is left out
from public scrutiny and accountability in such a manner.
5.17 The Committee took into account a suggestion made before it that the members of the Council
of Ministers should also be included within the ambit of the Bill. In this context, the Committee noted
that such a provision was suggested by the Law Commission of India, in its 179
th Report for inclusion
in the Bill.
5.18 The Committee also took note of one of the submissions made before it, viz, that on many
occasions, pliable public servants were the instruments, rather than the doers; and that this Bill looks
at the public servants only, while ignoring the main culprits who may be the persons wielding actual
power. The situation needs to be dealt with more thoughtfully so that the actual offenders may be
proceeded against.
5.19 Another view that was placed before  the Committee was that the Bill should cover private
sector companies/firms also. The Ministry, in its reply to the questionnaire, has stated that the
jurisdiction of the Bill is co-terminus with the present jurisdiction of the CVC. Accordingly, Government
banks, insurance companies and public sector undertakings were covered, but not the private sector
firms.
5.20 Another suggestion placed before the Committee was that the judiciary should also be brought
within the ambit of this Bill. On this issue, the Secretary, DoPT clarified, while deposing before the
Committee, that under the Prevention of Corruption Act, under the definition of “public servant”, the
judges are included.
5.21 But, while the Committee was deliberating on the Bill, doubts were raised as to whether this
provision is applicable to the lower judiciary only, or whether it applied to the higher judiciary also.
The term “public servant” has also been defined in the Bill under examination. It is, however, not clear
whether the term includes the judiciary also. The Committee strongly feels that there should be greater
clarity in this regard in the Bill.
5.22 During the course of discussions on the Bill, one of the Members of the Committee opined
that regulatory authorities should also be brought under the purview of this Bill. The Ministry, in its
written comments, clarified that all Government officials were covered in the Bill whether working in
India or abroad, in connection with the affairs of the Government.
5.23 The Committee finds merit in the foregoing views that have come up before it. The
Committee desires that the Ministry should consider bringing the members of Council  of
Ministers, the judiciary including the higher judiciary, regulatory authorities, etc. within the
ambit of this  Bill by making necessary amendments in the Bill.
2. Receipt of the Public Interest Disclosure complaints
5.24 The Committee is given to understand that under the present Whistle-blower Resolution, the
CVC had received a total of 1996 complaints from the year 2005 up to August, 2010 and it acted
on 614 complaints. Other complaints were either anonymous/pseudonymous or non-vigilance complaints.
5.25 As per the mechanism envisaged in the Bill [Clause 3(2)], the sole authority authorized to
receive a public interest disclosure is the Competent Authority, i.e., CVC or State Vigilance Commissions.

8
5.26 The Committee, during its interactions with the stakeholders, could gather a pervasive view
point that this may not be the best way to instill confidence in the minds of potential whistleblowers
and that multiple points may be provided for receiving complaints, specially to facilitate complainants
in the remote areas to make use of the enactment. In this context, it was also suggested to provide
for an option to receive complaints electronically. There was another suggestion that CVC/SVC should
be made the Appellate Authority in the process of handling the public interest disclosures.
5.27 The Ministry, in its written comments, has clarified that even in the Bill drafted by the Law
Commission of India in 2002, the proposal was that the CVC would be the Competent Authority. This
Bill did not carry any proposal for numerous Competent Authorities.
5.28 The Committee feels that the doubts arising from various quarters, regarding the
efficacy of providing CVC/SVCs as the sole authority authorized to receive a public interest
disclosure complaint are not unfounded particularly from the view point of access from remote
areas. Accordingly, the Committee urges upon the Ministry to ensure that necessary provisions
are made in Rules/Regulations putting in place a smooth and convenient system for receipt of
the disclosure complaints. At this point, the Committee would like to stress upon the crucial
point that if multiple points are to be made for receipt of public disclosure complaints, it has
to be particularly ensured that the identity of the complainant is protected for sure and no
loopholes creep in, weakening the system.
3. Identity of the Complainant
5.29 Clause 3(6) of the Bill makes it mandatory that the disclosure should indicate the identity of
the complainant.
5.30 In this context, the Committee received suggestions from various quarters that anonymous
complaints, if accompanied by sufficient evidence, should be taken cognizance of and in that case,
it would be easier to protect the complainant. In some of the memoranda received by the Committee,
it was suggested that a secret code may be given for each complaint received in order to maintain
confidentiality of the complainant. However, the Ministry, in its comments, did not accept the idea to
permit anonymous complaints as this may inflate unusually the number of false complaints thereby
defeating the purpose of the Bill. The Government, however, accepted the idea of use of electronic
means for receiving complaints and keeping the identity of the complainant secret and agreed to take
care of these aspects in the rules/regulations to be framed under the Bill.
5.31 The Committee notes at this juncture that the DOPT, in its comments furnished to the
Committee, has stated that the Department of Personnel & Training had issued an OM dated 29.9.92
which provides that no action should be taken on anonymous and pseudonymous complaints. Such
complaints should be ignored and filed. However, there is a provision available in the said order, viz.,
that in case such complaints contain verifiable details, they may be enquired into in accordance with
existing instructions only on specific direction of the Head of the Department/Chief Executive. The
CVC, in 1999, observed that there was widespread use of anonymous and pseudonymous petitions by
disgruntled elements to blackmail honest officials and hence no action should be taken on such
petitions. It was also stated that as per provisions of the Bill each and every petition was required
to be enquired into. It may not be practically possible to entertain large number of anonymous and
pseudonymous complaints and there is likelihood that the very purpose of the Bill may get diluted.
5.32 The Committee takes cognizance of the comments of the Ministry on the issue that a
mechanism can be provided under the Rules/Guidelines to ensure that the identity of the
complainant remains confidential in cases where the complaint is received electronically. The
Committee takes serious note of the concerns raised by the witnesses regarding ensuring
confidentiality of the identity of the complainant. The Committee strongly recommends that

9
the Ministry should envisage a fool-proof mechanism in every respect which would ensure that
the identity of the complainant is not compromised with, at any cost and at any level. The
Committee would like to place emphasis on this aspect since it feels that the absence of such
a mechanism would deter prospective complainants due to fear of harassment, victimization,
etc., or even physical harm which, in turn, would hamper the realization of the objective of
this legislation.
5.33 The Committee finds merit in the suggestion made by the stakeholders that if an
anonymous complaint is received by the Competent Authority, and the facts mentioned in the
complaint and the supporting documents reveal a prima facie case, the Competent Authority
should not reject it only for want of identity of the complainant. In Committee’s view,
anonymous complaints, if substantiated, would make the task of the Competent Authority
easier as it would be less worried on the aspect of protecting the identity of the complainant
which is an important objective of the Bill. The Committee recommends that the Government
may also consider an alternative mechanism within/outside the Bill, for enquiring into anonymous
complaints.
4. Revealing the identity of the Complainant
5.34 The Ministry, in its reply to the questionnaire, has clarified that a mechanism shall be provided
under the Rules/Guidelines to keep the identity of the complainant, confidential.
5.35 The proviso to Clause 4(4) of the Bill lays down that “if it becomes necessary”, the identity
of the complainant may be revealed to the Head of the Department of the organization, during inquiry
in relation to public interest disclosure.
5.36 The memoranda received by the Committee and the witnesses who tendered oral evidence
before the Committee, have placed before the Committee, serious opposition to this provision of the
Bill. Some of the witnesses even went to the extent of remarking that this provision is a virtual death
knell for the complainant. The main concern raised was that the Bill does not specify the conditions
under which it may become necessary to reveal the name of the complainant and that it leaves the
Competent Authority with wide scope of discretion in this regard. Further, it is apprehended that this
may make it very difficult to keep the identity of the complainant secret from the person/organisation
against whom the complaint is filed.
5.37 One of the suggestions in this regard was that the identity of the complainant should not be
disclosed without the written consent of the complainant, prior to such disclosure.
5.38 In its written comments, the Ministry stated that this clause had been inserted after a lot of
thought. It was felt that it may sometimes not be possible for the head of the department to conduct
discreet inquiries in the absence of further clarification. Hence, this clause was inserted with stiff
consequences in case of violation as per clause 15 of the Bill.
5.39 As stated in para 5.32 of this Report, protecting the identity of the complainant is
pivotal to the successful implementation of this statute. In order to make sure that the
interests of the complainant are protected, the Committee endorses the majority view placed
before it that the identity of the complainant should not be revealed by the Competent
Authority to the Head of the Department, without the written consent of the complainant.
5. Undue burden on whistleblowers
5.40 One of the points made by the witnesses and which was at the centre stage of the
deliberations of the Committee was that the Bill requires the whistleblower to make a disclosure
specifically naming the public servant responsible for or involved in the wrongdoing. Further, the

10
whistleblower is required to submit supporting documents and other material in support of his or her
disclosure. The witnesses felt that this was probably burdensome on the potential whistleblower who
might not have all the data.
5.41 The Committee could gauge the general view shared by the witnesses that the Bill proposes
to turn CVC/SVC into a sort of a Court where each whistleblower might struggle to prove his point,
by himself. This will probably mean as if the whistleblower is taking on the role resembling that of
an investigating agency or a public prosecutor, for which the State will neither pay him, nor recognize
him, nor accord him special status, protection or extent assistance of any kind.
5.42 The Committee strongly feels that since the main intention of the complainant while
making the disclosure is protection of public interest, undue burden should not be- placed on
him/her to provide proof to substantiate his/her case. Moreover, it would be unreasonable to
expect a private citizen, who is the sufferer or at the receiving end, having minimal resources
at his/her disposal, to place before the Competent Authority proof sufficient to substantiate the
complaint. The Committee is of the considered view that the Competent Authority may have
a reasonable expectation from the complainant, i.e., he/she should make out a prima facie
case, and subsequently, the Competent Authority should follow up the complaint to its logical
conclusion. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider dealing with this
aspect in the Bill.
6. Dismissal of Public Interest Disclosure
5.43 The Committee took note of the fact that clause 4(6) of the Bill lays down the conditions
under which the Competent Authority should close the matter. However, the Bill does not mandate that
the Competent Authority shall inform the person making the disclosure of the final outcome arrived
at by the Competent Authority.
5.44 Some suggestions have come before the Committee in this regard, viz., that the whistleblower
must be kept informed about the progress of the inquiry made into the allegations of wrongdoing and
that the Competent Authority must place in the public domain, the details of the outcome of every
inquiry launched 4 and the action taken, if any, subsequent to the receipt of the public interest
disclosure.
5.45 In this regard, the Ministry has opined that if the Committee agrees, the whistle blower may
be informed of the final outcome of the inquiry. However, the procedure therefor, could be incorporated
in the Rules/Regulations to be issued under the Act.
5.46 The Ministry has further stated that action taken by the Public Authority on the basis of the
recommendation/direction made by the Competent Authority is not confidential. It has also been stated
that on the basis of the recommendations of the ARC, the DOP&T has already issued a circular
requesting all Ministries/Departments to publicize cases which have reached finality ending up with
conviction or imposition of major penalty of dismissal, removal from service and compulsory
retirement.
5.47 The Members of the Committee also felt that a provision making it obligatory on the part of
Competent Authority to inform the complainant when the matter is closed, should be incorporated in
the Bill. The Competent Authority should also state the reasons for dismissing the complaint. Further,
the whistleblower should be given reasonable opportunity to adduce his justification/arguments, if he
is not satisfied with the conduct/outcome of the enquiry.
5.48 The Committee unanimously feels that the Competent Authority should inform the
complainant about the outcome of the complaint, since the complainant has a crucial role
under the scheme in the statute. The Competent Authority should also give the reasons if the

11
complaint is dismissed and further, the complainant should be given a reasonable hearing to
present his case if he is not satisfied with the dismissal of his complaint/ outcome of the
enquiry.
7. Statutory time limit
5.49 The Committee took serious note of the apprehensions made by the witnesses and in the
memoranda, that the Bill does not provide a time limit :- (i) for conducting the discreet enquiry; or
(ii) for inquiry by the head of the organisation/office; or (iii) for acting upon the recommendations
made by the Competent Authority as envisaged in clauses 4(2), 4(6) and 4(7), respectively, of the Bill.
It was felt that absence of time limit of any kind might retard the pace of disposal of cases and
thereby defeat the objective of the Bill.
5.50 In this regard, the Ministry, in its written comments, has admitted that the Bill does not provide
for any time frame to complete enquiry and decide on the complaint. It has, however, suggested that
if deemed necessary, the same can be provided in the Rules/Regulations. It may not be appropriate
to provide time-frame in the Bill because, if that is done, we may also have to spell out what action
has to be taken if the prescribed action is not completed within the time-frame.
5.51 The Committee also noted that the Law Commission of India, in its Bill proposed in its 179th
Report, provided that:
“9(1) The Competent Authority shall hold every such inquiry as expeditiously as possible and
in any case complete the inquiry within a period of six months from the date of the receipt
of the complaint.
Provided that (I the Competent Authority is of opinion that the inquiry cannot be
completed before the said period. It may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the said
period and in no case the said period shall be extended beyond a period of two years from
the date of receipt of the complaint.”
5.52 A view in the Committee also emerged that such a provision is essential to ensure the effective
implementation of this statute.
5.53 The Committee believes that the malady which presently affects the country’s system
is not the absence of statutes, but rather their non-effective/lax implementation. The Committee
is of the considered opinion that the relatively successful implementation of the Right to
Information Act, 2005 is mainly due to the statutory provisions in it for furnishing information
within the stipulated time limit and penalty for non-adherence to the same. In view of this,
the Committee strongly feels that the Rules/Regulations under the Bill should provide for a
reasonable time limit for conducting the discreet inquiry by the Competent Authority; for
inquiry by the head of the organisation/office and for acting upon the recommendations made
by the Competent Authority. The Rules/Regulations could further provide that if the time
period has to be extended, it shall not go beyond a particular period stated therein and the
Authority seeking extension of time should be required to record reasons in writing therefor.
8. Non-adherence to the recommendations made by the Competent Authority
5.54 The Committee took cognizance of the fact that the Bill does not envisage the consequences
of non-adherence to the recommendations made by the Competent Authority in terms of Clause 4(7)
of the Bill.
5.55 On this issue, the Ministry has stated that the recommendations under Clause 4(7) cannot be
made binding lest it will give over-riding power to the Competent Authority over the entire Executive.

12
5.56 The Committee feels that it is inevitable that the consequences of non-adherence to
the recommendation made by the Competent Authority should be provided in the Bill. The
Committee fails to understand how, in the absence of such a provision, the implementation
of the Competent Authority’s recommendations can be ensured. If the recommendations are
not acted upon and kept in cold storage based on one lame excuse or another, the primary
objective of the Bill i.e., tackling corruption will be vanquished. Moreover, the Committee
feels that quick action on the recommendations of the Competent Authority will also have
a deterrent effect on prospective wrong doers. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
Government should review their stand and put in place some mechanism in the Bill to
ensure that the directions of the Competent Authority are not avoided to protect the wrong
doers.
9. Time limit for actionable disclosure
5.57 The pre-dominant view that was placed before the Committee was that the time limit of five
years from the date on which the action complained against is alleged to have taken place, as provided
in clause 5(3) of the Bill, is not in consonance with the spirit of the Bill.
5.58 On this matter, the Ministry has stated that the provision had been kept as it may not be
possible to retrieve files/records older than this period. The Ministry, however, kept itself open to
Committee’s suggestions in this regard. It, however, also added that this has to be considered keeping
in view the instructions contained in Appendix - 13 of the GFR, 2005 relating to destruction of office
records connected with accounts.
5.59 One of the witnesses who tendered oral evidence before the Committee, while speaking on this
issue, stated thus:
“…There is a jive-year limitation proposed in the Bill. But what happens is, the Right to
Information Act allows people to collect information over a period of twenty years. There
should be no limitation because it conflicts the whole thing. The same is true about Secretaries
deciding whether something is information or not. That also contradicts the Right to Information
Act…”
5.60 In one of the memoranda submitted to the Committee, it has been opined that since this Bill
also envisages initiation of criminal proceedings against the wrong doer if so warranted, preventing the
Competent Authority from investigating any disclosure involving any allegation, if the complaint is
made after the expiry of five years from the date on which the action complained against is alleged
to have taken place, is contrary to the existing practices under the criminal law which does not
prescribe any limitation period for criminal offences.
5.61 The Committee is of the opinion that since the Bill empowers the Competent Authority
to recommend for initiation of criminal proceedings under the relevant laws and there is no
limitation period under the existing criminal law for such proceedings, the Committee feels
that the statutory time limit of 5 years should not be prescribed. The Committee is of the
opinion that if at all a time limit has to be prescribed, it should be in consonance with the
RTI Act and also the General Financial Rules - 2005. Further, limiting of complaints on events
older than 5 years, merely on the ground that records beyond 5 years may not be available
does not sound well. In Government, records are maintained as per retention schedule and
important records are definitely kept for a longer period. The Committee is, accordingly, not
convinced with this restriction of 5 years. The Committee is alternatively of the view that even
if a time limit is to be prescribed in the statute, in case of complaints which prima facie  reveal
wrong doings of a grave nature, exceptions should be made.

13
10. Exemption given to bonafide action or bonafide discretion
5.62 Clause 5(4) of the Bill prohibits the Competent Authority from questioning, in any inquiry under
this statute, any bonafide action or bonafide discretion (including administrative or statutory discretion)
exercised in discharge of duty by the employee.
5.63 One of the apprehensions raised in this regard was that it would be impossible to ascertain,
whether the alleged action amounts to bonafide action or bonafide use of discretion, unless it was
inquired into in the first instance.
5.64 The CVC, in its written submission, stated that since bonafide act includes any bonafide
discretionary act/ powers, the words” or bonafide discretion (including administrative or statutory
discretion)” are superfluous and may be omitted.
5.65 The Ministry, however, in its reply to the questionnaire, clarified that this was an exceptional
clause meant to cover situations where the Rules/Guidelines/Legislation provide for exercise of
discretionary powers.
11. Disclosure of sensitive information
5.66 W ith regard to Clause 7 of the Bill which exempts certain matters from disclosure, it was
suggested to the Committee that the Bill could provide for the disclosure of sensitive information
belonging to the specified categories in sealed cover, to the Competent Authority or the Court, for
examination. It was also submitted by one witness that giving binding and conclusive powers to the
Secretary to the Government of India or the Secretary to the State Government, to certify that a
document is of the nature specified in clause 7(a) and (b), is also not advisable since the RTI Act
clearly states what information can be given. The Ministry, however, in their clarification stated that
such an exemption is absolutely necessary as the country’s interest cannot be put on stake.
12. Victimisation of the Whistleblower
5.67 Clause 10 of the Bill states that the Central Government should ensure that the person making
the disclosure is not victimized. The term ‘victimization’ has not been defined in the Bill. It may be
noted here that the 179
th Report of the LCI has given the definition of ‘victimisation’ as :–
“ ‘victimisation’ with all its grammatical variations, in relation to a Public Servant other than
a Minister, shall include:-
(A) suspension pending inquiry, transfer, dilution or withdrawal of duties, powers and
responsibilities, recording adverse entries in the service records, issue of memos, verbal
abuse, all classes of major or minor punishment specified in the disciplinary rules,
orders or regulations applicable to such public servant and such other type of
harassment;
(B) any of the acts referred to in sub-clause (A) whether committee by the person against
whom a disclosure is made or by any other person or public authority at his
instance.”
5.68 The Committee recommends that the term ‘victimization’ may be defined in the Bill.
5.69 The Ministry, in its written comments, has stated that Clause 10 provides for safeguard against
victimization. Victimization has been clarified as “initiation of any proceedings or otherwise merely on
the ground that such person or a public servant had made a disclosure or rendered assistance in
inquiry under this Act”. It was felt that the above provision would take care of all aspects of
victimisation including fabrication of false charges, transfer, posting, promotion etc.

14
5.70 The Ministry further stated that clause 10(3) of the Bill stipulates that the direction of the
Competent Authority is binding. Hence, it is open for the Competent Authority to award punishment
to those who harass or victimize whistleblowers.
5.71 The Committee was told during the course of its deliberations that the term ‘merely’ in clause
10(1) may be replaced with ‘directly or indirectly’. The Committee also took note of the suggestion
made that in every case of allegation of victimization, the burden of proof should be on the employer.
It was also submitted that the penalty for victimization should be made very high.
5.72 The Committee believes that since the disclosure is made in the interest of the general
public, the burden to ensure that the complainant is not subjected to any  form/degree of
victimization should be on the concerned organisation/Competent Authority. The Committee
recommends that in order to ensure protection to the complainant from direct or indirect
victimization, the Ministry should actively consider the suggestions detailed above and make
necessary changes in the Bill.
5.73 The Committee also recommends that it should be provided in the Bill that witnesses/
persons who support the whistleblower or help in the investigation/inquiry, should also be
accorded the same protection against victimization as envisaged for the whistleblower, in the
Bill.
5.74 The Committee took note of the concerns raised by witnesses that though Clause 10(3) of the
Bill provides that every direction given under clause 10(1) by the Competent Authority shall be binding
upon the public servant/public authority, against whom the allegation of victimization has been proved,
there was however, no provision in the Bill, for ensuring enforcement of these directions.
5.75 The Ministry, in its reply to the questionnaire, has stated that the direction of the Competent
Authority under clause 10(2) is binding on the public authority as per clause 10(3). The Competent
Authority does not have original jurisdiction in the sense of High Court or Tribunal which can take
up contempt of their orders. Even the Central Information Commission is not vested with power of
contempt, etc. So, there is no need to make additional provision in the Bill for ensuring enforcement
of this direction which would only mean repetition of the provision of Clause 10(2).
5.76 T he Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry on this issue. The
Committee is deeply concerned to note that there are very high chances of non-compliance of
orders given by Competent Authority under clause 10(1), in the absence of any provision to
ensure enforcement of these orders. Therefore, the Committee strongly feels that the Ministry
should chalk out an effective mechanism, preferably in the Bill itself, to ensure that the
orders of the Competent Authority are complied with and in case of non-compliance, stringent
action should be provided for against those responsible.
13. Protection to whistleblowers
5.77 The Committee took serious note of the apprehensions raised by the witnesses and by those
who submitted their memoranda, the crux of which, is stated as under:
“…Let us consider that the whistle blower is someone who makes a submission on corruption.
Actually the RT1 activist has not even made his submission on corruption. The RTI activist
is under threat of attack…”
In this regard, a proposal suggested by one of the witnesses was that:
“…ensure that anyone who is attacked after filing such a complaint, that complaint becomes
an automatic high priority reference under this particular Act because the idea of attacking
an RTI activists or anyone else is to prevent the truth from coming out. If it becomes clear

15
to these attackers that whoever is being attacked, if they are attacked, even more investigation
will be done, special audits will be done. I will give you an example, in Rajasthan when we
do social audits, if there are attacks on social audit activists we insist that special audits be
done by a very good agency which is a Government agency and that passes the message out
to people that if you attack them what will follow is worse …”
5.78 The Committee also felt that the complainant should be provided swift and effective protection
that will have a deterrent effect on any vested interest that may think of using violence as a means
of suppressing the truth.
5.79 The Committee also took note of the suggestion made that the Bill should include specific
definition of the State protection available to those who are victimized and an expanded provision
detailing to whom the State protection can apply.
5.80 The Committee is of the unanimous view that the capacity of the State to provide for
an effective mechanism for ensuring protection to the life, liberty and property of the
complainant would be directly proportional to the degree of faith that the public would be
willing to repose, in the noble system envisaged in the Bill, to promote accountability to the
public. Therefore, the Committee feels that it is inevitable that the Government puts in place
a flawless mechanism for the protection of the whistleblower in order to ensure effective
implementation of this statute. Hence, the Committee desires the Ministry to consider the
witnesses’ views given above and act upon them, to ensure that the mechanism for the
protection of whistleblowers contemplated in the Bill is made foolproof.
14. Onus to protect the whistleblowers
5.81 The Committee took note of a view expressed by the witnesses that the Bill states that the
onus of protecting a whistleblower would be on the Central Government. There is no mention of the
State Governments in this context. It is obvious that in a federal setup, the Central Government cannot
provide for protection for employees of the State Government. It was suggested that the Bill should
authorize the State Governments to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act and also
protect whistle-blowing employees in the States.
5.82 It was also suggested that a new Clause may be inserted in Chapter V of the Bill, to provide
that the burden of proving that a public interest disclosure, was not revealed to anybody, without
proper authorization, shall be on the Public Authority dealing with the disclosure. It was felt that such
a provision will ensure that the confidentiality of the complainant is not compromised by the Public
Authority.
5.83 In this regard, one of the issues that come up for discussion is that of ensuring protection
to whistleblower in case of Centrally sponsored Schemes, with special emphasis upon SC/ST, tribals
and minorities, which are implemented in the States. A Member expressed his concern in following
words:
“…There could be certain issues of Centre-versus-State, but what you can do is that wherever
there is an act of whistle-blowing which pertains to a Central Government scheme, the Central
Government would provide protection to that whistle blower in case the State Government fails
to do so…”
5.84 The Committee was emphatic that the Ministry should seriously consider this matter.
The Committee desires a mechanism be set up for this Bill to apply particularly in respect of
Centrally funded schemes when the State level authorities fail to take suitable action. The
Committee, however, hopes that all the States would adopt this Bill.

16
5.85 The Committee endorses the suggestions given above and recommends that the Ministry
should give them due thought and deliberation, while finalizing the Bill.
15. Frivolous/ malafide disclosure
5.86 One of the Members of the Committee, expressed his view regarding this provision in the Bill
as under:–
“…In terms of imprisonment, the bar is too high. In fact, it acts as a big deterrent for anybody
to even use the Act. There are lot of applications which are filed in the Supreme Court and
the High Courts which are frivolous, which are misconceived, but the court does not send those
people to jail. We could just fine them. I mean, in a sense, you are defeating the entire purpose
of the Act by incorporating such provisions…”
5.87 The Secretary, DoPT, while referring to this issue, sated that:
“…basically, the experience which we have gained from the RTI, we, I think, wanted to bring
this into play here in the sense that it is, basically, some complaint which is proved to be mala
fide or false; that is the exact word which is used “Any person who makes any disclosure mala
fidely and knowingly that it was incorrect or false or misleading, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend up to two years.”
So, it is clearly identified that it should be false or it should be misleading, and mala fidely
and knowingly done. So, it is not really anything vague. It is something quite focused and
which we could try and make even more focused... The only desire on the part of the DOPT
is that we should not permit this to become something where the normal sort of grievances,
normal sort of complaints and all that are raised, because then, this whole machinery would
be so overburdened that it will not be able to do justice to the actual whistle blower cases.
That is the only aim and objective…”
5.88 At this juncture, a suggestion came that this provision might be kept in abeyance say for a
period of five years so that, during this period, the trend regarding filing frivolous/ malafide complaints
may be examined, and if found necessary, this provision can then be invoked. It was also proposed
that the complainant should be accorded protection against a suit for defamation.
5.89 Another perspective was placed before the Committee, during its discussions, by one of the
witnesses in the following terms:
“…The issue, now, is that there are whistleblowers. Maybe, there are not enough whistleblowers,
but we do have a lot of corruption. So, the question before the Members of Parliament is how
to make sure that people who find fault with the functioning, in terms of real corruption
happening, can actually show evidence and come forward without fear of victimization. And,
at the same time, we need to make sure that honest officers are not unnecessarily dragged.
That is why you do have a clause to penalize the people for mala fide and knowingly false
and misleading complaints …”
5.90 At the same time, there was a feeling in the Committee that malafide disclosures should be
penalised and that causing a malafide complaint to be filed should also be made punishable, since there
is a possibility that vested interests can make/cause to make complaints designed to harm the career
of a public servant or to clog the system with false complaints.
5.91 While the Committee does not have much opposition against penalizing frivolous/
malafide complainants, it is certainly opposed to the quantum of punishment prescribed in the
Bill. It will not only be a major deterrent for the prospective whistleblowers, but also increase
the possibility of misuse of this provision, especially in cases where the accused is high and

17
mighty and is able to influence the decision as to whether a complaint is frivolous/ malafide.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the penalty provided in clause 16 should be
substantially reduced.
5.92. The Committee also feels that, merely because a complaint is not proved beyond
reasonable doubt or a complaint is not found to be sustainable or a complaint is dismissed for
other reasons, it should not be, termed as frivolous/ malafide . The Committee is of the
considered opinion that while deciding whether a disclosure is frivolous/ malafide or not, the
Competent Authority should exercise great amount of caution and give primary importance to
the fact whether the complainant, while making the disclosure, had based his action on the
documents/information in his possession/ knowledge. The focus should be on the intention and
not the outcome of the enquiry. The Committee is of the view that such a dispensation will
ensure that only those disclosures which have been made frivolously or with a malafide
intention meet with penalty under the Bill.
5.93 There is another aspect of this matter. Clause 19 of the Bill provides for appeal in the High
Court for penalties imposed under Clauses 14 and 15. However, it does not provide for appeal in cases
of punishment imposed under Clause 16.
5.94 In this regard, the Ministry, in its written reply, has stated that under Clause 14 it is the
Competent Authority which will impose penalty on public authority for filing partial, vague or
misleading report, whereas clause 16 is an offence and the complainant will be tried by the competent
court for the said offence where he will get opportunity to defend under the CrPC. However, it
appears to the Committee that the Bill is not clear as to who is competent and required to
take action under Clause 16 of the Bill to impose penalty on the complaint. In the Committee’s
view, greater clarity is needed in this regard.
5.95 The Committee also recommends that in cases of punishment imposed under clause 16,
the accused should be given right of appeal to the High Court so that he can place the facts
before the Court to argue that he did not have any malafide ‘intention’ or that, at the time
of making the disclosure, the complaint was based on the information he had at his disposal,
at that point of time and that it was not frivolous.
Other issues examined by the Committee
16. Powers of Competent Authority
5.96 The witnesses who deposed before the Committee expressed serious doubts as to whether the
Competent Authority provided for in the Bill i.e., CVC or State Vigilance Commissions were suitably
empowered under the existing system to ensure that the guilty would be punished in a speedy and
efficacious manner, under the due process of law. The Committee could gather that the rationale
behind such an apprehension was that the power of the Competent Authority was limited to the extent
of recommending to the public authority, certain measures, against the public servant.
5.97 Similarly, it was suspected that the involvement of police or CBI as per clause 9 of the Bill
would involve susceptibility to political interference or undue pressure from such authorities and would
also lead to pendency of cases since such agencies are already overburdened. Therefore, one of the
suggestions that came was that the Competent Authority should have its own investigation and
prosecution mechanism.
5.98 Doubts were also raised as to how the interim orders of the Competent Authority, as provided
in Clause 13 of the Bill, will be executed.
5.99 The Committee takes cognizance of the relevant facts that the LCI, in its 179
th Report, had
provided:

18
“Clause 5(8) If the inquiry held by the Competent Authority discloses conduct, which constitutes
an offence punishable under any law, the Competent Authority shall direct the appropriate
authority or agency to initiate criminal proceedings against such public servant including a
Minister in accordance with law:
Provided that where such a direction is made, any requirement of sanction or prior approval
for such prosecution under any law for the time being in force, shall not be necessary to be
complied with.
(9) The conduct of an inquiry under this Act in respect of any action shall not affect such
action) or any power or duty of any public servant to take further action with respect to any
matter subject to the inquiry, in accordance with any law for the time being in force.”
6.0 On this issue, the Ministry, in its written reply, has stated that the recommendation under
clause 4(7) cannot be made binding lest it will give over-riding power to the Competent Authority over
the entire Executive.
6.1 Taking into cognizance the practical apprehensions raised by the stakeholders in this
regard and the LCI recommendation, the Committee desires that the Ministry should reconsider
the provisions of Clause 4(7)  the Bill. Keeping in view the fact that the successful implementation
of this statute mainly depends on the enforceability of the ‘directions’ made by the Competent
Authority, diluting the ‘directions’ by making them merely ‘recommendations’ casts  serious
doubts on the feasibility of enforcing the ‘recommendations’ to the desired extent.
17. Special whistleblowers’ Courts
6.2 During the deliberations of the Committee on the Bill, one of the Members of the Committee,
suggested that:
“…So, rather than taking it through the CVC route, you can actually set up special whistleblower
courts across the country like special CBI Judges. You empower Magistrates who only deal with
whistleblower applications. So, in that manner, you don’t overburden the CVC, you don’t
overburden the other authorities and your points about investigation, protection as well as
judicial scrutiny gets taken care of…”
6.3 It may be noted that the Ministry, in its written comments, has stated that CBI is being
strengthened and additional Special Courts are being set-up.
18. Incentives to the whistleblower
6.4 Majority of the witnesses who deposed before the Committee opined that the whistle blowers
should be rewarded if the disclosure made by them is proved. One of the witnesses suggested that
the principle of ‘qui tam’ may be adopted for this purpose.
6.5 In this regard, the Ministry has stated that the Public Authority who benefits from the whistle
blower would be encouraged to provide non-monetary incentives to the whistle blower under the
policy guidelines to be issued subsequently.
19. Whistle blowing to be made mandatory
6.6 Some of the witnesses opined that the Bill should make it compulsory for a public servant to
blow the whistle on any wrongdoing of which he/she has knowledge and that failure to make such
disclosure may be made an offence. The argument that was made in support of this is that according
to Section 176 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 a person who does not provide information about the

19
commission of or the intention of persons to commit the aforementioned offences, is liable for
punishment with a prison term of up to six months and or fine up to Rs. 1000. When the law is
so strict for ordinary citizens to blow the whistle on wrongdoing in society, there is no reason why
such stringent measures cannot be stipulated for public servants working in public authorities.
6.7 However, the Ministry, in its written comments, has stated that whistle-blowing cannot be
made mandatory for all public servants, as this will create an unhealthy work environment.
20. Prior publication of Rules
6.8 This issue was brought to the attention of the Committee by one of the witnesses, thus:
“…the rule-making provision that is mentioned in this Bill is similar to what exists in most
other laws. There is no requirement for prior publication’ which actually allows public
consultation on rule-making. Section 23  o f the General Clauses Act says that if a law provides
for making rules by prior publication, then, there is a requirement on the concerned department
to put those draft rules in the public domain, invite peoples views and then notify it. This is
a good consultative process which was laid down in 1897. ….with the exception of the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, no other law passed in recent times contains such
a requirement of prior publication…Rules must be made after prior publication so that any
attempt to dilute provisions of the Act can be taken care of because this has been the
experience in several cases where what is given in the principal Act sometimes is diluted in
the rules…”
6.9 It was proposed that clauses 24(1), 25 and 26 of the Bill may be amended to require
the Central Government as well as the State Government to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Bill as per the procedure of prior publication contained in Section 23 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897. The Committee recommends the Ministry to consider this suggestion.
21. Replacing the word ‘Complainant’
6.10 Some of the witnesses who deposed before the Committee were of the opinion that the term
‘Complainant’ may be replaced in the Bill with ‘Informant’ or ‘Whistleblower’, since the public spirited
person who is making the disclosure, is providing some information regarding certain wrongdoing in
the interest of the public only; he has nothing to gain from making the disclosure. Indeed, he may
be doing so at a great personal risk, purely because of the public interest involved.
22. Chief Vigi1ance Officer
6.11 One of the suggestions made by witnesses, based on their personal experiences of harassment,
for exposing corrupt practices in their respective Departments, was that the CVO should invariably be
an outsider so that he/she is completely uninfluenced by the local/organizational administration.
23. Short Title of the Bill
6.12 The Committee takes note and favors the view placed before it, that the Short Title
of the Bill may be worded better reflecting the real spirit of whistleblowing.
6.13 The Committee welcomes the Bill and broadly endorses its provisions. The Committee
hopes that the Ministry will consider the concerns/suggestions mentioned above and make
necessary changes in the Bill wherever found appropriate and possible.
6.14 The Committee, in the end, takes into account the fact that many more legislations
like The Lokpal Bill, The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill etc. are in the offing, the

20
main objectives of which are tackling of corruption and ensuring accountability. The Committee
desires that the Government should exercise great care to ensure a holistic approach so that
there is no conflict between these legislations and their implementation takes place in a
harmonious manner. In any case, the other Bills should not militate against this Bill.

21
MINUTES RECORDS OF DISCUSSION

23
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 29 th September, 2010 in Committee Room
No. G074, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
5. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
7. Shri. D.B. Chandre Gowda
8. Dr. Monazir Hassan
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
11. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
12. Shri S. Semmalai
13. Shri Manish Tewari
14. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Personnel. Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
1. Shri Shantanu Consul, Secretary;
2. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Additional Secretary;

24
3. Shri Alok Kumar Bhatnagar, Additional Secretary, CVC;
4. Ms. Shalini Darbari, Director, CVC; and
5. Shri J. Vinod Kumar, OSD.
II. Ministry of Law And Justice
• Department of Justice
1. Shrimati Neela Gangadharan, Secretary;
2. Shri Ramesh Abhishek, Joint Secretary; and
3. Shri S.C. Srivastava, Joint Secretary.
• Legislative Department
1. Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
2. Shri Divakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
The Public Interest Disclosure and Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them that The Public
Interest Disclosure and Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010 has been referred by
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to this Committee on the 15th September, 2010 for examination and
report within three months. She informed the Members that the Bill seeks to establish a mechanism
to receive complaints relating to disclosure on any allegation of corruption or wilful misuse of power
or wilful misuse of discretion against any public servant and to inquire or cause an inquiry into such
disclosure and to provide adequate safeguards against victimization of the person making such
complaints and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
3. The Chairperson then welcomed the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training and
representatives of the Legislative Department to the meeting and requested the Secretary to make a
presentation on the Bill. The Secretary then gave a detailed narration of the background and salient
features of the Bill and elucidated upon similar legislations existing in other countries. He also made
a power point presentation on the Bill.
4. The Chairperson and Members, while appreciating the noble objective of this Bill, expressed
apprehension that the provision for imprisonment upto two years in case of false or frivolous
complaints could defeat the very purpose of the Bill. The Secretary, Department of Personnel and
Training and Additional Secretary, Legislative Department responded to the points raised by the
Committee. The Chairperson asked the Secretary to furnish the replies which were not replied during
the meeting within one week.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 12.30 
A.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

25
RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 14 th February, 2011 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik – In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Monazir Hassan
6. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
7. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
8. Shri Manish Tewari
9. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
10. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
2. Shri Divakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
WITNESSES
1. PRS Legislative Research, Delhi.
Shri M.R. Madhavan, Head of Research.
25

26
2. Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, Delhi.
Shri Venkatesh Nayak, Programme Coordinator.
3. Shri M.N. Vijaya Kumar, lAS, Kamataka.
4. Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat, Delhi.
(i) Shri K.K. Swami, Vice President; and
(ii) Shri B.S. Sachdeva.
5. STPI-Visakhapatnam.
Shri. M.P. Dubey, Joint Director and Officer-in-Charge.
6. Shri G. Venkatanarayana, Hyderabad.
2. In the absence of the Chairperson of the Committee, Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik was voted
to chair the meeting. He welcomed the Members, the witnesses and the senior officers of the
Department of Personnel & Training and the Legislative Department present in the meeting. He then
requested the witnesses to place their views before the Committee on the Public Interest Disclosure
and Protection to Persons Making Disclosures Bill, 2010.
3. The representatives of PRS Legislative Research, while appreciating the objective behind the
Bill, enumerated some of the shortcomings of the Bill viz., revealing the name of the complainant under
certain circumstances, not providing for any penalty on public servant for victimizing the complainant,
absence of provision for appeal by the complainant in case of frivolous/ malafide complaints, CVC not
given the power to initiate prosecution, abuse of definition of victimization, etc.
4. The representative of Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative made a powerpoint presentation
on the Bill. He suggested that the scope and ambit of the Bill may be widened to include human rights
violations, wrongdoings that may have adverse effect on public health, safety and environment and
wrongdoings committed or intended to be committed by members of the Council of Ministers. Further,
he flayed the exemption given to Armed Forces, Police Forces, etc. in the Bill and opined that the Bill
should cover private sector also. The representative also referred to providing for  some motivation to
the whistleblower and having more outlets for  lodging complaints.
5. Then, Shri M.N. Vijaya Kumar, while expressing his views on the Bill, stated that it would be
appropriate if the term ‘complainant’ is substituted with ‘whistleblower’ or informer and elucidated
upon why whistleblowing is morally, ethically and legally important. The representatives of Akhil
Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat endorsed the views placed by the other witnesses and stated that the main
objective of  the Bill should be to encourage whistleblowers and that the provision in the Bill which
allows revealing the identity of the complainant to the Head of the Department would endanger the
whistleblower.
6. Shri M.P. Dubey and Shri G .  Venkatanarayana, while voicing their opinion about various
provisions of the Bill, shared with the Committee, some of the harsh treatment which they faced as
whistleblowers. They emphasized that the mechanism envisaged in the Bill should be strengthened
suitably to ensure that substantive punishment is meted out to the wrongdoer as well as the public
servant who indulges in victimization. There was also a suggestion to use the term ‘informant’ in place
of ‘complainant’ in the Bill.
7. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 12.36 
P.M.

27
RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 15 th February, 2011 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik – In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
3. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Dr. Monazir Hassan
6. Shri Devji M. Patel
7. Shri S. Semmalai
8. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
9. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
10. Shri Manish Tewari
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary
II. Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
Dr. S.D. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
WITNESSES
1. National Campaign for People’s Right to Information, Delhi.
(i) Dr. Nikhil Dey; and
(ii) Shri Shekhar Singh.
27

28
2. Rakshak Foundation, New Delhi.
Dr. Anupama Singh.
3. Dr. R. Stephen Louie, Advocate, Chennai.
4. Shri P.M. Bhat, Mysore.
5. Shri Krishna H. Rao, Mumbai
6. Shri Ajay B. Bose, Mumbai.
7. Shri Rajinder Kumar Goyal. Punjab
2. In the absence of the Chairperson of the Committee, Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik was voted
to chair the meeting. He welcomed the Members of the Committee and witnesses who were invited
to appear before the Committee for tendering oral evidence on the Public Interest Disclosure and
Protection to Persons Making Disclosures Bill, 2010. He also welcomed the representatives of the
Department of Personnel and Training and the Legislative Department. Thereafter, he requested the
witnesses to apprise the Committee of their views on the Bill. The witnesses, then, made brief
presentations before the Committee on the various provisions of the Bill.
3. Despite acknowledging the relevance of the proposed Bill, the representative of the National
Campaign for the People’s Right’s to Information drew the attention of the Committee towards the
issues that need to be addressed to make the present Bill an effective legislation. They raised concerns
over the issues like limited investigating powers of the CVC as proposed in the Bill, inclusion of private
sector in the mandate of the Bill and protection of RTI activists under potential threat, etc. In their
presentation they emphasized on the need to strengthen institutions like the Lokpal/Lokayukta to
supplement the proposed Bill. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications vis-a-vis the point made
by them on the proposed Bill and the representatives responded in detail.
4. The representative of the Rakshak Foundation while making presentation before the Committee,
inter-alia, raised concerns over the exclusion of Government funded NGOs from the ambit of the Bill
and suggested that these may be included in the proposed Bill. The Members raised some queries vis-
a-vis the points made by her and the representative responded in detail. There was a mention about
setting up of special Whistle Blower courts which may function within the existing set up.
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the presentations of other individual witnesses on the various
provisions of the Bill and potential consequences of the Bill in the present form. The Members took
note of the issues raised and discussed the provisions of the Bill in detail.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.

29
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday the 28 th April, 2011 in Room No. ‘53’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
6. Dr. Monazir Hassan
7. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
8. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
9. Shri Lalu Prasad
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Shri Manish Tewari
13. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
14. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
A. * * *
B. * * *
C. * * *
29
*** Relates to some other matter.

30
I. ** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
II. The Public Interest Disclosure and Protection to persons making the Disclosures
Bill, 2010
5. The Chairperson thereafter requested the Members to take up the consideration of the Public
Interest Disclosure and Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010. The Members
deliberated on the provisions of the Bill. It was then decided to consider the Bill in its next meeting
alongwith the draft report.
6. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 12.00 N
OON.
*** Relates to some other matter.

31
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th May, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Dr. Monazir Hassan
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
8. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
13. Shri Manish Tewari
14. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
A. ** *
2. * * *
31
*** Relates to some other matter.

32
B. Adoption of draft 46 th Report on the Public Interest Disclosure and Protection to
Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010.
3. The Committee thereafter considered its draft 46 th Report on The Public Interest Disclosure
and Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010. The Members deliberated upon the
various aspects of the report extensively and suggested some changes in the draft Report. The report
was adopted subject to amendments suggested by them. The Committee authorized the Chairperson
to carry out the modifications on the lines of discussion in the meeting before presentation of the
report to Parliament.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The Committee adjourned at 12.42 
P.M.

33
ANNEXURES

35
ANNEXURE-A
26 Aug 2010
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 97 of 2010
THE PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE AND PROTECTION
TO PERSONS MAKING THE DISCLOSURES BILL, 2010
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PUBLIC  INTEREST  DISCLOSURE
3. Requirements of public interest disclosure.
CHAPTER III
INQUIRY  IN RELATION  TO PUBLIC  INTEREST  DISCLOSURE
4. Powers and functions of Competent Authority on receipt of public interest disclosure.
5. Matters not to be inquired by Competent Authority.
CHAPTER IV
POWERS  OF COMPETENT  AUTHORITY
6. Powers of Competent Authority.
7. Certain matters exempt from disclosure.
8. Superintendence of Competent Authority over appropriate machinery.
9. Competent Authority to take assistance of police authorities, etc., in certain cases.
CHAPTER V
P
ROTECTION  TO THE PERSONS  MAKING  DISCLOSURE
10. Safeguards against victimization.

36
Clauses
11. Protection of witnesses and other persons.
12. Protection of identity of complaint.
13. Power to pass interim orders.
CHAPTER VI
OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES
14. Penalty for furnishing incomplete or incorrect or misleading comments or explanation
or report.
15. Penalty for revealing identity of complainant.
16. Punishment for false or frivolous disclosure.
17. Punishment to Head of department in certain cases.
18. Offences by companies.
19. Appeal to High Court.
20. Bar of jurisdiction.
21. Court to take cognizance.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
22. Report on disclosures.
23. Protection of action taken in good faith.
24. Power of Central Government to make rules.
25. Power of State Government to make rules.
26. Powers to make regulations.
27. Notification and rules to be laid before Parliament.
28. Notification issued and rules made by State Government to be laid before State
Legislature.
29. Power to remove difficulties.
30. Repeal and savings.

37
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 97 of 2010
THE PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE AND PROTECTION TO
PERSONS MAKING THE DISCLOSURES BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to establish a mechanism to receive complaints relating to disclosure
on any allegation of corruption or wilful misuse of power or
wilful misuse of discretion against any public servant and to
inquire or cause an inquiry into such disclosure and to
provide adequate safeguards against victimization of the
person making such complaint and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Public Interest Disclosure
and Protection to Persons Making the Disclosures Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of
this Act shall be construed  as a reference to the coming into force
of that provision.
37
Short title
extent and
commencement.

38
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Central Vigilance Commission” means the
Commission constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of
the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003;
(b) “Competent Authority” means in relation to—
(i) any public servant referred to in sub-
clause (A) of clause ( i), the Central Vigilance Commission
or any other authority as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf under this Act;
(ii ) any public servant referred to in sub-
clause (B) of clause ( i), the State Vigilance Commissioner,
if any, or any officer of a State Government or any
other authority as the State Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf
under this Act;
(c) “complainant” means any person who makes a
complaint relating to disclosure under this Act;
(d) “disclosure” means a complaint relating to,
(i) an attempt to commit or commission of an
offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988;
(ii) wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of
discretion by virtue of which demonstrable loss is
caused to the Government or demonstrable gain accrues
to the public servant;
(iii ) attempt to commit or commission of a
criminal offence by a public servant,
made in writing or by electronic mail or electronic mail
message, against the public servant and includes public
interest disclosure referred to in sub-section ( 2) of
section 3;
(e) “electronic mail” or “electronic mail message”
means a message or information created or transmitted or
received on an computer, computer system, computer
resource or communication device including attachments in
text, image, audio, video and any other electronic record,
which may be transmitted with the message;
(f) “Government company” means a company referred
to in section 617 of the Companies Act 1956;
(g) “notification” means a notification published in the
Gazette of India or, as the case may be, the Official Gazette
of a State;
(h) “public authority” means any authority, body or
institution falling within the jurisdiction of the Competent
Authority;
Definitions
45 of 1988.
1 of 1956.

39
(i) “public servant” means any employee of—
(A) the Central Government or any corporation
established by or under any Central Act, any Government
companies, societies or local authorities owned or
controlled by the Central Government and such other
categories of employees as may be notified by the
Central Government, from time to time, in the Official
Gazette;
(B) the State Government or any corporation
established by or under any State Act, Government
companies, Societies or local authorities owned or
controlled by the State Government and such other
categories of employees as may be notified by the State
Government, from time to time, in the Official Gazette.
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the
Central Government and the State Government, as the case
may be, under this Act;
(k) “regulations” means the regulations made by the
Competent Authority under this Act.
CHAPTER II
P
UBLIC  INTEREST  DISCLOSURE
3. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of
the Official Secrets Act, 1923, any public servant [other than those
referred to in clauses ( a) to ( d) of article 33 of the Constitution] or
any other person including any non-governmental organisation, may
make a public interest disclosure before the Competent Authority:
Provided that any public servant, being a person or member
referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of
article 33 of the Constitution, may make a public disclosure if such
disclosure does not, directly or indirectly, relate to,
(a) the members of the Armed Force or any matter
relating to Armed Forces; or
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the
maintenance of public order; or
(c) persons employed in any bureau or other
organisation established by the State for purposes of
intelligence or counter intelligence or any matter relating to
such bureau or other organisation;
(d) persons employed in, or in connection with, the
telecommunication systems set up for the purposes of any
Force, bureau or organisation referred to in clauses ( a) to ( c)
or any matter relating to such telecommunication system,
bureau or organisation.
19 of 1923.
Requirements of
public interest
disclosure.

40
(2) Any disclosure made under this Act shall be treated as
public interest disclosure for the purposes of this Act and shall be
made before the Competent Authority.
(3) Every disclosure shall be made in good faith and the
person making disclosure shall make a personal declaration stating
that he reasonably believes that the information disclosed by him and
allegation contained therein is substantially true.
(4) Every disclosure shall be made in writing or by electronic
mail or electronic mail message in accordance with the procedure as
may be prescribed and contain full particulars and be accompanied
by supporting documents, or other material, if any.
(5) The Competent Authority may, if it deems fit, call for
further information or particulars from the person making the
disclosure.
(6) No action shall be taken on public interest disclosure by
the Competent Authority if the disclosure does not indicate the
identity of the complainant or public servant making public interest
disclosure or the identity of the complainant or public servant is
found incorrect or false.
CHAPTER III
I
NQUIRY IN RELATION TO PUBLIC INTEREST  DISCLOSURE
4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Competent
Authority shall, on receipt of a public interest disclosure under
section 3,
(a) ascertain from the complainant or the public servant
whether he was the person or the public servant who made
the disclosure or not;
(b) conceal the identity of the complainant unless the
complainant himself has revealed his identity to any other
office or authority while making public interest disclosure or
in his complaint or otherwise.
(2) The Competent Authority shall, upon receipt of the
complaint and concealing the identity of the complainant, or the
public servant in the first instance, make discreet inquiry, in such
manner as may be prescribed, to ascertain whether there is any
basis for proceeding further to investigate the disclosure.
(3) If the Competent Authority, either as a result of the
discreet inquiry, or on the basis of the disclosure it self without any
inquiry, is of the opinion that the disclosure requires to be
investigated, it shall seek comments or explanation or report from
the Head of the Department of the organisation or authority, board
or corporation concerned or office concerned within such time as
may be specified by it.
Powers and
functions of
Competent
Authority on
receipt of
public interest
disclosure.

41
(4) While seeking comments or explanations or report referred
to in sub-section ( 3), the Competent Authority shall not reveal the
identity of the complainant or the public servant and direct the Head
of the Department of the organisation concerned or office
concerned not to reveal the identity of the complainant or public
servant:
Provided that if the Competent Authority is of the opinion that
it has, for the purpose of seeking comments or explanation or report
from them under sub-section ( 3) on the public disclosure, become
necessary to reveal the identity of the public servant to the Head of
the Department of the organisation or authority, board or
corporation concerned or office concerned, the Competent Authority
may reveal the identity of the complainant or public servant to such
Head of the Department of the organisation or authority, board or
corporation concerned or office concerned for the said purpose.
(5) The Head of the organisation or office concerned shall not
directly or indirectly reveal the identity of the complainant or public
servant who made the disclosure.
(6) The Competent Authority, if after conducting an inquiry,
is of the opinion that—
(a) the facts and allegations contained in the disclosure
are frivolous or vexatious; or
(b) there are no sufficient grounds for proceeding with
the inquiry, it shall close the matter.
(7) After receipt of the comments or explanations or report
referred to in sub-section ( 3), if the Competent Authority is of the
opinion that such comments or explanations or report reveals either
wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of discretion or
substantiates allegations of corruption, it shall recommend to the
public authority to take anyone or more of the following measures,
namely:
(i) initiating proceedings against the concerned public
servant;
(ii ) taking appropriate administrative steps for
redressing the loss caused to the Government as a result of
the corrupt practice or misuse of office or misuse of
discretion, as the case may be:
(iii) recommend to the appropriate authority or agency
for initiation of criminal proceedings under the relevant laws
for the time being in force, if so warranted by the facts and
circumstances of the case;
(iv) recommend for taking of corrective measures;
(v) take any other measures not falling under clauses ( i)
to ( iv) which may be necessary for the purpose of this Act.

42
5. ( 1) If any matter specified or an issue raised in a
disclosure has been determined by a Court or Tribunal authorised to
determine the issue, after consideration of the matters specified or
issue raised in the disclosure, the Competent Authority shall not take
notice of the disclosure to the extent that the disclosure seeks to
reopen such issue.
(2) The Competent Authority shall not entertain or inquire into
any disclosure—
(a) in respect of which a formal and public inquiry has
been ordered under the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1850;
or
(b) in respect of a matter which has been referred for
inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.
(3) The Competent Authority shall not investigate, any
disclosure involving an allegation, if the complaint is made after the
expiry of five years from the date on which the action complained
against is alleged to have taken place.
(4) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as empowering the
Competent Authority to question, in any inquiry under this Act, any
bona fide  action or bona fide  discretion (including administrative or
statutory discretion) exercised in discharge of duty by the employee.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS  OF COMPETENT  AUTHORITY
6. ( 1) Without prejudice to the powers conferred upon the
Competent Authority under any other law for the time being in
force, the Competent Authority, may require, for the purpose of any
inquiry any public servant or any other person who in its opinion
shall be able to furnish information or produce documents relevant
to the inquiry or assist in the inquiry, to furnish any such
information or produce any such document as may be necessary for
the said purpose.
(2) For the purpose of any such inquiry (including the
preliminary inquiry), the Competent Authority shall have all the
powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof
from any Court or office;
Matters not to
be inquired by
Competent
Authority.
37 of 1850.
60 of 1952.
Powers of
Competent
Authority.
5 of 1908.

43
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or documents;
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed.
(3) The Competent Authority shall be deemed to be a Civil
Court for the purpose of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and every proceeding before the
Competent Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and for the purposes
of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code.
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 7, no obligation to
maintain secrecy or other restriction upon the disclosure of
information obtained by or furnished to the Government or any
public servant, whether imposed by the Official Secrets Act. 1923
or any other law for the time being in force, shall be claimed by any
public servant in the proceedings before the Competent Authority or
any person or agency authorised by it in writing and the
Government or any public servant shall not be entitled in relation to
any such inquiry, to any such privilege in respect of the production
of documents or the giving of evidence as is allowed by any
enactment or by any rules made thereunder:
Provided that the Competent Authority, while exercising such
powers of the Civil Court, shall take steps as necessary to ensure
that the identity of the person making complaint has not been
revealed or compromised.
7. ( 1) No person shall be required or be authorised by virtue
of provisions contained in this Act to furnish any such information
or answer any such question or produce any document or
information or render any other assistance in the inquiry under this
Act if such question or document or information is likely to
prejudicially affect the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of
India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign State,
public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of
court, defamation or incitement to an offence,
(a) as might involve the disclosure of proceedings of
the Cabinet of the Union Government or any Committee of
the Cabinet;
(b) as might involve the disclosure of proceedings of
the Cabinet of the State Government or any Committee of that
Cabinet,
and for the purpose of this sub-section, a certificate issued by
the Secretary to the Government of India or the Secretary to
the State Government, as the case may be, or, any authority
so authorised by the Central or State Government certifying
that any information, answer or portion of a document is of
the nature specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b), shall be
binding and conclusive.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
19 of 1923.
Certain matters
exempt from
disclosure.

44
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), no person
shall be compelled for the purposes of inquiry under this Act to give
any evidence or produce any document which he could not be
compelled to give or produce in proceedings before a court.
8. ( 1) Every public authority shall, for the purposes of dealing
or inquiry into the disclosures sent to it under sub-section ( 3) of
section 4, create an appropriate machinery for the said purpose.
(2) The Competent Authority shall exercise superintendence
over the working of machinery created under sub-section ( 1) for
the purposes of dealing or inquiry into the disclosures and give such
directions for its proper functioning, from time to time, as it may
consider necessary.
9. For the purpose of making discreet inquiry or obtaining
information from the organisation concerned, the Competent
Authority shall be authorised to take assistance of the Delhi Special
Police Establishment or the police authorities, or any other authority
as may be considered necessary, to render all assistance to complete
the inquiry within the specified time pursuant to the disclosure
received by the Competent Authority.
CHAPTER V
P
ROTECTION  TO THE PERSONS  MAKING  DISCLOSURE
10. ( 1) The Central Government shall ensure that no person
or a public servant who has made a disclosure under this Act is
victimised by initiation of any proceedings or otherwise merely on
the ground that such person or a public servant had made a
disclosure or rendered assistance in inquiry under this Act.
(2) If any person is being victimised or likely to be victimised
on the ground that he had filed a complaint or made disclosure or
rendered assistance in inquiry under this Act. He may file an
application before the Competent Authority seeking redress in the
matter, and such authority shall take such action, as deemed fit and
may give suitable directions to the concerned public servant or the
public authority, as the case may be, to protect such person from
being victimised or avoid his victimisation.
(3) Every direction given under sub-section (1) by the
Competent Authority shall be binding upon the public servant or the
public authority against whom the allegation of victimisation has
been proved.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the power to give directions under sub-
section ( 2), in relation to a public servant, shall include the power
to direct the restoration of the public servant making the disclosure,
to the status quo ante .
Superintendence
of Competent
Authority over
appropriate
machinery
Competent
Authority to
take assistance
of police
authorities, etc.,
in certain cases.
Safeguards
against
victimisation.

45
11. If the Competent Authority either on the application of the
complainant, or witnesses, or on the basis of information gathered,
is of the opinion that either the complainant or public servant or the
witnesses or any person rendering assistance for inquiry under this
Act need protection, the Competent Authority shall issue appropriate
directions to the concerned Government authorities (including
police) which shall take necessary steps, through its agencies, to
protect such complainant or public servant or persons concerned.
12. The Competent Authority shall, notwithstanding any law for
the time being in force, conceal, as required under this Act, the identity
of the complainant and the documents or information furnished by him,
for the purposes of enquiry under this Act, unless so decided otherwise
by the Competent Authority itself or it became necessary to reveal or
produce the same by virtue of the order of the court.
13. The Competent Authority, at any time after the making of
disclosure by the complainant or public servant, if it is of the
opinion that any corrupt practice required to be stopped during the
continuation of any inquiry for the said purpose may pass such
interim orders as it may deem fit, to prevent the immediate stoppage
of such practice.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
14. Where the Competent Authority, at the time of examining
the report or explanations or report referred to in sub-section ( 3) of
section 4 on the complaint submitted by organisations or officials
concerned, is of the opinion that the organisations or officials
concerned, without any reasonable cause, has not furnished the
report within the specified time or mala fide refused to submit the
report or knowingly given incomplete, incorrect or misleading or
false me report or destroyed record or information which was the
subject of the disclosure or obstructed in any manner in furnishing
the report, it shall impose a penalty which may extend to two
hundred fifty rupees for each day till report is so, however, the total
amount of such penalty shall not exceed fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed against any person
unless he has been given an opportunity of being heard
15. Any person, who negligently or mala fidely  reveals the
identity of a complainant shall, without prejudice to the other
provisions of this Act, be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend up to three years and also to fine which may
extend. up to fifty thousand rupees.
16. Any person who makes any disclosure mala fidely  and
knowingly that it was incorrect or false or misleading shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may for extend up
to two years and also to fine which may extend up to thirty
thousand rupees.
Protection of
witnesses and
other persons.
Protection of
identity of
complainant.
Power to pass
interim orders.
Penalty for
furnishing
incomplete or
incorrect or
misleading
comments or
explanation or
report.
Penalty for
revealing identity
of complainant.
Punishment for
false or frivolous
disclosure.

46
17. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by any Department of Government; the Head of the Department
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he proves that
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
Department of Government and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable, such
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
18. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a company, every person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the
part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes
a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.
19. Any person aggrieved by any order of the Competent
Authority relating to imposition of penalty under section 14 or
section 15 may prefer an appeal to the High Court within a period
of sixty days from the date of the order appealed against:
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after
the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the
appeal in time.
Punishment to
Head of
department in
certain cases.
Offences by
companies.
Appeal to High
Court.

47
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the “High
Court” means the High Court within whose jurisdiction the cause of
action arose.
20. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any
matter which the Competent Authority is empowered by or under
this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court
or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.
21.  ( l) No court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Competent Authority
or any officer or person authorised by it.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try any offence
punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
22. ( 1) The Competent Authority shall prepare a consolidated
annual report of the performance of its activities in such form as
may be prescribed and forward it to the Central Government or
State Government, as the case may be.
(2) On receipt of the annual report under sub-section ( 1), the
Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, shall
cause a copy thereof to be laid before each House of Parliament, or
the State Legislature, as the case may be.
Provided that where any other law for the time being in force
provides preparing of such annual report by the Competent
Authority, then the said annual report shall contain a separate part
on the performance of activities under this Act by the Competent
Authority.
23. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against the Competent Pro Authority or against any officer,
employee, agency or person acting on its behalf, in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under
this Act.
24. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure for disclosure by writing or
appropriate electronic means under sub-section ( 4) of section 3;
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Court to take
cognizance.
Report on
disclosures.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power of Central
Government to
make rules.

48
(b) the manner in which the discreet inquiry shall be
made by the Competent Authority under sub-section ( 2) of
section 4;
(c) the additional matter in respect of which the
Competent Authority may exercise the powers of a civil court
under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 2) of section 6;
(d) the form of annual report under sub section ( 1) of
section 22;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, prescribed.
25. The State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
26. The Competent Authority may, with the previous approval
of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not
inconsistent with the provision of the Act and the rules made
thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is
expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this
Act.
27. Every notification issued and every rule made by the
Central Government and No every regulation made by the
Competent Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as a may
be after it is issued or made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the notification or the rule or the
regulation, or both Houses agree that the notification or the rule or
the regulation should not be made, the notification or the rule or the
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that notification or rule or
regulation.
28. Every notification issued by a State Government and
every rule made by a State Government and every regulation made
by the Competent Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is issued, before the State Legislature.
29. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a
period of three years from the date of the commencement of this Act.
Power of State
Government to
make rules.
Powers to make
regulations.
Notification and
rules to be laid
before
Parliament.
Notification
issued and rules
made by State
Government to
be laid before
State Legislature.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

49
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
30. ( 1) The Government of India, Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and
Training) Resolution No.371/12/2002-A VD-III dated the 21st April,
2004 as amended vide Resolution of even number, dated the 29th
April, 2004 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken under the said Resolution be deemed to have been done or
taken under this Act.
Repeal and
savings.

50
50
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Corruption is a social evil which prevents proper and balanced
social growth and economic development. One of the impediments felt
in eliminating corruption in the Government and the public sector
undertakings is lack of adequate protection to the complainants reporting
the corruption or wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of discretion
which causes demonstrable loss to the Government or commission of
a criminal offence by a public servant.
2. The Law Commission of India had in its 179th Report, inter
alia, recommended formulation of a specific legislation titled “The
public Interest Disclosure (Protection of Informers) Bill, 2002 to
encourage disclosure of information regarding corruption or
mal-administration by public servants and to provide protection to
such complainants. The Second Administrative Reforms Commission
in its 4th Report on “Ethics in Governance” has also recommended
formulation of a legislation for providing protection to whistle-blowers.
The Government of India had issued a Resolution No. 89, dated the
21
st April, 2004 authorising the Central Vigilance Commission as the
designated agency to receive written complaints from whistle-blowers.
The said Resolution also, inter alia, provides for the protection to the
whistle-blowers from harassment, and keeping the identity of
whistle-blowers concealed. It has been felt that the persons who
report the corruption or wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of
discretion which causes demonstrable loss to the Government or
commission of a criminal offence by a public servant need statutory
protection as protection given to them by the said Resolution of the
Government of India would not suffice.
3. In view of the position stated in the foregoing paragraphs, it
has been decided to enact a standalone legislation to, inter alia,
provide—
(a) for bringing with ill the scope of the Bill, public
servants being the employees of the Central Government or the
State Government or any corporation established by or under
any Central Act or any State Act, Government Companies,
Societies or local authorities owned or controlled by the Central
Government or the State Government and such other categories
of employees as may be notified by the Central Government or,
as the case may be, the State Government, from time to time,
in the Official Gazette;
(b) adequate protection to the persons reporting corruption
or wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of discretion which
causes demonstrable loss to the Government or commission of
a criminal offence by a public servant;

51
(c) a regular mechanism to encourage such person to
disclose the information on corruption or wilful misuse of
power or wilful misuse of discretion by public servants or
commission of a criminal offence;
(d) the procedure to inquire or cause to inquire into such
disclosure and to provide adequate safeguards against victimisation
of the whistle-blower, that is the person making such disclosure;
(e) safeguards against victimisation of the person reporting
matters regarding the corruption by a public servant;
(f) punishment for revealing the identity of a complainant,
negligently or mala fidely;
(g) punishment for false or frivolous complaints.
4. The notes on clauses explain in detail the provisions of the
Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; PRITHVIRAJ CHA V AN
The 12th August, 2010.

52
52
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This clause provides for the short title, extent and
commencement of the proposed legislation. It is proposed not to
extend the provisions of the proposed legislation to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir. It further proposed to empower the Central
Government to bring it into force on such date as it may appoint by
notification in the Official Gazette and the Central Government may
appoint different dates for different provisions of the Act.
Clause 2.—This clause defines various expressions used in the
proposed legislation which, inter alia, include the expressions “Central
Vigilance Commission”, “Competent Authority”, “disclosure”, “electronic
mail” or “electronic mail message”, “Government company”, “public
authority” and “public servant”.
Clause 3.—This clause lays down the requirements of public
interest disclosure. It provides that notwithstanding anything contained
in the provisions of the Official Secrets Act, 1923, any public servant
[other than those referred to in clauses (a) to (d) of article 33 of the
Constitution] or any other person including any non-governmental
organisation, may make a public interest disclosure before the Competent
Authority.
It further provides that any public servant, being a person or
member referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or
clause (d) of article 33 of the Constitution, may make a public
disclosure if such disclosure does not, directly or indirectly, relate to,
the members of the Armed Force or any matter relating to Armed
Forces; the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of
public order; persons employed in any bureau or other organisation
established by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter
intelligence or any matter relating to such bureau or other organisation,
persons employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication
systems set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation
or any matter relating to such telecommunication system, bureau or
organisation.
It further provides that any disclosure made under the proposed
legislation shall be treated as public interest disclosure to be made
before the Competent Authority which is made in good faith and the
person making such disclosure shall make a personal declaration stating
that he reasonably believes that the information disclosed by him and
allegation contained therein is substantially true.
It further provides that every disclosure shall be made in writing
or by electronic mail or electronic mail message in accordance with
the procedure as may be prescribed which shall contain full particulars
and be accompanied by supporting documents, or other material and

53
the Competent Authority may, if it deems fit, call for further information
or particulars from the person making such disclosure.
It also provides that no action will be taken on public interest
disclosure by the Competent Authority if the disclosure does not
indicate the identity of the complainant or public servant making public
interest disclosure or the identity of the complainant or public servant
is found incorrect or false.
Clause 4.—this clause provides for the powers and functions of
the Competent Authority on receipt of public interest disclosure. It
provides that the Competent Authority shall, on receipt of a public
interest disclosure, ascertain from the complainant or the public servant
whether he was the person or the public servant who made the
disclosure or not and conceal the identity of the complainant unless
the complainant himself has revealed his identity to any other office or
authority while making public interest disclosure or in his complaint or
otherwise.
It further provides that the Competent Authority, upon the
receipt of the complaint and concealing the identity of the complainant,
or the public servant in the first instance, make discreet inquiry, in
such manner as may be prescribed, to ascertain whether there is any
basis for proceeding further to investigate the disclosure and in case
the Competent Authority, either as a result of the discreet inquiry, or
on the basis of the disclosure itself without any inquiry, is of the
opinion that the disclosure requires to be investigated, it shall seek the
comments or explanation or report from the Head of the Department
of The organisation or authority, board or corporation concerned or
office concerned within such time as may specified by it and while
doing so, the competent authority will not reveal the identity of the
complainant or the public servant. However, if the Competent Authority
is of the opinion that it has, for the purpose of seeking comments or
explanation or report from the Head of the Department of the
organisation or authority, board or corporation concerned or office
concerned may reveal the identity of the complainant or public servant
to such Head of the Department of the organisation or authority, board
or corporation concerned or office concerned.
It further provides that the Competent Authority, if after
conducting an inquiry is of the opinion that, the facts and allegations
contained in the disclosure are frivolous or vexatious; or there are no
sufficient grounds for proceeding with the inquiry, it shall close the
matter.
It also provides that after receipt of the comments or explanations
or report referred to in sub-clause (3), if the Competent Authority is
of the opinion that such comments or explanations or report reveals
either wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of discretion or
substantiates allegations of corruption, it shall recommend to the public
authority, for initiating proceedings against the concerned public servant;
or, for taking appropriate administrative steps for redressing the loss
caused to the Government as it result of the corrupt practice or

54
misuse of office or misuse of discretion, as the case may; or, to
recommend the appropriate authority or agency for initiation of criminal
proceedings under the relevant laws for the time being in force, if so
warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case; or, recommend
for taking of corrective measures; or, any other appropriate measure
which may be necessary for the purposes of the proposed legislation
Clause 5.— This clause provides for the matters not be inquired
by the Competent Authority. It provides that if any matter specified or
an issue raised in a disclosure has been determined by a Court or
Tribunal authorised to determine the issue, after consideration of the
matters specified or issue raised in the disclosure, the Competent
Authority shall not take notice of such disclosure to the extent that the
said disclosure seeks to reopen such issue.
It further provides that the Competent Authority shall not entertain
or inquire into any disclosure, in  respect of which a formal and public
inquiry has been ordered under the Public Servants (Inquiries)
Act, 1850 or in respect of a matter which has been referred for
inquiry under the Commissions of inquiry Act, 1952 and shall not
investigate, any disclosure involving an allegation, if the complaint is
made after the expiry of five years from the date on which the action
complained against is alleged to have taken place.
It also provides that nothing in the proposed legislation shall be
construed as empowering the Competent Authority to question, in any
inquiry under the proposed legislation, any bona-fide action or discretion
(including administrative or statutory discretion) exercised in discharge
of duty by the employee.
Clause 6.—This clause lays down the powers of the Competent
Authority. It provides that without prejudice to the powers conferred
upon the Competent Authority under any other law for the time being
in force, the Competent Authority, may require, for the purpose of any
inquiry any public servant or any other person who in its opinion shall
be able to furnish information or produce documents relevant to the
inquiry or assist in the inquiry, to furnish any such information or
produce any such document as may be necessary for the said purpose.
It further provides that for the purpose of any such inquiry
(including the preliminary inquiry), the Competent Authority shall have
all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 and that all proceedings under the proposed
legislation shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings for the purposes
of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and for section 195
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
It further provides that subject to the provisions of clause 7, no
obligation to maintain secrecy or other restriction upon the disclosure
of information obtained by or furnished to the Government or any
public servant, whether imposed by the Official Secrets Act, 1923 or
any other law for the time being in force, shall be claimed by any
public servant in the proceedings before the Competent Authority or

55
any person or agency authorised by it in writing and the Government
or any public servant shall not be entitled in relation to any such
inquiry, to any such privilege in respect of the production of documents
or the giving of evidence as is allowed by any enactment or by any
rules made thereunder.
It also provides that the Competent Authority, while exercising
the powers of the Civil Court, shall take steps as necessary to ensure
that the identity of the person making complaint has not been revealed
or compromised.
Clause 7.—This clause deals with certain matters exempted
from disclosure. It provides that no person shall be required or be
authorised by virtue of provisions contained in the proposed legislation
to furnish any such information or answer any such question or
produce any document or information or render any other assistance
in the inquiry under the proposed legislation, if such question or
document or information is likely to prejudicially affect the interest of
the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign State, public order, decency or morality
or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an
offence, which might involves the disclosure of proceedings of the
Cabinet of the Union Government and Cabinet of the State or any
Committee of the Cabinet.
It further provides that a certificate issued by a Secretary to the
Government of India or the Secretary to the State Government, as the
case may be, or, any authority so authorised by the Central or State
Government certifying that any information, answer or portion of a
document is of the nature specified which might involves the disclosure
of proceedings of the Cabinet of the Union Government and Cabinet
of the State or any Committee of the Cabinet shall be binding and
conclusive.
It also provides that no person shall be compelled for the
purposes of inquiry under the proposed legislation to give any evidence
or produce any document which he could not be compelled to give or
produce in proceedings before a court.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for the superintendence of
Competent Authority over appropriate machinery. It provides that every
public authority shall, for the purposes of dealing or inquiry into the
disclosures sent to it under sub-clause (3) of clause 4, create appropriate
machinery for the said purpose and shall exercise superintendence
over the working of such machinery and give such directions for its
proper functioning, from time to time, as it may consider necessary.
Clause 9.—This clause makes provisions for the Competent
Authority to take assistance of police authorities in certain cases. It
provides that for the purpose of making discreet inquiry or obtaining
information from the organisation concerned, the Competent Authority
shall be authorised to take assistance of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment or the police authorities, or any other authority as may

56
be considered necessary, to render all assistance to complete the
inquiry within the specified time pursuant to the disclosure received by
the competent authority.
Clause 10.—This clause empowers by providing safeguards
against victimization. It provides that the Central Government shall
ensure that no person or a public servant who has made a disclosure
under the proposed legislation is victimized by initiation of any
proceedings or otherwise merely on the ground that such person or
a public servant had made a disclosure or rendered assistance in
inquiry under the proposed legislation and if any person is being
victimized or likely to be victimized on the ground that he had filed
a complaint or made disclosure or rendered assistance in inquiry, he
may file an application before the Competent Authority seeking redress
in the matter, and such authority while taking an action may give
suitable directions to the concerned public servant or the public
authority, as the case may be, to protect such person from being
victimized or avoid his victimization.
It further provides that every direction given under sub-
clause (1) by the Competent Authority shall be binding upon the public
servant or the public authority against whom the allegation of
victimization has been proved and notwithstanding anything contained
in any other law for the time being in force, the power to give
directions under sub-clause (2), in relation to a public servant, shall
include the power to direct the restoration of the public servant
making the disclosure, to the status quo ante.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for Protection of witnesses
and other persons. It provides that if the Competent Authority either
on the application of the complainant, or witnesses, or on the basis
of information gathered, is of the opinion that either the complainant
or public servant or the witnesses or any person rendering assistance
for inquiry under the proposed legislation need protection, the
Competent Authority shall issue appropriate directions to the concerned
Government authorities, including police, which shall take necessary
steps to protect such complainant or public servant or persons
concerned.
Clause 12.—This clause provides for protection of identity of
complainant. it provides that the Competent Authority shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in any other Jaw for the time
being in force, conceal, the identity of the complainant and the
documents or information furnished by him, for the purposes of
enquiry, unless so decided otherwise by the Competent Authority itself
or it became necessary to reveal or produce the same by virtue of the
order of the court.
Clause 13.—This clause empowers the Competent Authority to
pass interim orders. It provides that the Competent Authority, at any
time after the making of disclosure by the complainant or public
servant, if it is of the opinion that any corrupt practice required to be
stopped during the continuation of any inquiry for the said purpose

57
may pass such interim orders as it may deem tit, to prevent the
immediate stoppage of such practice.
Clause 14.—This clause makes provision for penalty for
furnishing incomplete or incorrect or misleading comments or
explanation or report. It provides that the Competent Authority, at the
time of examining the report or explanations or report on the complaint
submitted by organisations or officials concerned, is of the opinion
that the organisations or officials concerned, without any reasonable
cause, has not furnished the report within the specified time or mala
fidely refused to submit the report or knowingly given incomplete,
incorrect or misleading or false report or destroyed record or
information which was the subject of the disclosure or obstructed in
any manner in furnishing the report, shall impose a penalty which may
extend to two hundred fifty rupees for each day till report is furnished,
however, the total amount of such penalty not to exceed fifty thousand
rupees but no penalty shall be imposed against any person without
giving him an opportunity of being heard.
Clause 15.—This clause contains the provision for penalty for
revealing identity of complainant. It provides that any person, who
negligently or mala fidely reveals the identity of a complainant shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to
three years and also to fine which may extend up to  fifty thousand
rupees.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for punishment for false or
frivolous disclosure. It provides that any person who makes any
disclosure mala fidely and knowingly that it was incorrect or false or
misleading shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend up to two years and also to fine which may extend up
to thirty thousand rupees.
Clause 17.—This clause provides for punishment to the Head of
the Department in the Government. It provides that where an offence
under the proposed legislation has been committed by any Department
of the Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly unless he proves that the once was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.
It further provides that if an offence has been committed by a
Department of Government and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
other officer, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Clause 18.—This clause contains provisions for offences by
companies. It provides that where an offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a company, every person directly in
charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its

58
business at the time of commission of offence shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly unless he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised ail due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence. It also provides that where any
offence under the proposed legislation has been committed with the
consent or connivance of or attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager. secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly. The Explanation to the clause seeks to
define the terms “company” and “director”.
Clause 19.—This clause makes provision for filing of an appeal
to the High Court. It provides that any person aggrieved by an order
made by the Competent Authority relating to imposition of penalty, for
furnishing incomplete or incorrect or misleading Comments or
explanation or report under clause 14 or for revealing identity of
complainant under clause 15 may prefer an appeal to the High Court
within a period of sixty days from the date of the order.
It further provides that the High Court may entertain an appeal
after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that
the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within
the said period.
Clause 20.—This Clause provides for exclusion of jurisdiction
of civil courts, It provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction in
respect of any matter which the Competent Authority is empowered
by or under the proposed legislation to determine and no injunction
shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any
action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by
or under the proposed legislation.
Clause 21.—This clause provides for courts to take cognizance
of an offence. It provides that no court shall take cognizance of any
offence punishable under proposed legislation save on a complaint
made by the Competent Authority or any officer or person authorised
by it and no court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate
or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try any offence punishable under
the proposed legislation.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to empower the Competent
Authority to prepare a report on disclosures. It provides that the
Competent Authority shall prepare a consolidated annual report of the
performance of its activities in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government and forward it to the Central Government or State
Government, as the case may be, which would be laid, before Parliament
by the Central Government and, before State Legislature by the State
Government.
It further provides that if any other law for the time being in
force provides preparing of the annual report by the Competent

59
Authority, then the said annual report shall contain a separate part on
the performance of activities under the proposed legislation by the
Competent Authority.
Clause 23.—This clause provides for protection of action taken
in good faith. It provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the Competent Authority or against any
officer, employee, agency or person acting on its behalf, for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 24.—This clause confers power on the Central
Government to make rules. It provides that the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out
the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates
matters for which such rules may be made by the Central Government.
Clause 25.—This clause confers power on the State Government
to make rules. It provides that the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 26.—This clause empowers the Competent Authority to
make regulations. It provides that the Competent Authority may, with
the previous approval of the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of the
proposed legislation and for giving effect to the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for laying of rules, regulations
and notifications before Parliament. It provides that every rule made
and every notification issued by the Central Government and every
regulation made by the Competent Authority under the proposed
legislation shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 28.—This clause provides for laying of rules regulations
and notifications before the State Legislature. It provides that every
rule made and every notification issued by the State Government and
every regulation made by the Competent Authority under the proposed
legislation shall be laid before the State Legislature.
Clause 29.—This clause makes provision for power to remove
difficulties. It provides that if any difficulty arises in effect to the
provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government may, by
order, not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation,
remove the difficulty.
It provides that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
a period of three years from the date of commencement of the
proposed legislation. It also provides that every order under this clause
shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House
of Parliament.

60
Clause 30.—This clause relates to the repeal and savings. It
provides for the repeal of the Resolution of the Government of India,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training) issued vide No. 371/12/2002-A VD-III, dated
the 21st April, 2004 as amended vide Resolution of even number,
dated the 29th April, 2004.
It further provides that notwithstanding the said repeal, anything
done or any action taken under the said Resolution be deemed to have
been done or taken under the proposed legislation.

61
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (l) of clause 24 empowers the Central Government
to make, by notification in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out
the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates
the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These
matters, inter alia. specifies the procedure for disclosure in writing or
appropriate electronic means under sub-clause (4) of clause 3; the
manner in which the discreet inquiry is to be made by the Competent
Authority under sub-clause (2) of clause 4; the additional matter in
respect of which the Competent Authority may exercise the powers of
a civil court under sub-clause (2) of clause 6; the form of annual
report under sub-clause (1) of clause 22.
2. Clause 25 empowers the State Government to make, by
notification in the Official Gazette, rules, for carrying out the provisions
of the proposed legislation.
3. Clause 26 empowers the Competent Authority, with the
previous approval of the Central Government or the State Government,
to make, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulations, consistent
with the provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made
thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is expedient
for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of the proposed
legislation.
4. Clause 21 provides that rules and regulations made by the
Central Government are required to be laid before each House of
Parliament and rules and regulation made by the State Government are
required to be laid before each House of the State Legislature.
5. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may
be made are matters of procedure or administrative detail and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of
legislative power is therefore of a normal character.
61

62
62
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to establish a mechanism to receive complaints relating to disclosure on any
allegation of corruption or wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of
discretion against any public servant and to inquire or cause an
inquiry into such disclosure and to provide adequate safeguards against
victimization of the person making such complaint and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
(Shri Prithviraj Chavan, Minister of State for Personnel, Public Grievance and Pensions)

63
ANNEXURE-B
63
PART-I: COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE SUBJECT
1. Memorandum No.1.
Shri J.P. Shah,
M.Com., LL.B.
Ex-Bank Manager,
Consumer & RTI
Activist,
b-12, Amrapali,
Gandhigram,
Junagarh, Gujarat-
326001.
The credibility of ‘public servant’
is so low that hardly anyone
will rely on true intention and:
capability of CVC or State
Vigilance Commission (SVC)
[competent authority] to keep
names of complainants secret at
all times. The fact that police
protection is provided to an
officer in an organization at the
instance of CVC/SVC, will make
his identity open directly or
through police. Hence, whistle-
blowers should be encouraged
to lodge anonymous complaints
by post or emails.
It is not possible for a common
man to give documentarily prove
corruption or misdeeds. He can
only give rough information
about misdeeds. Hence, the
The Department of Personnel & Training
had issued an OM dated 29.9.92 which
provides that no action should be taken
on anonymous and pseudonymous
complaints. Such complaints should be
ignored and filed. However, there is
provision available in this order that in
case such complaints contain verifiable
details, they may be enquired into in
accordance with existing instructions only
on specific direction of the Head of the
Department/Chief Executive.
The CVC, in 1999, observed that there is
widespread use of anonymous and
pseudonymous petitions by disgruntled
elements to blackmail honest officials and
hence no action should be taken on such
petitions.
As per provisions of the bill each and
every petition is required to be enquired
into. It may not be practically possible to
entertain large number of anonymous and
pseudonymous complaints and there is
likelihood that the very purpose of the
Bill may get diluted.
DoP&T is open to modifications. This
clause was inserted with a motive to
discourage frivolous complaints, inquiry
of which would only be a waste of time.
Sl. Name of Comments/suggestions Response of Govt.
No. organization/
individual
12 3 4

64
12 3 4
2. Memorandum No.2.
Shri Ajay B. Bose,
C.Rly. Flat No.
51/4, Agarwad,
B/H: Sion
Hospital, Sion
9W), Mumbai-
400022 Mob:
9833058952
provision to penalize complainant
for frivolous complaints needs
to be deleted.
Following remedial measures
should be provided to protect
the interest of whistle-blowers:–
(i) Armed protection when
they attend Court/enquiry
for deposing against the
accused whom they have
brought trap.
(ii) Transfer and posting
undertaken with utmost
care keeping the interest
of whistle-blower upper
most in mind.
(iii) Ensuring that whistle-
blowers are not denied
rightful promotion,
increment or perks on
flimsy grounds for
exposing corruption.
(iv) Stiff penalty and
punishment for those
harassing and victimizing
whistle-blowers.
(v) Identity of whistle-blower
should not be revealed if
desired.
Clause No.11 of the bill provides for
protection to witnesses and other persons
including police protection. There may
not be any requirement to specifically
provide in the Bill that armed protection
should be given to whistle blowers.
Clause No.l0(1) stipulates that 
no person
or a public servant who has made a
disclosure is victimized by initiation of
any proceedings or otherwise merely on
the ground that such person or a public
servant had made a disclosure or rendered
assistance in inquiry under this Act. It is
felt that this will take care of all aspects
including transfer, posting, promotion etc.
This is taken care by the safeguards
stipulates in clause 10(2). Further, clause
No.10(3) of the bill stipulates that the
direction of the competent authority is
binding. Hence, it is open for the
competent authority to award punishment
to those who harass or victimize whistle
blowers.
The provisio to Clause No.4(4) of the
bill stipulate that the identity of the
complainant can be revealed to head of
the departments for the purpose of enquiry
under this Act.
The suggestion is perhaps based on this
clause. In this context, it may be
mentioned that this clause has been
inserted after a lot of thought. It was felt
that it may sometimes not be possible

65
12 3 4
for the head of the department to conduct
discreet inquiries in the absence of further
clarifications. Hence, this clause was
inserted with stiff consequences as in
clause 15 of the bill.
This may defeat all efforts made for
concealing the identity of the whistle
blower as well as his protection.
The administrative measures suggested
by Shri Thyloor are incidentally the same
as that suggested by the Administrative
Reforms Commission. The Government
is already considering these
recommendations.
This suggestion cannot be accepted at
this stage considering the fact that not all
citizens of this country are literate.
DoP&T is open to suggestion and
modifications in the Bill. However, at this
stage, it may not be possible for the
CVC to handle complaints of private
sector.
Arrangement for publicity can be made
only after the Bill receives the assent of
the President.
The Bill does not provide for any time
frame to complete enquiry and decide
the complaint. However, if deemed
necessary the same can be provided in
the Rules/Regulations. It may not be
appropriate to provide time-frame in the
Bill because we may have to also spell-
out what action has to be taken if the
same is not complied within the time-
frame.
(vi) Lifting of gag on whistle-
blowers for speaking to
electronic media and print
media for exposing
corruption in their
departments.
Shri Thyloor has suggested that
administrative measures would be
more fruitful than giving adequate
protection to whistle-blowers.
Give computer generated; code
number to the informer which
is assigned by an independent
and private agency preferably
guided by Lokpal or Lokayuktas.
Employees working in private
organizations, banks, foreign
banks etc. should also be
included within the ambit of the,
Bill.
Level of Awareness in the Public
is to be developed by the
concerned a authorities through
various machineries.
Complaints against any Senior
official should be scrutinized by
a designated impartial committee
(of not less than 3 high rank
officers) assisted by Vigilance
Cell, within 30 days.
3.
4.
5.
Memorandum No.3.
Shri Devaraj
Thyloor
Memorandum No.4.
Shri Saileswar
Chakrabarti,
1/288, Naktala,
Kolkata-700047
West Bengal Tel:
033 23772623
Memorandum No.5
Shri G .
Venkatanarayana,
(Ex-Dir KVIC,
Chennai), H.No.
81-363/33,
Adityanagar Colony,
Opp. Galaxy
Cinema,Tolichowki,
Hyderabad 500008
(AP)

66
Clause 11 of the Bill provide for protection
to witnesses.
Incidentally, there was one such
recommendation of the ARC. DoP&T has
already issued a circular requesting all
Ministries/Departments to publicize cases
which have reached finality both in regard
to conviction and major penalties of
dismissal, removal from service and
compulsory retirement.
Clause 16 provide for both fine and
imprisonment for false complaints.
This is a good idea which can be
considered at a later stage while
prescribing detailed rules and procedure
for handling such complaints.
The preamble to the Bill mentions
‘complaints relating to disclosure on
any allegation of corruption or willful
misuse of power or willful misuse of
discretion. ...” This provision itself
12 3 4
If the allegations are found
verifiable, the concerned officials
should be suspended within next
10 days and departmental
enquiry should be conducted
strictly as per time schedule and
guidelines of CVC.
The complainant may be allowed
to be a witness and he should
be provided protection.
Action taken on the accused
officers should be publicized as
it would act as a deterrent.
For false complaints, a penalty
of not less than Rs.25000/- be
imposed besides initiation of
departmental disciplinary
proceedings for major penalty.
Use of latest technology may
help government to ensure
adequate protection to the person
reporting corruption and can also
help in imposing punishment for
false or frivolous complaints.
The idea is that Government may
arrange for a website, e-mail id
and a toll free number. On calling
the toll free number the serve
will record the mobile number
and keep it secret and in return
give a 20 digits new number
which the complainant has to
mandatorily use while lodging
complaints. In case of frivolous
complaints, the complainant can
be traced by help of the mobile
number
The preamble and other relevant
clauses may also include
complaints relating to disclosure
on any allegation for omission
or violation of statutory rules or
6.
7.
Memorandum No.6.
Shri Rajesh A.V .,
44 – river
Gardens,
Neeramankara,
Kaimanom, P.O.
Trivandrum –
695040.
Mob: 9447246298
Tel: 033 23772623
Memorandum No.7.
Shri R.
Subramanian,
Retd.
Superintendent,

67
12 3 4
Coimbatore
Municipal
Corporation, 113,
First Cross Street
(South),
Arignar Anna
Colony,
Hudco Colony,
Tatabad,
Coimbatore
641012.
Acts of the Central Government
or Bylaws or Standing Orders
of Local Body Council or Boards.
Clause 4(7)(iv) may also provide
for suitable compensation.
Clause 10(1): Fabrication of false
charges or suspension or
removal or dismissal from
service under the disciplinary and
appeal rules of respective service
or department or stoppage of
pay and allowances or with
holding of periodical increment
or suppression of promotion or
overlooking of seniority or non-
inclusion in the seniority list of
a public servant who has made
a disclosure under this Act shall
also be considered as
victimization.
A proviso to Clause 16 may be
added as under:-
“provided the responsibility to
prove the allegation shall not
be vested with the complainant,
on the contrary, it shall be vested
with the accused person or public
servant or public authority or
head of office or head of
department who is maintaining
or keeping the relevant records
in his  custody".
takes care of the suggestion made.
Clause 4(7)(v) empowers the competent
authority to take any other measures not
mentioned in clauses (i) to (iv). Hence, it
felt appropriate the competent authority
can order for suitable compensation, if
found necessary.
Clause No.10 provide for safeguard
against victimization. Victimization has
been clarified as “initiation of any
proceedings or otherwise merely on the
ground that such person or a public
servant had made a disclosure or rendered
assistance in inquiry under this Act”.  It
is felt that the above provision will take
care of all aspects including fabrication
of false charges, transfer, posting,
promotion etc.
Clause 16 provide that “Any person who
makes any disclosure mala-fidely and
knowing that it was incorrect or false
or misleading shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may
extend up to two years and also to fine
which may extend up to thirty thousand
rupees”.
It has been suggested that the onus to
prove that the complaint is frivolous shall
lie with the accused person and not on
the complainant.
The bill empowers the competent authority
to take a decision whether the complaint
is frivolous or vexatious. Since the
competent authority is an independent
body, there may not be any need for
inserting such a clause as suggested.

68
12 3 4
Memorandum No.8
Akkhi Bhartya
Grahak Panchayat,
6, Dharmaraj
Plaza, Old
Gangapur Naka
Gangapur Road,
Nashik-422 005
Tel: 0253-
2311412
8. Persons or Members referred to
in Article 33 of the constitution
should be brought in the ambit
of the bill.
Action on the complaint should
be time bound and a decision
should be taken within 90 days.
The limitation for submitting the
disclosure be at least ten years
instead of five years.
Clause 7 of the bill should be
consistent with the provisions
of the RTI Act.
The captioned bill seeks to ensure
any inquiry into disclosures and
provide proper safeguards to the
complainant. But provisions of
the bill do not ensure
achievement of the aims and
objective of the bill.
Previous records show that CVC
has failed to encourage whistle
blowers.
It was Ministry of Defence who
suggested that Armed Forces may be
kept out of the purview of the bill.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
The Bill does not provide for any time
frame to complete enquiry and decide
the complaint. However, if deemed
necessary the same can be provided in
the Rules/Regulations. It may not be
appropriate to provide time-frame in the
Bill because we may have to also spelt
out what action has to be taken if the
same is not complied within the time-
frame.
It may not be possible to retrieve old
files of ten years.
The motive of the whistle blower bill and
that of the RTI Act are different. Though
both are aimed at checking corruption,
the exemptions provided in the whistle
blower bill and that in the RTI Act cannot
be made the same. In fact, the
exemptions under the RTI Act are more
than that of the whistle Blower Bill.
The preamble of the bill already provides
the concept.
Under the present Whistle-blower
Resolution, the CVC had received a total
of 1996 complaints from 2005 to August,
2010 and acted on 614 complaints. The
other were either anonymous/
pseudonymous or non-vigilance
complaints. So, it is not correct to say
that the CVC has failed to encourage
whistle-blowers.

69
12 3 4
There is only one Competent
Authority whereas in other
countries there are many
authorities.
Guaranteeing anonymity of the
whistle blower is the main
feature of this bill. But even this
guarantee has also been diluted.
According to subsection 4 of
the Section 4, the competent
authority can reveal the identity
of the whistle blower to the head
of the department if it thinks
necessary to get his explanation.
Clause 16 of the bill provides
for fined up to Rs. 30,000 and
punished by imprisonment up to
2 years.
An oversight committee having
public representation should be
roped in to draft a new bill.
The preamble and the statement
of object and reasons should
highlight that corruption is the
mother of all evils and that
corruption is a major killer of
innocent people.
The Bill should be renamed as
Promotion of whistle blowing
and Protection of whistle blowers
Bill, 2010 by providing formal
ways to promote whistle blowing.
The words complainant and
complaining should be replaced
by whistle blower.
Whistle blower can be defined
as a person who raises a
concern about wrong doing
occurring in an organization or
body of people. Usually this
person would be from that same
The DoP&T is open to suggestion.
In this context, it may be mentioned that
this clause has been inserted after a lot
of thought. It was felt that it may
sometimes not be possible for the head
of the department to conduct discreet
inquiries in the absence of further
clarifications. Hence, this clause was
inserted with stiff consequences as in
clause 15 of the bill.
The DoP&T is open to suggestion.
This may be decided by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
If it is felt that the preamble needs a
change, the DoP&T is open to suggestion
The DoP&T is open to suggestion.
The DoP&T is open to suggestion.
In the bill, “ complainant ” has been
defined that as any person who makes  a
complaint relating to disclosure under this
act. If it is felt that the term whistle
blower has to be used, it may be defined
accordingly.
9.
Memorandum No. 9
Vijay Kumar, IAS
No. 23, 2 nd Main,
KEB Layout,
Vivekananda
Nagar,
Banashankari 3
rd
stage,
Bangalore-
560 085

70
12 3 4
organization (private or public),
but he could be a person with
which he had no relation of any
type. In the case of public
servants reporting the
misconduct in his own
organization is mandatory.
Whistle blowing could be defined
to mean the following:
• That a criminal offence has
been committee is being
committee or is likely to be
committed.
• That a person has failed, is
failing, or is likely to fail to
comply with any legal
obligation to which he is
subject.
• That a miscarriage of justice
has occurred is occurring
or is likely to occur.
• That the health or safety of
any individual has been is
being or is likely to be
endangered.
• That the environment has
been, is being, or is likely
to be damaged, or
• That information tending to
show any matter falling
within anyone of the above
has been is being or is likely
to be deliberately concealed.
It is important to recognize three
different categories of whistle
blowers:
Presently, the term “disclosure” has been
used instead of “whistle blowing”. The
term “disclosure” has been defined as
under:
(i) an attempt to commit or commission
of an offence under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988;
(ii) willful mis-sue of power or willful
misuse of discretion by virtue of
which demonstrable loss is caused
to the Government or demonstrable
gain accrues to the public servant;
(iii) attempt to commit or commission
of a criminal offence by a public
servant.
The above definition of 'disclosure' takes
care of the suggestion made.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
The bill authorizes all citizens to make
complaints. There may not be any ground
for categorizing whistle blowers.

71
12 3 4
I. Those who are public
servants.
II. Those who are part of any
organized private sector.
III. Those who do not belong
to either of the above two
categories.
It would be in larger public
interest to define whistle blowing
as that mandatory activity of
every public servant whose duty
is to disclose to the public any
one or many of those mentioned
under 9(iii) happening in his own
organization.
It is important to recognize that
as far any government servant
whistle blowing is mandatory and
hence the protection should be
automatic.
Not taking the anti-corruption
pledge or administering the anti-
corruption pledge on the first
day of Vigilance week must be
treated as a misconduct
attracting e major punishment.
The following victimization
should be explicitly mentioned
to act as deterrent against
corrupt seniors who indulge in
harassment to save their own
skins:-
• Discrimination in any
manner, unusually as close
observation of what one
says and does,
Organizational stonewalling-
not responding to letters,
not giving appointment, not
inviting for meetings etc.
Vindictive tactics to make
Whistle-blowing cannot be made
mandatory for all public servants, as this
will create an unhealthy work
environment.
As above.
The pledge is not optional and generally
all public servants are required to
administer the oath. However, not taking
the oath does not amount to misconduct
attracting disciplinary proceedings, as per
existing rules.
Clause No.10 provide for safeguard
against victimization. Victimization has
been clarified as “initiation of any
proceedings or otherwise merely on the
ground that such person or a public
servant had made a disclosure or rendered
assistance in inquiry under this Act”.  It
is felt that the above provision will take
care of all aspects including transfer,
posting, promotion etc.

72
one’s work more difficult
or insignificant frequent
transfers, transfers to posts
which do not normally
warrant posting of an
officer of his seniority,
initiating enquiry without any
basis, framing false charges,
withdrawing facilities, not
sanctioning leave, violating
all Rules with the sole
intention of harassing,
forcing the whistleblower to
seek redress in Courts and
other authorities, withholding
salary on flimsy grounds,
suspension pending inquiry,
transfer, dilution or
withdrawal of duties powers
and responsibilities,
recording adverse entries in
the service records, issue
of memos, verbal abuse,
questioning one’s mental
health, threatening dismissal
from Service, Isolation &
humiliation, assassination of
one’s character, act in such
a manner that continuation
in the organization becomes
difficult and dangerous and
such other type of
harassment.
• As far as private citizens
blowing whistles the
following harassment should
be mentioned explicitly:
Threats to the whistleblower and
family members, misuse of
authority to deny basic civic
facilities, reopening closed or
forgotten cases (The Bill does
not want to act against more
than 5 year old incidents),
physically attacking, denying
Police protection when sought.
12 3 4
Clause 11 stipulates that if the Competent
Authority either on the application of the
complainant or witnesses, or on the basis
of information gathered, is of the opinion
that either the complainant or public
servant or the witnesses or any person
rendering assistance for inquiry under this
Act need protection, the Competent
Authority shall issue appropriate directions
to the concerned Government authorities
(including police) which shall take
necessary steps, through its agencies, to
protect such complainant or public
servant or persons concerned. This would

73
12 3 4
• The following definition of
Mal-administration given by the
Law Commission in its 2001
Report should be used:
“Mal-administration’
includes any action taken or
purporting to have been taken
or being taken or proposed to
be taken in the exercise of
administrative or statutory power
or discretion,
Where such action is
unreasonable, unjust, oppressive
or improperly discriminatory;
Where there has been negligence
or undue delay in taking such
action;
Where there has been reckless,
excessive or unauthorized use of
power in taking such action;
Where such action amounts to
breach of trust;
Where such action involves the
conduct of a public servant
which would result in wastage
of public funds or causes loss
or prejudice to the State or is
prejudicial to public interest in
any manner; or
Where such action is outside the
authority conferred by law or
amounts to violations of systems
or procedure",
ENCOURAGEMENT TO
WHISTLE BLOWERS:
Whistle blowing is encouraged in
all sectors must be emphasized.
take care of all the problem highlighted.
The definition suggested is based on the
suggestion made by the Law Commission
of India in its 179
th report. The Group of
Ministers and also the Committee of
Secretaries felt that such stringent clauses
would hamper smooth functioning of
Government servants.
This purpose can be achieved by giving
wide publicity to the Act.

74
12 3 4
In every public function every
public servant. must speak about
the need to blow whistle.
All government printed
stationeries (calendars, diaries,
advertisements, receipt bills,
salary bills etc.) notifications,
circulars, orders etc must carry
a slogan promoting whistle
blowing.
Just like the statutory warning
about the ill effects, of smoking
by displaying serious but
grotesque pictures, the ill effects
of corruption and the need to
blow whistle blowing should be
made mandatory.
Under any circumstance cash
incentives should not be given
to whistle blowers. However,
losses, if any, incurred must be
compensated in full.
• The following observation
made in the Law Commission’s
Report could be used to create
a provision to enable a
whistle blower to inform larger
public:
He reasonably believed that he
would be victimized if he had
raised the matter internally or
with a prescribed regulator (i.e.
Competent authority);
There was no prescribed regulator
(of if the appointment of the
competent authority is not at all
transparent); and he reasonably
believed that evidence was likely
to the concealed or destroyed;
or
This suggestion can be considered at
appropriate time.
This suggestion can be considered at
appropriate time.
The bill has no provision for giving reward
to whistle blowers. Parliamentary Standing
Committee may take a view on this.
These provisions are adequately covered
under clause 10(2) of the bill which
provide as under:
“If any person is being victimized or
likely to be victimized on the ground that
he had filed a complaint or made
disclosure or rendered assistance in inquiry
under this Act, he may file an application
before the Competent Authority seeking
redress in the matter, and such authority
shall take such action, as deemed fit and
may give suitable directions to the
concerned public servant or the public
authority, as the case may be, to protect
such person from being victimized or
avoid his victimization.”

75
12 3 4
The concern has already been
raised with the employer or a
prescribed regulator. These
preconditions do not, however,
apply if the malpractice is of
an extremely serious nature.
Where such action is outside the
authority conferred by law or
amounts to violations of systems
or procedure.”
Any Government servant can
talk or write against evils of
corruption just like today he does
no evils like Prosecution, Child
Labour, Illiteracy, Dowry etc as
part of his duties without the
need to give prior intimation.
Recognizing the fact that
frivolous and false complaints
are prices to be paid for having
allowed the Systems to collapse
and for not taking action against
widespread corruption for a long
time, either this clause should
be deleted or there should be at
least five year moratorium on
this clause.
As corruption is a criminal
activity the 5 year limit should
be removed as the RTI Act
allows exposing corruption
which-happened any time in the
past.
Whether identity should be
revealed or not should be totally
left to the whistleblower with
the liberty given to the whistle
blower to withdraw permission
given earlier.
As far as what information  can
be given would be decided as
per the Right to Information Act.
This is outside the purview of the bill.
DoP&T is open to suggestion.
It may be difficult to retrieve old records.
Moreover, the Government will not be
able to store all such old documents
safely forever.
The bill provides for revealing the identity
only in exceptional circumstances and that
to the head of the department as stipulated
in clause 12.
Though the motive of both the whistle
blower bill and the RTI Act is the same,
they are based on different footings.

76
The same office which drives a
person to seek protection should
never be involved in giving
protection and protection should
be extended to members of the
family also.
•  The transparent selection of
Competent Authority and
members of the Appellate
Authority (Tribunal) every step
of which is subjected to
thorough public scrutiny could
be done in the following manner:
Application should be called,
after giving wide publicity,
directly from person with
exemplary integrity who himself
had at least directly had blown
whistle or had supported
whistleblowers
The credentials and claims of
all these applications should be
put on the respective
Government's website and
provision should be made to file
comments on-line.
Each of the applicants should
be asked to give his response to
the comments received by
providing documentary evidences
wherever needed.
The office entrusted with the
process of appointing the
Competent Authority should
make a thorough examination of
the applications, responses from
the public and the remarks by
the applicants if any and after
assigning marks in a transparent
manner prepare a list of top ten
out of all the applications
received.
12 3 4
Clause 11 stipulates for providing
protection to whistle blower, witnesses
and other persons.
This is beyond the purview of the bill.

77
12 3 4
A Committee of eminent people-
headed by a retired Chief Justice
in case of central government
and a retired High Court Chief
Justice in the case of a State
Government making the
appointment should scrutinize the
ten applications, comments from
the public and  response from
the applicants if any and the
comments of the office and then
only shortlist five names clearly
indicating why these were
selected and reason for rejection
of remaining five applications
which were assigned ranks within
top ten should be put on the
official website.
Finally shortlisted five people
should then participate in a
public debate which must be
aired by Government Television,
which should allow for public
to ask questions live. The
Selection Committee comprising
of the Head of the State, the
Opposition Leader and the
Supreme Court/High Court Chief
Justice should watch the public
debate and then give reason in
detail as to why one of them is
to be appointed as the
Competent Authority.

78
78
PART-I: COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE SUBJECT
1. Memorandum N0.10.
The Resist
Initiative
International
(Dr. Subhash
Mohapatra),
Executive Director,
Pandab Patna,
Nirakarpur,
Khurda, Orissa,
Pin-752919
Tel. +91
6756222221
Remove the restriction contained
in Chapter 3, Section 3(1)
(a-d), which shield Armed
Forces and Security Forces, as
well as intelligence operations
from accountability
Section 5(3) of the bill stipulate
that the competent authority shall
not investigate any disclosure
involving an allegation, if the
complaint is made after the
expiry of five years from the
date on which the action
complained against is alleged to
have taken place. The Resist
Initiative International has
suggested for removal of this
section because it is contrary to
the existing practicing under the
Criminal Procedure Code and
also the recommendations made
in the UNHCR's Concluding
Observations on India, 1997.
Definition of “Victimization”
should be more specific and
exhaustive. The potential negative
repercussions of making a Public
Interest Disclosure are numerous
and varied, ranging from physical
violence to verbal threats and
intimidation, to discrimination and
other mental and emotional
hardships.
Ministry of Defence had suggested that
Armed Forces may be kept out of the
purview of the bill.
It may be difficult to retrieve old records.
Moreover, the Government will not be
able to store all such old documents
safely forever.
Clause No.l0 provide for safeguard against
victimization. Victimization has been
clarified as “initiation of any proceedings
or otherwise merely on the ground that
such person or a public servant had made
a disclosure or rendered assistance in
inquiry under this Act", It is felt that the
above provision will take care of all
aspects ranging from physical violence
to verbal threats and intimidation, to
discrimination and other mental and
emotional hardships. However, DoP&T
is open to suggestions.
Sl. Name of Comments/suggestions Response of Govt.
No. organization/
individual
12 3 4

79
12 3 4
Protection from victimization
should be more specific and
exhaustive. The existing Clause
10(2) is vague in its definition
of protection, an oversight
which may lead to inadequate
protection measures. The ideal
clause would specify the possible
protections available to those
who make Public Interest
Disclosures, as well as specify
that these protections are
available to not only the person
or persons making the
disclosure, but also witnesses,
victims, relatives (of the person
making the disclosure, of
witnesses, or of victims) and/or
others who are close to them
(persons making the disclosure,
witnessees, or victims).
Clause 16, detailing punishment
for frivolous disclosures ought
to be removed. This clause
represents a clear danger to those
making Public Interest
Disclosures, and human rights
defenders specifically. The Bill
does not provide an adequate
definition of "frivolous
disclosures" which leaves it
opens to manipulation. As such,
this clause effectively handicaps
the entire Bill, dissuading people
from making Disclosures for
fear of being punished
themselves, despite good
intentions. The Resist Initiative
International adjures the
Government to remove this
clause entirely and strike from
the Bill any provisions for
prosecution of those who make
public interest disclosures.
There should be numerous
Competent Authority. Preferably
Clause 11 of the Bill provides for adequate
protection to witnesses.
This clause was inserted with a motive
to discourage harassment of honest public
servants by making frivolous complaints,
inquiry of which would only be a waste
of time.
This particular bill was preceded by a
Bill which was drafted by the Law
Memorandum No.ll.
Shri Krishna H Rao
2.

80
12 3 4
one in each Department. The
CVC/State Vigilance Commission
may not be able to handle large
number of complaints effectively.
There should be provisions for
cash rewards.
Persons making complaints to
other forums including the
concerned Departments heads
will be left without protection.
The term "Complainant" should
not be used as it shows narrow
thinking and prejudice against
such a person.
There should be no penalties and
imprisonment to complainants.
Names of the whistle blower
should not be revealed even to
the head of Government
Departments.
By seeking to make the identity
of the whistleblower a secret,
the Bill inadvertently creates
conditions wherein anybody with
that privileged information
(especially employees of CVC/
SVC) may gain crores of rupees
by betraying his identity to
interest parties. Thus, the bill
perversely endangers the
whistleblowers and sets the stage
for various kinds of attacks and
retributions.
12 Shiv Krupa,
Kulupwadi Road,
Mumbai- 400066
Contact- 022 288
60814
Commission of India in 2002. That Bill
became the basic pattern on which this
bill has come up. Even in that Bill, the
proposal was that the CVC would be the
competent authority and there was no
proposal for numerous competent
authority.
The bill has no provision for giving reward
to whistle blowers. Parliamentary Standing
Committee may take a view on this.
On promulgation of this act, there may
be no need for whistleblowers to make
complaints to other forums. Further, it
may not be possible for the Government
to protect all whistleblowers who
themselves reveal their identity to other
forums.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee
may take a view on this.
-do-
The bill provides for revealing the identity
only in exceptional circumstances and that
too only to the head of the department
as stipulated in clause 12.
Clause 15 of the Bill provides for
imprisonment for a term upto 3 years
and also fine upto fifty thousand rupees
for revealing identity of complainants.

81
12 3 4
There should be specific
mechanism for moving trails on
fast tracks
The Police force and armed
forces should be included in the
ambit of the bill.
The term whistle blower should
be used.
The action taken by the
Competent Authority should be
put in public domain.
Shri Dubey has cited his own
case where he has mentioned
that though CVC has rendered
all protection, the administrative
Department is reluctant to protect
him.
On receiving complaints the
Competent Authority should give
a complaint number.
The complainant should be
apprised of the development and
action completed at each stage
so that he may be able to point
out the deficiencies.
Even if the accused is acquitted,
the complainant should be
exempted from being prosecuted
for an act of defamation.
The CBI is being strengthened and
additional Special Courts are being set-
up.
Ministry of Defence had suggested that
Armed Forces may be kept out of the
purview of the bill.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
On the basis of the recommendation of
the ARC, DoP&T has already issued a
circular requesting all Ministries/
Departments to publicize cases which
have reached finality both in regard to
conviction and major penalties of
dismissal, removal from service and
compulsory retirement.
Under the present “whistleblower”
Resolution, the direction of the CVC is
not binding upon the administrative
authority. Clause 10(3) of the Bill
stipulates that every direction given by
the Competent Authority shall be binding
upon the public authority.
This can be considered at the time of
framing the Rules/ Regulations.
This can be debated at the time of
framing the Rules/ Regulations.
When the identity of the complainant is
kept secret, the question of such clause
does not arise. The Bill discourages
frivolous complaints, it may not be
appropriate to provide such legal clause
barring the accused from filing defamation
suits.
3.
4.
Memorandum No.12
Shri MP Dubey,
Joint Director and
Officer in charge
STPI -
Vishkhapatnam-
530049
Mob No.
9000337719
Memorandum No. 13
Shri Rajinder
Kumar Goyal,
109-D, RCF
Colony, & nbs
Hussainpur-144602
Distt. Kapurthala
(Pb) Mob No.
9779243039

82
The time limit as provided in
Section 5(3) of the Bill should
be removed.
The scope of disclosure should
be widened to include complaints
relating to illegal acts performed
by contractors/suppliers directly
or through their employees and/
or hired persons.
In section 2(d)(ii) the word
“demonstrable” occurring in both
places may be deleted and
suitably replaced with  the word
“wrongful”.
In section 3(1) of the act the
words within brackets “[other
than those referred to in clauses
(a) to (d) of article 33 of the
constitution]” may be deleted.
In section 3(1) of the act the
following word may be added
after the words “non-
governmental organization” and
before the word “may” “
duly
registered or recognized by
central or state governments”.
It may be difficult to retrieve old records.
Moreover, the Government will not be
able to store all such old documents
safely forever.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee
may take a view in the matter because
the ambit of the bill will increase
considerably and CVC may not be able
to handle complaints on a large scale.
Clause 2(d)(ii) provide as under:–
“disclosure” means a complaint relating
to – willful misuse of power or willful
misuse of discretion by virtue of which
demonstrable loss is caused to the
government or demonstrable gain accrues
to the public servant. The word
‘demonstrable’ is more appropriate than
'wrongful'. The word ‘wrongful’ has a
wider meaning which may make difficult
for government servants to work.
Clause 3(1) of the bill stipulates as under:–
Notwithstanding anything contained in
the provisions of the Official Secrets
Act, 1923, any public servant [other
than those referred to in clauses (a) to
(d) of article 33 of the Constitution} or
any other person including any
nongovernmental organization, may make
a public interest disclosure before the
Competent Authority: .....
Ministry of Defence had suggested that
Armed forces may be kept out of the
purview of the Bill.
May not be necessary as all citizens are
eligible to lodge complaints.
12 3 4
Memorandum No.14
Shri Karthikeyan,
ML
Advocate, Madras
High Court, New
No. 52, Gangai
Amman Koil Street,
vadapalani,
Chennai- 600026
Tel: 9884093836
5.

83
12 3 4
In section 3(1) of the act the
“provided and its clauses (a) to
(d)” may n be completely deleted.
In section 3(3) of the act the
word “substantially” may be
deleted and it may be replaced
with the word 
“reasonably”.
In section 4(4) of the act in the
provided clause at the end after
the word purpose and before
the full stop the following words
may be added 
“after giving notice
to the public servant who made
the disclosure and after obtaining
his objections if any”.
In section 4(6)(b) of the act
after the words “it shall close
the matter” the following words
may be added 
“and send a copy
of the closure report to the
complainant”.
In section 5(3) of the act the
word “five years” may be
deleted and it may be replaced
with the word 
“seven years”.
In section 10(1) of the act after
the word central government and
Ministry of Defence who suggested that
Armed forces may be kept out of the
purview of the Bill.
Clause 3(3) of the Bill stipulates as under:-
“Every disclosure shall be made in good
faith and the person making disclosure
shall make a personal declaration stating
that he reasonably believes that the
information disclosed by him and
allegation contained therein is
substantially true.”
As the complainant is required to provide
evidence, the word substantially may be
more appropriate than reasonably.
Clause 4(4) provides that the Competent
authority can reveal the identity of the
complainant to the head of organization.
In this context it has been suggested that
this should be only with the consent of
the complainant. This is a good suggestion
and the Parliamentary Standing committee
may take a view. DoP&T is open to
suggestions.
It has been suggested that if the complaint
is closed, the complainant should be
informed accordingly. This suggestion can
be take care of while framing the rules/
regulations.
Clause 5(3) of the bill stipulate that “the
Competent Authority shall not investigate,
any disclosure involving an allegation, if
the complaint is made after the expiry of
five years from the date on which the
action complained against is alleged to
have taken place.” It has been suggested
that 5 years may be replaced by 7 years.
The period provided in the Bill is
reasonable as it may not be possible for
the Government to retrieve old files and
also to store all old records forever.
Clause 10 (1) of the Bill provide as
under:–

84
12 3 4
before the word shall the
following words may be a
inserted 
“and the state
governments”.
In section 14 of the act the
word “two hundred fifty rupees”
may be deleted and it may be
replaced with 
“five hundred
rupees”.
In section 14 of the act the
word “five thousand rupees”
may be deleted and it may be
replaced with 
“one lakh rupees”.
In section 15 of the act the
word “three years” may be
deleted and it may be replaced
with 
“seven years”.
In section 15 of the act the
word “fifty thousand rupees”
may be deleted and replaced with
“two lakh rupees”.
In section 16 of the act the
after the section a “Provided
clause may be added to make
the burden of proof lie on the
prosecution to prove the guilt of
the complainant”.
“The Central Government shall ensure
that no person or a public servant who
has made a disclosure under this Act is
victimized by initiation of any proceedings
or otherwise merely on the ground that
such person or a public servant had made
a disclosure or rendered assistance in
inquiry under this Act." It has been
suggested to include “state governments”.
This is not possible as this is a Central
legislation providing enabling provision in
Section 25 of the Act for adoption by
the State Governments.
Clause 14 of the Bill prescribes for a
penalty of Rs.250/- per day for not
furnishing comments/explanation/report to
the competent authority. It has been
suggested to increase the penalty to
Rs.500/- per day subject to a ceiling of
Rs.1,00,000/-. The RTI Act provides for
penalty of Rs.250/- per day and so does
this Bill. The Parliamentary Standing
Committee may take a view in the matter.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
The maximum penalty for revealing
identity of a complainant is 3 years
imprisonment and/or fine of Rs.50,000/-.
It has been suggested to increase this to
7 years and Rs.2 lakhs. The penalty
should not be too harsh. The
Parliamentary Standing Committee may
take a view in the matter. DoP&T is
open to suggestions.
Clause 16 provide that “Any person who
makes any disclosure mala-fidely and
knowing that it was incorrect or false or
misleading shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend
up to two years and also to fine which
may extend up to thirty thousand rupees”.

85
12 3 4
In section 19 of the act the
word “section 15” the following
word may be added 
“or section
16”.
The Bill does not cover corporate
sector.
The proviso to reveal the identity
of the whistleblower even to the
Head of the Department should
be removed.
The Bill should not have been
drafted without consulting the
people.
There should be provision for
reward to whistle-blowers.
It has been suggested that the onus to
prove that the complaint is frivolous shall
lie with the prosecution and not on the
complainant.
The bill empowers the competent authority
to take a decision whether the complaint
is frivolous or vexatious. Since the
competent authority would be an
independent body, there may not be any
need for inserting such a clause as
suggested.
It has been suggested that the option to
move the High Court may also be available
to the Complainant if he is charged for
lodging frivolous complaint. The
Parliamentary Standing Committee may
take a view in the matter. DoP&T is
open to suggestions.
DoP&T is open to suggestions and
modifications in the Bill. However, at this
stage, it may not be possible for the
CVC to handle complaints of private
sector.
This clause has been inserted after a lot
of thought. It was felt that it may
sometimes not be possible for the head
of the department to conduct discreet
inquiries in the absence of further
clarifications. Hence, this clause was
inserted with stiff consequences as in
clause 15 of the bill.
The Bill was under consideration of the
Group of Ministers. Now, it is in public
domain.
The bill has no provision for giving reward
to whistle blowers. Parliamentary Standing
Committee may take a view on this.
Memorandum No. 15
Dr. R. Stephen
Louie,
Advocate,
F-9, I Phase, 1st
Floor, Spencer
Plaza, Chennai-
60002, India
Memorandum No.16
Shri PM Bhat G-1,
Brigade Retreat,
VV Mohalla,
Mysore-570 002
Tele: 570 002
6.
7.

86
12 3 4
Memorandum No. 17
Shri P. Sreedhara
Babn, Advocate,
1-4-169/47,
Tirumala Enclave,
Old Alwal-
Secunderabad
(A.P) Pin-500010
Tel: 9908117418
Memorandum No. 18,
National compaign
for people right to
information
Shri Aruna Roy &
Shri Nikhil Dey,
C-17A, Munirka,
New Delhi-
110 067
8.
9.
No mala-fides shall be attributed
to the person disclosing the
information pertaining to corrup-
tion/willful misuse of power etc.
Provision to adequately
compensate the loss to the
complainant for loss or damage
caused to the person furnishing
information.
If the allegations are
substantiated in the preliminary
enquiry the accused should be
suspended forthwith.
Provide for time limit to initiate
action.
Provide retrospective effect to
the Bill/Act to enable earlier
whistleblower to get justice.
The Bill does not provide any
protection for a private
whistleblower ( e.g. RTI activist)
The CVC is not suitable to be
the Competent Body under this
Act for the following reasons:
Must seek permission to initiate
enquiries.
• Must seek permission to
initiate enquiries.
• Does not have
jurisdiction over
politicians.
• Does not have
resources, thus will
need to outsource
investigation.
The Bill has provisions penalizing person
making disclosure mala fidely  and
knowingly. Removal of penalty would
increase the number of frivolous complaints.
Clause 4(7)(v) empowers the competent
authority to take any other measures not
mentioned in clauses (i) to (iv). Hence, it
is open for the competent authority to
order for suitable compensation, if found
necessary.
Action against accused can be taken only
under the extant rules.
This can be taken care of while framing
the rules/regulations.
It may be difficult to retrieve old records.
Moreover, the Government will not be
able to store all such old documents
safely forever.
Clause 11 provides for protection which
also includes police protection.
Clause 10(3) provides that every direction
of the Competent Authority shall be
binding.
Politicians are not covered under the ambit
of the Bill.
The question of outsourcing investigation
does not arise. The CVC itself will
conduct discreet inquiries. The strength
of the Commission can be increased if
functionally required.

87
12 3 4
• Only has advisory
powers and thus cannot
mandate enforcement of
its recommendation.
• Appointment procedure
for a CVC is
nontransparent, and as
seen from the current
controversy over
Mr. Thomas appoint-
ment, may also
lack moral authority.
• There are no provisions
for transparency and
accountability of the
CVC in the CVC act,
or for the Competent
Authority in this Act.
Involving the HoD in
investigation of complaints will
compromise both the integrity
of the investigation and safety
of the whistleblower.
Armed forces, intelligence
agencies and institutions
substantially funded by the
government are not included in
scope.
Permissible disclosure is
narrowly defined with potential
for gaps in coverage of
maladministration, public safety
and environmental issues.
Further matter older than 5 years
are out of scope.
Clause 10(3) provides that every direction
of the Competent Authority shall be
binding.
Appointment is transparent as the
recommendation is made by a committee
comprising of the Prime Minister, Home
Minister and Leader of the Opposition.
The Annual Report of the CVC is laid on
the Table of both Houses of the
Parliament and it is also studied by the
Departmental Standing Committee.
This clause has been inserted after a lot
of thought. It was felt that it may
sometimes not be possible for the head
of the department to conduct discreet
inquiries in the absence of further
clarifications. Hence, this clause was
inserted with stiff consequences as in
clause 15 of the Bill.
Ministry of Defence had suggested that
Armed Forces may be kept out of the
purview of the Bill.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
It may be difficult to retrieve old records.
Moreover, the Government will not be
able to store all such old documents
safely forever.

88
12 3 4
The provision of imprisonment
of complainant for disclosures
deemed mala fide  is susceptible
to misuse and may be used to
discourage potential whistle-
blowers.
Lack of timeline for investigation
may be used to shield corrupt
public servants. Further long
drawn investigation will render
whistleblower protection (if
needed) irrelevant.
Exemptions from disclosure
granted under Section 7(1) on
the basis of mere certification
by a GoI or state secretary can
be misused to thwart
investigation; adequate safeguards
are required.
The Competent Authority must
act on all complaints supported
with credible information
regardless whether or not identity
of complainant is disclosed.
The burden of proof to prove
victimization is on the
whistleblower versus international
best practices where the onus is
on the supervisor to show
legitimate rationale for negative
action taken.
This clause was inserted with a motive
to discourage frivolous complaints, inquiry
of which would only be a waste of time.
DoP&T is, however, open to
modifications.
This can be taken care of while framing
the Rules/Regulations.
Clause 7(1) of the Bill provide for
exemption from disclosure documents or
information which is likely to prejudicially
affect the interest of the sovereignty and
integrity of the nation etc. It is absolutely
necessary to provide such exemption as
the country cannot be put to a stake.
Certain clauses were inserted with a
motive to discourage frivolous complaints,
inquiry of which would only be a waste
of time.
Clause 16 provide that “Any person who
makes any disclosure mala-fidely and
knowing that it was incorrect or false or
misleading shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend
up to two years and also to fine which
may extend up to thirty thousand rupees”.
It has been suggested that the onus to
prove that the complaint is frivolous shall
lie with the accused person and not on
the complainant.
The bill empowers the competent authority
to take a decision whether the complaint
is frivolous or vexatious. Since the
competent authority is an independent
body, there may not be any need for
inserting such a clause as suggested.

89
12 3 4
Bill must provide protection for
two types of whistleblowers:
citizen and institutional
(government) whistleblower.
Competent Authorities must be
designated at each level for
decentralized administration to
ensure protection for
whistleblowers as well as
accountability of state officials
at all levels.
Appellate/oversight body must be
independent, have a time period
to decide matters, have adequate
power and resources, and
subject to transparent
appointments and functioning.
In case of grievous hurt to the
whistleblower, a special task
force under the Competent
Authority will investigate issues
being probed by the whistle-
blower.
The appellate/oversight body will
primarily be responsible for
protection of whistleblower; will
have oversight of investigation
under existing statutes and
organizations but will not take
over all investigative functions.
Whistleblower must be provided
an opportunity for rebuttal in
case a complaint is closed based
on preliminary investigation.
The Bill penalizes frivolous and
vexatious complaints.
The Competent Authority may
disclose the identity to the Head
of the Department if it becomes
necessary to do so.
All citizens can lodge complaints and are
protected accordingly.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
There is no provision in the Bill for
appellate/oversight authority.
There is no provision in the Bill for special
task force etc.
There is no provision in the Bill for
appellate/oversight authority.
This can be taken care of while framing
the rules/regulations.
This clause was inserted with a motive
to discourage frivolous complaints, inquiry
of which would be a waste of time.
This clause has been inserted after a lot
of thought. It was felt that it may
sometimes not be possible for the head
of the department to conduct discreet
Memorandum No.19
PRS Legislative
Research
10.

90
The Bill needs to create a
mechanism that enables
complaints against corrupt
officials but deters the use of
this facility to harass honest
officials.
The Competent Authority has
only recommendatory powers.
Victimization has not been
defined.
No time limit has been
prescribed for discreet inquiry.
Corporate whistleblowers are not
covered in the Bill.
No penalty has been prescribed
for victimization.
inquiries in the absence of further
clarifications. Hence, this clause was
inserted with stiff consequences as in
clause 15 of the bill.
It is because of this that penalty has
been proposed for frivolous complaints.
Clause 10(3) of the Bill stipulates that
every direction given by the Competent
Authority shall be binding upon the public
authority.
Clause No.l0 provide for safeguard against
victimization. Victimization has been
clarified as “initiation of any proceedings
or otherwise merely on the ground that
such person or a public servant had made
a disclosure or rendered assistance in
inquiry under this Act”.
DoP&T is open to suggestions. However,
timeframe can be incorporated in the
rules/regulations.
DoP&T is open to suggestion and
modifications in the Bill. However, at this
stage, it may not be possible for the
CVC to handle complaints of private
sector.
Though the Bill has no penal provision
for victimization it provides adequate
powers the Competent authority to impose
penalty on such officers.
12 3 4

91
91
COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE SUBJECT
Sl. Name of Comments/suggestions Response of Govt.
No. organization/
individual
12 3 4
1. Memorandum No. 20.
Dr. K.C. Sunny,
Professor & Head,
Department of
Law, University of
Kerala,
Thiruvananthapuram.
Incorporate mal-administration
also as a ground for making
disclosure.
The bill does not cover acts of
public servants which cause
harm to public safety, health and
environment.
Private Sector and non-
governmental organizations
should be brought within the
scope of the Bill.
Ministers should be included.
The applicability of the Bill
should be extended to the whole
of India and also to the officials
from India working in foreign
countries.
The competent authority should
have a representation also from
the Judiciary.
Identity of the whistle blower
should not be disclosed to the
head of the department.
The term “mal-administration” was used
and defined in the Bill suggested by the
Law Commission of India in its 179
th
report. The Group of Ministers (GoM)
and also the Committee of Secretaries
(CoS) felt that such stringent clauses
would hamper smooth functioning of
Government servants. Hence, the present
grounds enunciated in the Bill would
suffice.
DoP&T is open to suggestion.
At this stage, it may not be possible for
the CVC to handle complaints of private
sector.
It was felt that Ministers may be left out
for the present.
The Bill extends to whole of India except
the State of Jammu & Kashmir. All
government officials are covered in the
Bill whether working in India or abroad,
in connection with the affairs of the
Government.
There is only one Competent Authority
i.e. CVC. Under the existing Act, this is
not possible.
The suggestion is perhaps based on the
Proviso of clause 4. This clause has
been inserted after a lot of thought. It
was felt that it may sometimes not be
possible for the head of the department

92
to conduct discreet inquiries in the
absence of full details/further clarifications.
Hence, this clause was inserted with stiff
consequences as in clause 15 of the bill.
This can be taken care of while framing
the rules/regulations.
It may be difficult to retrieve old records.
Moreover, the Government will not be
able to store all such old documents
safely forever.
Supporting documents may be necessary
to carry out investigation and also to
ensure that the complaint is not frivolous.
However, DoP&T is open to suggestions.
This clause was inserted with a motive
to discourage frivolous complaints, inquiry
of which would only be a waste of time.
However, DoP&T is open to suggestions.
DoP&T is open to suggestions. However,
at this stage, it may not be possible for
the CVC to handle complaints of NGOs/
private sector.
The bill authorizes all citizens to make
complaints. There may not be any ground
for categorizing whistle blowers.
Clause 11 stipulates for providing
protection to all whistle-blower, witnesses
and other persons. There may not be
any ground for categorizing whistle
blowers.
This particular bill was preceded by a
Bill which was drafted by the Law
Commission of India in 2002. That Bill
became the basic pattern on which this
bill has come up. Even in that Bill, the
proposal was that the CVC would be the
competent authority and there was no
proposal for numerous competent
authorities.
Time-limit may be provided for
investigation.
The time limit of 5 years for
lodging of complaints should be
removed.
Production of documentary
evidence at the time of lodging
of complaints may be done away
with.
There should be no punishment
for vexatious complaints.
Include NGOs that receive
government funds within the
scope of the Bill.
Include RTI activists as an
admissible class of potential
complainants.
Extend protection in this Bill to
RTI activists as well.
The CVC should set up multiple
points of disclosure so as to
allow much greater access to
the public, especially to victims
in rural areas, who may be
uneducated or even illiterate.
12 3 4
Memorandum No.21.
RAKSHAK,
2784 Homestead
Rd, # 235, Santa
Clara, California,
USA - 95051
2.

93
12 3 4
Investigations should be free
from manipulation or undue
influence.
There should be time limit for
investigation.
CVC should have investigative
functions, particularly for
complaints involving police or
CBI personnel.
Provision should be made for
complainants to track the status
of their complaints by means of
internet.
Increase period of imprisonment
and fine for false, frivolous and
vexatious complaints.
Include punishment also for
persons who cause frivolous
complaints.
Double the penalties and make
them compulsory in case of a
deliberate pattern of false
complaints designed to destroy
someone’s career or intentionally
clog the system.
Since the competent authority is an
independent body and will directly
supervise the investigation, the question
of manipulation or undue influence may
be not arise.
The Bill does not provide for any time
frame to complete enquiry and decide
the complaint. However, if deemed
necessary the same can be provided in
the Rules/Regulations. It may not be
appropriate to provide time-frame in the
Bill because we may have to also spelt
out what action has to be taken if the
same is not complied within the time-
frame.
It can be considered at a later stage
while prescribing detailed rules and
procedure for handling such complaints.
It can be considered at a later stage
while prescribing detailed rules and
procedure for handling such complaints.
Clause 16 provides for imprisonment for
a term up to two years and also to fine
up to thirty thousand rupees. This is
adequate for discouraging false, frivolous
and vexatious complaints.
This may be a difficult proposition in the
present circumstances. The person who
causes frivolous complaints can be
penalized only if there is substantial
evidence.

94
3. Consent of the whistleblower
should be obtained before
revealing his/her identity to any
authority.
Retaliatory action against the
whistle-blower should be
identified.
The Bill should have specific
remedies in cases of
victimization.
Only a limited number of
categories of wrongful actions
are recognized by the
whistleblower Bill. Human rights
violations, actions causing loss
to the taxpayer and unlawful
actions have been left out.
Ministers have not been included.
Non-governmental/private/social
sectors not covered.
Members of armed forces left
out from the purview of the
Bill.
The Bill does not contain a list
of actions that are indicative of
the victimization of the whistle-
blower.
12 3 4
Memorandum No. 22.
Shri Venkatesh
Nayak,
Commonwealth
Human Rights
Initiative (CHRI)
B-117, First floor,
Sarvodaya Enclave,
New Delhi -
110 017.
The bill provides for revealing the identity
only in exceptional circumstances and that
too only to the Head of the Department
as stipulated in Clause 12.
Clause No.10 provide for safeguard
against victimization.  Victimization has
been clarified as  “initiation of any
proceedings or otherwise merely on the
ground that such person or a public
servant had made a disclosure or rendered
assistance in inquiry under this Act”.  It
is felt that the above provision will take
care of all- aspects ranging from physical
violence to verbal threats and intimidation,
to discrimination and other mental and
emotional hardships.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
It was felt that Ministers may be left out
for the present.
At this stage, it may not be possible for
the CVC to handle complaints of private
sector.
Ministry of Defence had suggested that
Armed Forces may be kept out of the
purview of the bill.
Clause 10(1) of the Bill provide as under:–
“The Central Government shall ensure
that no person or a public servant who
has made a disclosure under this Act is
victimized by initiation of any proceedings
or otherwise merely on the ground that
such person or a public servant had made
a disclosure or rendered assistance. in
inquiry under this Act.”

95
12 3 4
There is no reference in the Bill
to a bar on filing of defamations
suits against whistleblowers.
There is no clear provision
guaranteeing protection for
journalistic sources.
The Bill does not require public
authorities to create internal
procedure for whistle-blowing.
The Bill does not require the
Competent Authority to provide
guidance to potential
whistleblowers.
The public authorities are not
required to create special
mechanism for investigating
disclosures.
There is no obligation on the
Competent Authority to inform
the whistleblower of the progress
made in the investigation or
provide him with a final report.
The bill does not empower the
Competent Authority to pass
orders in relation to victimization
of the whistleblower.
The Bill does not contain any
provision under which the
whistleblower may seek damages
or compensation for being
victimized.
There is only one Competent
Authority.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
The bill authorizes all citizens to make
complaints. There may be no ground for
categorizing whistle-blowers.
There may be no scope for creating
internal procedure as the competent
authority will be. looking into all issues.
Though the bill does not require the
competent authority to provide guidance
to potential whistle blowers, the bill does
allow the competent authority to ascertain
the identity of the complainant.[Clause
4(1)(a)]. This clause gives power to
interact with the whistle blower and the
competent, authority may guide potential
whistle blowers, if found necessary .
There may be no scope for creating
internal procedure as the competent
authority will be looking into all such
Issues.
This can be provided in the rules/
regulations if deemed appropriate.
Clause 10 provides for safeguard against
victimizations of whistle blowers. Every
direction of the competent authority is
binding.
Clause 4(7)(v) empowers the competent
authority to take any other measures not
mentioned in clauses (i) to (iv) of this
clause. Hence, it is open for the
competent authority to order for suitable
compensation, if found necessary.
This particular Bill was preceded by a
Bill which was drafted by the Law
Commission of India in 2002. That Bill

96
The Bill is silent on the procedure
for disclosing wrong doing that
occur in the office of the
Competent Authority.
The Bill is silent on the issue of
burden of proof regarding
victimization of the
whistleblower.
became the basic pattern on which this.
Bill has come up. Even in that Bill, the
proposal was that the CVC would be the
competent authority and there was no
proposal for numerous competent
authorities.
DoP&T is open to suggestions.
Clause 10(2) provides that if any person
is being victimized or likely to be
victimized he may file an application
before the competent authority who shall
give suitable direction to the concerned
public authority.
12 3 4

97
ANNEXURE-C
QUESTIONNAIRE ON
THE PUBLIC INTEREST DISCLOSURE AND PROTECTION TO
PERSONS MAKING THE DISCLOSURES BILL, 2010
Para Section/Provision in the Bill Observations of Parliamentary Our comments
No. Standing Committee
12 3 4
3 (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of
the Official, Secrets Act, 1923, any public servant [other than
those referred to in clauses (a) to (d) of article 33 of of the
Constitution] or any other person including any non-governmental
organisation, may make a public interest disclosure before the
‘competent Authority:
Provided that any public servant, being a person or member
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d)
of article 33 of the Constitution, may make a public disclosure
if such disclosure does not, directly or indirectly, relate to,—
(a) the members of the Armed Force or any matter relating to
Armed forces; or
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of
public order or
(c) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation
established by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter
intelligence or any matter relating to such bureau or other
organisation;
(d) persons employed in, or in connection with, the
telecommunication systems set up for the purposes of any
The public servants referred to
in clauses (a) to (d) of article
33 of the Constitution are
exempted under clause 3(l) of
the Bill from making a public
disclosure, subject to the proviso
given therein. What is the
justification for such a provision
in the Bill?
Government is of the view that
all personnel covering under
Article 33(1) should not whistle
blow against each other. They
can however whistle blow
against all other public servants,
while other public servants/
persons can blow whistle against
them.
1.

98
Force, bureau or organisation referred to in clauses (a) to (c) or
any matter relating to such telecommunication system, bureau or
organisation.
4 (2) The Competent Authority shall, upon receipt of the complaint
and concealing the identity of the complainant, or the public
servant in the first instance, make discreet inquiry, in such
manner as may be prescribed, to ascertain whether there is any
basis for proceeding further to investigate the disclosure.
4 (6) The Competent Authority, if after conducting an inquiry, is
of the opinion that
(a) the facts and allegations contained in the disclosure are
frivolous or vexatious; or
(b) there are no sufficient grounds for proceeding with the
inquiry, it shall close the matter.
4 (7) After receipt of the comments or explanations or report
referred to in sub-section (3), if the Competent Authority is of
the opinion that such comments or explanations or report reveals
either wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of discretion or
substantiates allegations of corruption, it shall recommend to the
public authority to take anyone or more of the following measures,
namely:
(i) initiating proceedings against the concerned public servant;
(ii) taking appropriate administrative steps for redressing the loss
caused to the Government as a result of the corrupt practice or
misuse of office or misuse of discretion, as the case may be;
(iii) recommend to the appropriate authority or agency for initiation
12 3 4
2. There is no statutory time limit
in the Bill for the following:
(i) for conducting the discreet
inquiry; or
(ii) for inquiry by the head of
the organization/office; or
(iii) for acting upon the
recommendations made by the
Competent Authority envisaged
in clauses 4(2), 4(6) and 4(7),
respectively, of the Bill.
Comments of the Ministry on
these provisions including
justification therefore may be
furnished.
This could be considered while
drafting the Rules or Guidelines
under the Act.

99
of criminal proceedings under the relevant laws for the time
being in force, if so warranted by the facts and circumstances
of the case;
(iv) recommend for taking of corrective measures;
(v) take any other measures not falling under clauses (i) to (iv)
which may be necessary for the purpose of this Act.
5 (3) The Competent Authority shall not investigate, any disclosure
involving an allegation, if the complaint is made after the expiry
of five years from the date on which the action complained
against is alleged to have taken place.
5(4) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as empowering the
Competent Authority to question, in any inquiry under this Act,
any bonafide action or bonafide discretion (including administrative
or statutory discretion) exercised in discharge of duty by the
employee.
3.
4.
5.
What is the reasoning behind
providing a time limit of 5 years
in clause 5 (3) of the Bill?; What
shall be the situation where the
action complained has linkage
more than 5 years; Does this
provision not seriously limit the
scope of the competent authority?
The exemption given under
clause 5(4) of the Bill, for any
‘bonafide action or discretion
exercised in discharge of duty
by the employee’, from the
purview of this statute might be
grossly misused. What
safeguards need to be provided
to prevent the same and what
are the possible fallouts of this
clause, if such exemption is not
provided?
Bill does not provide for
informing the complainant:–
(a) if, after discreet enquiry, it
is ascertained that there is no
DOPT is open to suggestion.
However, this has to be
considered keeping in view the
instructions contained in
Appendix-13 of the GFR, 2005
relating to destruction of office
records connected with accounts
(copy enclosed as Annexure-I)
This is an exceptional clause,
where the Rules/Guidelines/
Legislation provide for exercising
of discretionary powers.
If the Committee agrees, the
whistle blower may be informed
of the final outcome of the
inquiry. However, the procedure
could be incorporated in the

100
basis for proceeding further to
investigate the disclosure; or
(b) if, after conducting an
inquiry, the Competent Authority
is of the opinion that the matter
shall be closed.
Has the Ministry looked at the
feasibility of giving incentive(s)
to the complainant, if the
complaint is proved true. If so,
furnish the details and the logic
behind not including such a
provision in the Bill.
12 3 4
Rules, Guidelines to be issued
under the Act.
The Public Authority who
benefits from the whistle blower
would be encouraged to provide
non-monetary incentives to the
whistle blower under the policy
guidelines to be issued
subsequently.
6.

101
7.
8.
14 Where the Competent Authority, at the time of examining the
report or explanations or report referred to in sub-section (3) of
section 4 on the complaint submitted by organisations or officials
concerned, is of the opinion that the organisations or officials
concerned, without any reasonable cause, has not furnished the
report within the specified time or mala fidely  refused to submit
the report or knowinsly given incomplete, incorrect or misleading
or false report or destroyed record or information which was
the subject of the disclosure or obstructed in any manner in
furnishing the report, it shall impose a penalty which may extend
to two hundred fifty rupees for each day till report is furnished,
so, however, the total amount of such penalty shall not exceed
fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed against any person
unless he has been given an opportunity of being heard.
16. Any person who makes any disclosure mala fidely  and
knowingly that it was incorrect or false or misleading shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up
to two years and also to tine which may extend up to thirty
thousand rupees.
10 (2) If any person is being victimised or likely to be victimiscd
on the ground that he had filed a complaint or made disclosure
or rendered assistance in inquiry under this Act, he may file an
application before the Competent Authority seeking redress in the
matter, and such authority shall take such action, as deemed fit
and may give suitable directions to the concerned public servant
or the public authority, as the case may be, to protect such
person from being victimised or avoid his victimisation.
10 (3) Every direction given under sub-section (1) by the
Competent Authority shall be binding upon the public servant or
the public authority against whom the allegation of victimisation
has been proved.
While the proviso to clause 14
of the Bill mandates giving an
opportunity of being heard to
the concerned organization or
official before imposing penalty
for certain offences, clause 16
does not envisage such an
opportunity to the complainant
in case of punishment for false
or frivolous disclosure. What is
the justification for this
differential dispensation in two
alike situations?
Clause 10(3) of the Bill provides
that every direction given under
clause 10(1) by the Competent
Authority shall be binding upon
the public servant/public
authority against whom the
allegation of victimisation has
been proved. There is, however,
no provision in the Bill, for
ensuring enforcement of these
directions. What are the
comments of the Ministry in this
Under clause 14 it is the
Competent Authority which will
impose penalty on public
authority for filing partial, vague
or misleading report, whereas
clause 16 is an offence and the
complainant will be tried by the
competent court for the said
offence where he will get
opportunity as per CrPC.
The direction of the competent
authority under clause 10(2) is
binding on the public authority
as per clause 10(3). The
competent authority does not
have original jurisdiction in the
sense of High Court or Tribunal
who can take contempt of their
orders. Even the Central
Information Commission is not
vested with power of contempt
etc. So, there is no need to
make additional provision in the

102
regard?
Whether the Ministry, while
introducing this Bill, also
considered the need for an
internal whistle blower
mechanism in the Government
organizations; What is the
opinion of the Ministry on the
same? What are the expectations
of the Ministry from such an
internal mechanism and how it
would be compatible with the
mechanism proposed under the
Bill?
Whether the action taken by the
Public Authority in pursuance of
the recommendation(s) made by
the Competent Authority will be
kept confidential or whether the
same can be made public; What
is the considered view of the
Ministry and how the same. has
been reflected in the Bill?
What is the justification/rationale
behind not including the private
organizations/companies/trusts
etc. within the ambit of ‘public
12 3 4
Bill for ensuring enforcement of
this direction which would only
mean repetition of the provision
of Clause 10(2).
The present Bill includes both
the internal whistle blower and
also the external whistle blower.
Action taken by the public
authority on the basis of
recommendation/direction made
by the Competent Authority is
not confidential.
The jurisdiction of the Bill is
co-terminus with the present
jurisdiction of the CVC.
Government banks, insurance
2. (i) “public servant” means any employee of –
(A) the Central Government or any corporation established by
or under any Central Act any Government companies, Societies
9.
10.
11.

103
servant’ as defined under clause
2(i) of the Bill; what is the
status of banks and companies
where Government provides
some financial assistance and
exercise control through
Government nominees?
As per the provisions of the
Bill, each and every complaint
is required to be enquired into
by the Competent Authority. The
position is, however, not very
clear with regard to entertaining
the anonymous complaints. Since
one of the main objectives of
the Bill is to protect the
complainant, anonymous
complaints, if they sufficiently
substantiate and corroborate
through documentary evidence
the wrongful act by a public
servant, there should be no
objection in taking cognizance
of such anonymous complaints.
What is the considered stand of
Government with regard to the
handling of anonymous
complaints in so far as this Bill
is concerned?
Keeping the identity of the
complainant confidential is not
or local authorities owned or controlled by the Central Government
and such other categories of employees as may be notified by
the Central government, from time to time, in the Official Gazette;
(B) the State Government or any corporation established by
or under any State Act, Government companies, Societies or
local authorities owned or controlled by the State Government
and such other categories of employees as may be notified by
the State Government, from time to time, in the Official Gazette.
companies and public sector
undertakings are covered but not
the private sector firms.
The Bill is about protection of
whistle blower and if the identity
of the whistle blower is not
known then how he would be
protected. This Bill is not about
handling of general complaints
or public grievances for which
separate mechanism  already
exist.
A mechanism shall be provided
under the Rules/Guidelines.
12.
13.

104
12 3 4
easy when the Bill provides for
disclosing the same to the Head
of Organisation to which the
complaint relates. Maintaining
confidentiality within the CVC is
also a responsible job. In such a
scenario, to what extent
Government sees, keeping secret
the name of complainant/
entertaining anonymous
complaints a way out?
The Bill does not provide for
consequences if the public
authority does not comply with
the recommendations of the
Competent Authority in terms of
clause 4(7) of the Bill; what
consequences are foreseen in
such a situation and should the
Bill not provide a way out for
the same so that the stalemate
does not persist?
14. 4 (7) After receipt of the comments or explanations or report
referred to in sub-section (3), if the Competent Authority is of the
opinion that such comments or explanations or report reveals either
wilful misuse of power or wilful misuse of discretion or substantiates
allegations of corruption, it shall recommend to the public authority
to take anyone or more of the following measures, namely:–
(i) initiating proceedings against the concerned public servant;
(ii) taking appropriate administrative steps for redressing the loss
caused to the Government as a result of the corrupt practice or
misuse of office or misuse of discretion, as the case may be;
(iii) recommend to the appropriate authqrity or agency for initiation
of criminal proceedings under the relevant laws for the time
being in force, if so warranted by the facts and circumstances
of the case;
(iv) recommend for taking of corrective measures;
(v) take any other measures not falling under clauses (i) to (iv)
which may be necessary for the purpose of this Act.
The recommendation under
Clause 4(7) cannot be made
binding lest it will give over-
riding power to the Competent
Authority over the entire
Executive.

105
The Bill provides for punishment
of upto 2 years or fine upto
thirty thousand in case the
disclosure is found to be false
or frivolous. These provisions
appear to be demotivating for
the complainant to come forward
for pointing out irregularities by
public servants. Would it not be
appropriate if these provisions
of the Bill are recast so as to
ensure that the penalty clause is
invoked only in those cases
where the complainant's action
is patently wrong and cases of
genuine mistake are not covered
for imposition of penal action.
The Bill is silent about the format
of complaint. Can Government
consider some guidelines for the
same so that the complaints are
more focused and convenient to
act upon; should there not be
some provision to guide the
complainant, if they so desire,
before submitting the complaint
so as to avoid wasteful exercise
as different points?
DOPT is open to suggestion
It will be taken care of at the
time of framing Guidelines/
Rules under the Act.
15.
16.

ANNEXURE-D
COMMENTS FURNISHED BY THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION ON THE BILL
Clause For Read Reasons
No.
Clause 2 (d)(ii), line
19
Clause 2(i) (A), line
35
Clause 5 (4), line
10
Accrues to the public
servent
“Public servant” means an
employee of-
The words “Bonafide
discretion (including
administrative or statutory
discretion)” to deleted
Accrues to the public
servant/any person
“Public servant” means
any person as defined
in Sec. 2(c) of the PC
Act 1988 (Chapter 1)
Wrongful gain to any third
party also to be taken care
of.
Too many definitions of Public
Servant such as in IPC and
PC Act is likely to cause
confusion. The comprehensive
definition of Public Servant
given in PC Act may be
adopted for the purposes of
this legislation.
Since bonafide act includes
any bonafide discretionary act
powers these words are
superfluous and may be
omitted.
106

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.