DEPA
AC
ARTMENT-
PERSO
CTION TA
COM
(P
 (La
      
-RELATED
ONNEL, PU
Rajy
Decem
ONE HUN
KEN ON O
MMITTEE O
THE
 (MIN
(Presented to
id on the Ta
    PARLIA
          RA
D PARLIAM
UBLIC GRIE
ya Sabha Se
mber, 2022 
NDRED TW
ONE HUND
ON "DEMA
PERTA
E LEGISLAT
NISTRY OF
o the Rajya S
ble of the Lo
 
AMENT OF
AJYA SABH
 
MENTARY
EVANCES
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecretariat, N
/ Pausha 19
 
WENTY FOU
ON 
RED FOUR
ANDS FOR
AINING TO
TIVE DEPA
F LAW AND
Sabha on 22n
ok Sabha on 
 
F INDIA 
HA 
 STANDIN
, LAW AND
 
New Delhi 
944 (Saka) 
URTH REP
RTEENTH 
R GRANTS 
O 
ARTMENT 
D JUSTICE) 
nd December
22nd Decem
G COMMI
D JUSTICE
PORT 
REPORT O
(2022-23)" 
r, 2022) 
mber, 2022) 
TTEE ON 
E 
REPORT N
124
OF THE 
     
NO. 
4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
Website : https://rajya sabha.nic.in 
2

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                             4                    
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                  5                   
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                          6                 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                 7                    
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                  8   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                 9                  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                               11                              
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS    
            (IV)  CHAPTER IV                                                                                               18 
               RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT 
BEEN RECEIVED 
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE  MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                21 
 
6. ANNEXURE                                                                                                           24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
            (Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Vandana Kumar Additional Secretary
 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Nitin Kumar, Secretariat Assistant 
__________________________ 
* vacant due to change in nomination of Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand w.e.f. 08.12.2022 
 
4

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been auth orized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hu ndred Twenty Fourth Report 
(124th) on Action Taken on One Hundred Fourteenth (114 th) Report of the Committee on 
"Demands for Grants (2022-23)"  pertaining to the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law 
& Justice). 
2. The One Hundred Fourteenth Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions , Law and Justice was 
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 24th March, 2022.  
3. The Legislative Department, of the Ministry of Law and Justi ce furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on the One Hundred Fourteenth Report of the Commi ttee on 20 th October, 
2022. The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Twenty Fou rth Report and adopted 
the same in its meeting held on 20th December, 2022. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observati ons and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
20th December, 2022 SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                                            Law and Justice 
 
  
5

ACRONYMS 
 
BE Budget Estimates 
CEO Chief Electoral Officer 
CII Cost of Inflation Index 
CIIL Central Institute of Indian Languages 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
EVP Electors’ Verification Programme 
DSE Demographically Similar Entries 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
ECI Election Commission of India 
EPIC Electors’ Photo Identity Card 
EVM Electronic Voting Machine 
FY Financial Year 
ICT Information Communication Technology 
ILI Indian Law Institute 
ITAT Income Tax Appellate Tribunal  
LIMBS Legal Information on Man agement and Briefing System 
MOF Ministry of Finance 
NBCC National Buildings Construction Corporation 
NDIAC New Delhi International Arbitration Centre 
NVSP National Voters Service Portal 
OLW Official Language Wing 
RE Revised Estimates 
SCI Supreme Court of India 
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
SVEEP Systematic Voters Education and Electoral Participation 
VSP Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan 
VVIP Voter Verification and Information Programme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6

R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the actio n taken by the 
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) on the recommendations / observations 
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on P ersonnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred Fourteenth (114 th) Report on "Demands for 
Grants (2022-23)", which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and l aid on the Table of the Lok 
Sabha on the 24th March, 2022. 
2. The Committee had made 17 recommendations/observations in it s 114 th Report. 
Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scr utinized under three chapters 
on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations (1) which have been accepted by th e 
Department, i.e. in respect of para 3.15 of the Report. The Com mittee is 
pleased to note that the Department has accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations (1) which the Committee does not  desire 
to pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. in respect of 
para 3.16 of the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the ex planations 
advanced by the Department and does not wish to pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations (8) in respect of which Committe e has not 
accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. with regard to par as 2.7, 2.8, 
2.11, 2.12, 3.4, 3.10, 3.11 and 3.12 of the Report. The Committ ee does not 
accept the reasons given by the Department and reiterates the same. 
Chapter --IV:       Recommendations/Observations (7) in respect of which final replies of the 
Department have not been received, i.e. in respect of paras 2.1 7, 2.18, 
2.19, 3.20, 3.21, 3.24 and 3.31 of the Report. The Committee de sires that 
replies to this paras may be furnished without further delay. 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish poi nted and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendation s/Observations made by the 
Committee in this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have b een discussed in the respective  Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the or iginal report (i.e. of 114 th 
Report) have been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
 
--- 
  
7

                                   CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.0 The Committee observes that this Department is involved in examining new 
legislations for different Minis tries/Departments and also for repealing of obsolete laws. The 
Committee in its 101
st Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) had made observations w ith 
regard to drafting errors and ambiguity in law/statutes and des ired for pre-legislative 
consultation and periodic review of legislations.  The Committe e is of the view that 
legislation enacted are not able to keep pace with changing soc io-economic developments 
leading to excessive litigations, financial loss to exchequer, disconnect with social milieu and 
so forth. (Para 3.15) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1 As regards the Committee’s observation in Para 3.15, it is to mention that:  
i. The process of legislation involves the study of social and financial costs, benefits and 
the key challenges that required to be settled before undertaki ng the legislations. The 
administrative Ministry/Department also identifies the problems  in the policy that 
needs to be addressed, the options it has considered and the re asons thereof in 
bringing forward a legislation.  
ii. Further, the Chapter 9 of the Manual of Parliamentary Procedure  in the Government 
of India (relating to legislation) provides that the concerned Ministry/Department has 
to formulate the legislative proposals in consultation with the  interested persons and 
authorities concerned, including holding discussions on the nec essity for the proposed 
legislation and on all matters of substance to be embodied therein. 
iii. Moreover, as per the Government of India (Allocation of Busines s) Rules, 1961, 
different subject matter or policies are allocated to different Ministries/Departments of 
the Government of India. Accordingly, the Ministries/Department s concerned with 
the subject matter initiates pre-legislative Consultations, hol ds deliberations with the 
public and all stakeholders and on that basis, finalise its leg islative policy and 
subsequently conduct the impact assessment after the legislations is enacted.  
iv. It is further pertinent to mention here that the Legislative De partment prepares draft 
laws in consultation with the administrative Ministry concerned  in accordance with 
the procedure laid down in the Manual of Parliamentary Procedur es, ordinarily within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of the proposal and after clearance from the 
Department of Legal Affairs. The refore, the Legislative Departm ent is merely a 
service provider Department catering its drafting services to t he 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.  
 
Further Observation 
1.2 The Committee notes the Reply of the Department.  
8

                                  CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT             
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 The Committee desires that a general consensus is required on the issue of Legislative 
Impact Assessment (LIA), and accordingly of the considered view that there has to be a nodal 
Ministry/Department for dealing with the issues related to LIA,  and believes that the 
Legislative Department, due to its expertise in legislative/cab inet note drafting is the most 
suitable Department under the Government of India for the purpo se. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Department to prepare a white paper  on the Legislative Impact 
Assessment in the country by taking learning experiences of oth er developed countries. (Para 
3.16) 
Action Taken 
2.1 As regards the Committee’s observation in Para 3.16, it is to mention that:  
i. The Legislative Impact Assessment or Analysis is a transparent and informed process 
with the participation and involvement of all stakeholders so that the preparedness and 
availability of requisite administrative, financial and infrast ructural support for 
successful implementation of intended legislation is known befo re hand and the 
desired object can be achieved. 
ii. The Legislative Impact Assessment is wide enough to encompass w ithin its scope 
Judicial Impact Assessment, Social Impact Assessment, Financial Impact Assessment, 
Environment Impact Assessment, Employment Impact Assessment, etc.  
 Judicial Impact Assessment  helps in preserving Courts ability to keep pace 
with growing workload, ensures, adequate funding of Courts and improves 
administration of justice. 
 Social Impact Assessment  helps in evaluating the socio-economic impact of 
legislation on people, particularly those from the economically  weaker section 
and marginalized section of society. 
 Financial Impact Assessment  helps in evaluating the economic costs of 
proposed legislation.  
 Environment Impact Assessment  helps in evaluating the beneficial and 
adverse impact of new legislation on environment, optimization of natural 
resources, reducing or mitigating potential negative impacts an d achieving 
9

sustainable development.  
 Employment Impact Assessment  helps in evaluating employment creation 
through proposed legislation. 
iii. A law is reviewed by the concerned Ministry/Department for exam ining its 
effectiveness and setting right m ischief, if any, created by su ch law on the basis of 
feedback, if any, received from the stakeholders and the other concerned persons, the 
data, if any, collected in this behalf, the comments/suggestion s, if any, received from 
the public, etc. Thereafter, the concerned Ministry/Department takes up necessary 
l e g i s l a t i v e  a c t i o n  e i t h e r  f o r  a m e n d m e n t  o r  r e p e a l  o f  t h e  l a w .  Post-enactment 
legislative impact assessment is also done by the Law Commissio n of India or such 
other body or commission set up specifically for such purpose, which is normally 
limited to the specific terms of reference. 
iv. Under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1 961, each 
Ministry/Department has been allocated subject matters on which  t h a t  
Ministry/Department initiates, possess and implements legislati ve proposals and also 
studies social, economic, environmental and judicial impact of such  legislative 
proposals. 
v. In view of the above, pre-legislative consultations, legislative impact assessment /post 
legislation consultation are within the domain of the concerned  Ministry/Department. 
Hence, the pre and post Legislative Impact Assessment should be  done by the 
concerned Ministry/Department which piloted the legislation. Th erefore, the subject 
matter relating to legislative impact assessment does not come under the purview of 
the allocation of work to Legislative-I Section of this Department. 
vi. However, the Committee is of view that there has to be a nodal Ministry/Department 
for dealing with the issue related to Legislative Impact Assess ment and believes that 
the Legislative Department possess the expertise in legislative /cabinet note drafting 
and therefore, Legislative Department is considered as most sui table Department for 
the purpose. In this regards, it is to state that as explained above the legislative impact 
assessment /post legislation consultation is a wide concept and  involves intricacies, 
specialized knowledge, expertise, manpower, research work and i nfrastructure and as 
the Legislative Department does not intervene in the policy mat ter of the legislation 
rather only provides its drafting services to the Ministries/De partments. In view of the 
a b o v e ,  L e g i s l a t i v e  D e p a r t m e n t  i s  e x a m i n i n g  v a r i o u s  a s p e c t s  r e l ating to the 
recommendation made by the Department related Parliamentary Sta nding Committee, 
and the manner of its implementation and suitable decision take n by the competent 
authority will be communicated in due course of time. 
 
Further Observation 
 
2.2 The committee acknowledges the reply of the department.   
10

                                                   CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND 
REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 The Committee observes that allocation to the Official Lang uage Wing (OLW) has 
marginally increased from the Financial Year (2020-21) to (2021 -22), except in the 
forthcoming financial year (2022-23), which has seen increase o f 25.36 percent over the 
current financial year. Whereas for the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan  (VSP), the allocation has 
remained constant in the current and preceding financial year, except allocation of Rs. 1.00 
crore (14.28 percent) increased in the forthcoming financial ye ar. These wings of the 
Department play a very important and significant role in transl ation of Central Acts, 
Ordinances and Subordinate legislation in Hindi and other Eight  Scheduled languages, and 
also in translation of judgements of Supreme Court and High Courts in Hindi.  (Para 2.7) 
3 . 1  I n  v i e w  o f  t h e  a b o v e ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  f e e l s  t h a t  t h e  s t a t i c  allocations made to these 
Wings over the years may be due to their under-performance and non-initiation of any major 
new initiatives. The Committee therefore feels that these wings  needs to be strengthened and, 
accordingly, recommends the Department to take appropriate step s, so that new initiatives 
can be initiated by these Wings and the allocation made can be optimally utilised. (Para 2.8) 
 
Action Taken  
3.2 Observation made by the Committee (in Para 2.7) has been no ted down by the 
Department. 
Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan (VSP): 
3.4 As regards the Committee’s observation in Para 2.8, VSP has  submitted that the main 
reason for not utilizing the budget allocation fully by VSP is that some of the posts in VSP 
are vacant for a long time despite attempts made to fill up them.  
3.5 As regards vacant posts in VPS, it is stated that action wa s taken from time to time to 
fill up the vacant posts in VSP as per Recruitment Rules. Two v acant posts of Sub-Editors 
have been filled up. However, some posts could not be filled up  due to various reasons 
including poor response of the candidates, non-possessing the e ligibility criteria and 
experience prescribed in Recruitment Rules, non-availability of  eligible candidates in feeder 
grades etc.  Therefore, VSP is taking action to amend the Recru itment Rules by revising the 
eligibility criteria i.e. educational qualifications, experience and method of recruitment i.e. by 
promotion/deputation/absorption etc. to ensure good response. V SP is also taking the 
necessary action to fill up all vacant posts as recommended by the Committee to strengthen 
the VSP. The vacancies of Assistant (General), Lower Division C lerk (LDC) and 
11

Multitasking Staff (MTS) have b een reported to Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for 
making recruitment against these vacancies. VSP is continuously  following up with SSC to 
expedite the recruitment against these posts. Proposal for fill ing up one post of Editor on 
promotion basis has already been sent to UPSC and VSP is follow ing up with UPSC for 
expediting the same.  The Ministry is taking up the matter with  Deptt. of Personnel & 
Training for posting of officials against the vacancies of  CSS S and CSS cadre posts. As 
regards the posts which have been deemed abolished, a proposal for their revival is being sent 
to Department of Expenditure.  
3.6 However, in spite of shortage of staff, VSP is publishing a ll three law journals every 
month and performing other functions allocated to it consistently.  
Official Language Wing (OLW): 
3.7 As regards the Committee’s observation in Para 2.8, OLW has  s u b m i t t e d  t h a t  t h e  
marginal increase in the budgetary provisions for this Wing cou ld be related to post-
pandemic period as during this period the process of Grants-in- Aid given to the concerned 
non-governmental organization working in the field of Hindi was  not accelerated owing to 
soft response from the stakeholders. In addition, during this p eriod the work relating to 
printing of legal documents/books such as Diglots Central Acts,  etc. being done by this Wing 
also didn’t take much pace and new proposals under this categor y were not identified. It is 
stated that necessary steps would be taken for accelerating the  processes and procedures 
which were not taken up appropriately so as to fulfill the obje ctive of promoting the Hindi 
languages in the legal field. It is stated that other items of budgetary allocations are being 
carried out to their logical conclusion.   
Further observation 
3.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Department with regard  to initiation of the 
recruitment process to fill-up the vacancy positions in Vidhi S ahitya Prakashan. In this 
regard, the Committee reiterates its suggestions made in its ea rlier reports wherein the 
Committee had suggested expeditin g the process of finalization of amendments to 
recruitment rules and filling-up vacancies in consultation with  the concerned cadre 
controlling and recruiting authorities'. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.9 The Committee observes wide fluctuations in allocation unde r the various heads of 
election expenses over the years in BE & RE. It is also observe d that allocations for 
‘Elections (Reimbursement to State/UTs)’ and ‘EVMs Professional  Services’ has been 
drastically reduced in BE (2022-23 ) over the projections made t o the Ministry of Finance. 
Further, the Committee is not satisfied with the rationale furn ished by the Department/ECI 
that the allocations under the Revenue head in BE (2022-23) for  electoral expenses will not 
adversely affect the work of the Department as audit certificat es takes around 2-3 years. If 
this was the rationale, then the Committee couldn’t fathom as t o why projection of Rs 
12

1594.60 crore for ‘Elections (Reimbursement to State/UTs) was m ade to the Ministry of 
Finance initially. (Para 2.11) 
3.10 The Committee feels that reductions in allocations under t he head may be due to 
inaccurate projection or inflation of funds required and thereb y, failure of the 
Department/ECI to justify its projection to the Ministry of Fin ance. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that while making projections to the Mi nistry of Finance in future, 
the Department should ensure that its projection are rational a nd appropriate to meet its 
requirements. (Para 2.12) 
 
Action Taken 
3.11 (In response to Para 2.11),  it may be stated that the largest decrease is under Election 
head (conduct of elections) i.e. from projections made to Minis try of Finance (MOF) of Rs. 
1594.60 crore  [projected on the basis of B.E(2021-22) Rs.164.30 crore and R.E(2021-22) 
Rs.1572.80 crore ] to B.E.(2022-23) Rs.292.00 crore.   On account of Election related 
expenditure in the years 2021-22, this Department had received Audit Certificates from 8 
State Governments (Telangana, Uttarakhand, Tripura, Sikkim, Raj asthan, Himachal Pradesh, 
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh).  After the settlement of election accounts, projections of Rs.1400.00 
crore in R.E(2021-22) stage was made. MOF provided the requeste d amount in R.E stage 
through 2 nd Batch of Supplementary for the year 2021-22 and the same amoun t has been 
reduced in B.E(2022-23) and provided Rs. 292.00 Crore for Elect ion related expenditure.  
Further, releases would be made to the State Governments only a fter receipt of the valid 
Audit Certificates from the concerned Accountant General (AG) o ffices of the State 
Governments, which generally takes some time (2 to 3 years).  F urther, the Department has 
received audit certificates of 7 major states i.e. Andhra Prade sh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Tamilnadu, Bihar, Gujarat and Maharashtra and need of funds for  releases has been 
demanded at R.E(2022-23) stage. 
3.12 Recommendation made by the Committee (in Para 2.12) has be en noted down by the 
Department for future compliance  
Further observation 
 
3.13 The Committee observes that the Department is repeating th e same reply again, 
which is not acceptable to it. The Committee desires that herei nafter Department may 
make rational projections of its requirements. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.14 The Committee observes that posts in the Department are va cant due to various 
reasons, and feels that the Department needs to wholeheartedly pursue the issue with various 
authorities engaged in recruiting and posting of staff to fill- up the vacant positions. Further, 
13

the Committee feels that recruitment process may be initiated i n advance in anticipation of 
likely retirement/vacancy positions to avoid delays and, recomm ends that the Department 
should forward details of vacancy/anticipated vacancy positions  in advance to the 
recruiting/cadre controlling authorities. (Para 3.4) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan (VSP): 
 
3.15 As regards the Committee’s observation in Para 3.4, VSP ha s submitted that they are 
taking the necessary action to fill up all vacant posts as reco mmended by the Committee to 
strengthen the VSP. Two vacant posts of Sub-Editors have been f illed up. The vacancies of 
Assistant (General), Lower Division Clerk (LDC) and Multitaskin g Staff (MTS) have been 
reported to Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for making recruit ment against these 
vacancies. VSP is continuously following up with SSC to expedit e the recruitment against 
these posts. Proposal for filling up one post of Editor on prom otion basis has already been 
sent to UPSC and VSP is following up with UPSC for expediting t he same.  The Ministry is 
taking up the matter with Deptt. of Personnel & Training for po sting of officials against the 
vacancies of  CSSS and CSS cadre posts. As regards the posts wh ich have been deemed 
abolished, a proposal for their revival is being sent to Department of Expenditure. 
 
Official Language Wing (OLW): 
 
3.16 As regards the Committee’s observation in Para 3.4, OLW ha s submitted that the total 
sanctioned staff strength of the OLW is 154. Out of this total staff strength, presently 96 posts 
are filled up and 58 posts are vacant. It is stated that maximu m vacant posts are from cadre of 
Regional Languages posts and the amendment in recruitment rules  for the post of Additional 
Legislative Counsel (Regional Languages), Deputy Legislative Co unsel (Regional 
Languages) and Assistant Legislative Counsel (Regional Language s) is under process. 
Further, it has now been decided that the vacant post of Region al Languages Officers may be 
filled through existing recruitment rules and action for fillin g up the same is under process. 
OLW has also approached the recruitment agencies to fill up the ir posts as early as possible. 
Status of action taken for filling up these vacancies is enclosed as Annexure-I
. 
 
Further Observation 
 
3.17 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. Further, the Committee 
recommends the Department may expedite the consultation process  with recruitment 
and cadre controlling agencies. 
 
3.18 In Official Language Wing(OLW), the Committee observes tha t posts in the 
Department are vacant due to various reasons. Some of the posts  like that of Deputy 
and Assistant Legislative Counsel (Regional Languages) are vacant since 2016 and most 
of the vacancies have been lying vacant since 2018. The Committ ee also observed that 
14

most of the vacancies have been reported to either SSC or are u n d e r  p r o c e s s .  I n  t h i s  
regard, the Committee feels that the vacancies have not been fi lled for extended period 
and therefore, recommends that a time frame should be decided w ith in which the 
recruitment process should be completed. The Committee may be a pprised the reasons 
for delay in filling up the vacant posts and corrective action may be taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
3.19 The Committee in its previous reports, including 101
st a n d  1 0 7th, on Demands for 
Grants had expressed its anguish over the lukewarm approach of the Department with regard 
to translation of Constitution and Central Government Acts in S cheduled Languages. The 
Committee observes that no noticeable improvement in the translation work has been made in 
Scheduled Languages or updation work of Constitution of India i n some Scheduled 
Languages, like Odia and Sanskrit language. The Committee wishe s to point out that it was 
last undertaken around 35-40 years ago. In this way, the Depart ment is not doing justice to 
these Scheduled languages. The Committee feels priority should be accorded for 
translating/updating Constitution of India and other Central Ac ts in Odia and Sanskrit at the 
earliest. (Para 3.10) 
3.20 The Committee also doesn’t agree with the rationale of the  Department that the 
process of translation is slow due to ongoing Covid-19 pandemic  situation as it observes that 
as on date, the Constitution of India has been translated only in 16 Scheduled Languages and 
further translation/updation work in scheduled language are pen ding for decades. The 
Committee feels that, instead of blaming the Covid-19 pandemic,  which is a recent 
phenomenon, the Legislative Department needs to improve its org anisational efficiency and 
get the Constitution of India translated/updated in all the reg ional languages without further 
delay.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department t o fix a timeframe for 
completing the translation/upda tion of Constitution of India in  all the scheduled languages 
and apprise this Committee in this regard while furnishing the Action Taken Replies. (Para 
3.11) 
Action Taken 
3.21 With reference to the Committee’s observation in Para No.3 .10 and 3.11, Regional 
Language Unit of Official Language Wing (OLW) has submitted tha t they are continuously 
striving to translate, update and publish of the Constitution o f India and all the Central Acts 
in all the languages as mentioned in the 8 th Schedule to the Constitution of India.  The 
Constitution of India has been translated and uploaded in 17 la nguages and it is updated in 9 
languages i.e Bengali, Dogri, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Punj abi, Tamil, Telugu and 
15

Urdu.  It is under process of publication in Manipuri Meitei Sc ript.  Initiative is underway to 
entrust the work of translation, updation and printing of the Constitution of India in Assamese, 
Bodo, Gujarati, Konkani, Kashmiri, Maithili, Nepali, Odia, Sant ali, Sanskrit and Sindhi 
through the Central Institute of Indian Languages (CIIL establi shed under the Ministry of 
Education, Government of India).  The Department is expediting to translation and 
publication of the Constitution of India at the earliest and al l central Acts in the region 
languages. 
Further Observation 
 
3.22 The Committee acknowledges the initiatives of the Departme nt. The committee 
reiterates its recommendations made in its previous Reports viz . 96 th, 101 st and 114 th 
Report to bring out publication of the Constitution of India in  a l l  t h e  S c h e d u l e d  
languages of the Constitution. Further, the Committee would lik e to know about the  
initiatives taken for the translation, updation and printing of  the Constitution of India 
in Assamese, Bodo, Gujarati, Konkani, Kashmiri, Maithili, Nepal i, Odia, Santhali, 
Sanskrit and Sindhi and the current status of the such initiati ves may be forwarded for 
the perusal of the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.23 The Committee also observes that posts of language officer  are vacant for Assamese, 
Gujarati, Kanada, Odia, Urdu, Sanskrit, Sindhi, Konkani, Nepali  and Manipuri. Further, no 
post of language officers have been sanctioned for Bodo, Santha li, Maithali, Dogri and 
Kashmiri languages. The Committee is surprised to note that no post/s for language officers 
has been created in the Department for Kashmiri language (1950) , which was included in the 
Eighth Schedule more than 70 years ago. Further, even after 17 years of inclusion in the Eight 
Schedule, no posts of languages o fficers have been created for Bodo, Santhali, Maithali,  and 
Dogri, despite having large number of people speaking these Sch eduled Languages viz. 
Maithali ( 12,179,122), Santhali (6,469,600), Kashmiri (5,527,6 98), Dogri (2,282,589), and 
Bodo (1,350,478). The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department not only to fill-
up the vacant position of language officers in the Department  and also approach appropriate 
authorities for creating posts of language officers for Bodo, S anthali, Maithali, Dogri and 
Kasmiri languages without any further delay. (Para 3.12) 
Action Taken 
 
3.24 As regards the Committee’s observation in Para 3.12, Offic ial Language Wing 
(OLW) has submitted that the recruitment rules for the post of Group ‘A’ Officer (Regional 
Languages) are under consideration. It is mentioned that there is no post sanctioned for Bodo, 
Maithali, Dogri and Kasmiri languages. As per records, there is  already a sanctioned post for 
16

the Santhali language. It is submitted that necessary action wi ll be taken up with the 
concerned authorities for getting sanctioned posts for these fo ur languages viz. Bodo, 
Maithali, Dogri and Kasmiri. 
 
Further Observation 
 
3.25 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Commi ttee desires early 
action may be initiated for getting posts of the four language viz. Bodo, Maithali, Dogri 
and Kashmiri filled. The Department may apprise the Committee o f the action taken in 
this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
… 
  
17

CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.0 The Committee observes that as against an allocation of Rs.  253.00 crore in the 
current Financial Year, the expenditure of the ECI till 31
st January, 2022 is only Rs. 158.74 
crore (63 percent approx.). The Committee observes that out of the total allocation of Rs. 
7.00 crore for capital expenditure in the current financial yea r; the ECI has not been able to 
spend a single rupee till 31 st January, 2022. The Committee understands that expenditure 
under the capital head is directly linked with the external age ncies like CPWD and NBCC for 
construction of building for ECI at Dwarka, however, the Committee  fails to understand why 
only Rs. 158.74 has been spent under the Revenue head which is well within the control of 
ECI, and accordingly, the Committee recommends ECI to furnish c ogent reasons for under-
utilisation of funds allocated to it under the Revenue head. (Para 2.17) 
     
4.1 The Committee also observes allocations have been reduced u nder Revenue heads- 
Information Technology, Voters’ Awareness, and Training of ECI,  w h i c h  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  
believes are important components of electoral processes. The Committee feels that reduction 
in allocations under the Revenue Expenditure for the forthcomin g financial year vis-à-vis 
projection to the Ministry of Finance may be due to the inabili ty of the ECI to spend the 
allocations made for various heads in the current financial year. (Para 2.18) 
 
4.2 The Committee, accordingly, recommends the ECI to improve i ts spending capacity 
on various activities, as non- expe nditure of amount allocated reflects under-performance of 
activities/under-utilisation of resources. The Committee is the refore of the view that an 
important institution like ECI should not be forced to limit it s activities due to financial 
constraints and recommends the Department/ECI to approach the M inistry of Finance for 
enhanced allocation during the RE stage, especially for Informa tion Technology and Voters’ 
Awareness and Training . (Para 2.19) 
 
VACANCY POSITION IN ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.3 The Committee is of the view that shortage of secretarial s taff may adversely affect its 
functioning at optimal level, and accordingly, recommends that the ECI should pursue the 
matter with the cadre controlling and recruiting agencies to fi ll-up these vacancies in a time 
bound manner. (Para 3.20) 
18

 
4.4 The Committee takes note of the Constitutional provisions a nd also the submission by 
the Election Commission of India that Regional Commissioner/s m ay be appointed by the 
President of India if required; however, after the first Genera l Election, they were not 
appointed. The Committee is of the view that ECI should have op timal level of manpower as 
per its requirements and accordingly, recommends the Legislativ e Department/Election 
Commission of India to submit its views on the appointment of R egional Commissioner/s for 
the forthcoming General Elections to the Lok Sabha in the year 2024. (Para 3.21) 
VOTERS' REGISTRATION AND AWARENESS 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.5 The Committee appreciates the ECI for achieving optimal lev el of voter’s enrolment 
in the electoral roll as it had already registered 95 crore vot ers in the country. The Committee 
also takes note of the initiatives of the ECI for augmenting IT  infrastructure to facilitate 
electoral processes, and believes that with the optimal utilisa tion of modern information and 
communication and technologies it would be able to overcome the  geographical and physical 
limitations.  The Committee feels that along with the voters’ e nrolment in the electoral roll, 
the ECI may also explore the feasibility of  conducting post-po ll exercise affecting 
participation of voters’  and reasons for low voters’ turnout o n the day of election as an 
academic activity to improve its performance in future elections. (Para 3.24) 
 
COMMON ELECTORAL ROLL 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.6 The Committee in its previous reports had recommended the D epartment/ECI for a 
Common Electoral Roll from Parliamentary to local body election s, and accordingly, 
appreciates the Department/ECI f or sensitizing the Government i n bringing the Election 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2021 to provide multiple qualifying dates  for preparation and 
revision of electoral roll, thereby, encouraging the States to adopt the Common Electoral 
R o l l s .  T h e  C o m m i t t e e  i s  o f  t h e  v i e w  t h a t  s i n c e  t h e  r e l e v a n t  s t atutes have already been 
amended, the Department/ECI may pursue with the remaining State  Governments/UTs to 
implement the common electoral roll. (Para 3.31) 
Action Taken 
4.7 The recommendations/observations of the Committee are conce rned with the Election 
Commission of India (ECI). Accordingly, ECI has been requested to provide the statement of 
19

action taken or proposed to be taken by them on the recommendat ions/observations of the 
Committee, to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat directly. 
 
Further observation 
 
4.8 The Committee has not received replies to recommendations o f the Committee of 
the paras 2.17, 2.18, 2.19, 3.20, 3.21, 3.24 and 3.31 from the Legislative 
Department/Election Commission. The Committee also found that s imilar observations 
were made in this regard in its previous 109
th Report on Action Taken on 107 th Report 
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2021-22) which was pres ented to Rajya 
Sabha and Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th December, 2021. The Committee 
would like to remind the Department that Action taken Replies s hould be furnished 
before the Committee within three months from the day when Repo rt on Demands for 
Grants is presented in Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, directs the Department 
that replies on the Report should be furnished within the prescribed timeframe. 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
MINUTES 
21

VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on 20.12.202 2 in 
Committee Room No. 4, Block-A, P arliament House Annexe Ext. Bui lding, 
New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi -  Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vii) Shri P. Wilson 
 
 Lok Sabha  
(viii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(ix) Smt. Veena Devi 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xii) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xiii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiv) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xv) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
22

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meet ing of the
Co
mmittee. He apprised them that  the Committee will first consi der and adopt
two reports  *     *     *.
3.
The Committee considered and adopted the 124 th Report on Action taken
on 
114th Report of the Committee on Demand for Grants (2022-23)  pertaining
to 
the Legislative Department a nd 125th Report on Action Taken on 115th
Report 
of the Committee on Demand for Grants (2022-23) pertaini ng to t he
Depart
ment of Legal Affairs.
4
. *    *   *
 
5. *
* *  
6 . *    *   *
 
7 . *    *   *
 
8 . *    *   *
 
9.
A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10.
The meeting adjourned at 04.05 PM.
New De
lhi             P. NARAYANAN
20th December, 2022        DIRECTOR 
To 
The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
***** 
23
____________________
*Relates to other matters

ANNEXURE-I 
Details of sanctioned strength, vacant position and step taken for filling the vacancies of the Official 
Languages Wing, Legislative Department. 
SI. 
No. 
Name of post Sanctioned 
strength 
In 
position 
Vacant/ Date 
of vacancy 
Mode of 
Recruitment 
Action taken for filing of post 
1. Joint Secretary & 
Legislative Counsel 
02 01 01 
01/09/2018 
Promotion The post of Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
(Hindi Branch) is lying vacant from 01.09.2018  
and this post is to be filled up by promotion. At 
present there is no eligible candidate in the feeder 
grade. Further, it is stated that Ms. Upma Mathur, 
Ex. Additional Legislative Counsel  (Hindi Branch) 
has filed an Original Application 
i.e. OA No. 4632/2018 before Hon’ble CAT, PB,
New Delhi regarding seniority against Shri
Ramawtar Yadav, Additional Legislative Counsel.
(Since   both   have   superannuated   and   has
become infructuous).
2. Additional 04 03 01 Promotion The post is to be filled by promotion but 
Legislative Counsel presently no incumbent is eligible for the post. 
(Hindi Branch) 01/12/2021 
3. Additional 
Legislative 
(Regional 
Languages) 
Counsel 
02 02     - - 
4. Deputy Secretary 01 01     - - 
5. Deputy Legislative 06 03 03 Promotion/ The proposal for filling up these three posts 
Counsel (Hindi DR through direct recruitment is under process. 
Branch) 05/04/2016 
25/11/2021 DR (03) 
25/11/2021 
6. Deputy Legislative 14 03 11 Promotion/ Recruitment rules for the post of Deputy 
Counsel (Regional DR Legislative Counsel (RL) is under process for 
Languages) 05/04/2016 amendment. However, actin for filling up the 
(09) (Newly DR (07) same through existing recruitment rules is under 
created) PR (04) process. 
23/06/2016 The proposal for filling up three posts through 
01/10/2018 promotion is under process. 
7. Assistant Legislative 09 04 05 Promotion/ Two posts are to be filled by promotion but no 
Counsel (Hindi DR Superintendent is eligible for promotion post. 
Branch) 20/08/2018 The proposal for filling up three posts through 
16/01/2020 DR (03) direct recruitment is under process. 
10/08/2020 PR (02) 
29/12/2021 
29/12/2021 
8. Assistant Legislative 14 04 10 DR Recruitment rules for the post of Assistant 
Counsel (Regional 14/10/2014 Legislative Counsel (RL) is under process for 
Languages) 05/04/2016 amendment. However, actin for filling up the 
(05) (Newly same through existing recruitment rules is under 
created) process. 
30/08/2016
22/05/201g
(02)
29/06/2021
9. Superintendent 
Translation (Hindi 
Branch) 
05 04 01 
07/07/2021 
DR/ 
Deputation 
Deputation 
(01) 
This post is to be filled up by deputation and 
same has been sent to Employment News for 
advertisement for inviting applications. 
10. Superintendent 
(Technical) 
01 01      - - 
11. Superintendent 
(Printing) 
01      - 01 
19/12/2019 
Promotion. Feeder cadre incumbent is yet to complete the 
requisite years of services; hence the post was  
advertised for deputation but only one application 
has been received and he is not fulfilled the 
eligibility criteria. 
24

' 12. 
 
  Assistant Library 
  Information Officer 
01 01      -         - 
13.   Section Officer 01 01      -         - 
14.   Private Secretary 02 02      -         - 
15.   Personal Assistant 06 05 01 DR The vacancy   has   already   been 
   (Hindi)     reported to SSC for filling up the 
    22/12/2021  same. 
16.   Senior Translator 06 01 05 DR All vacancies have already been 
      reported to SSC for filling up the 
    08/04/2005  same. 
    28/12/2011   
    27/09/2017   
    02/08/2018   
    06/12/2019   
17. 
 
  Personal Assistant 
  (RL) 
18 10 08 
 
30/08/2017 
(07)  (Newly 
created) 
29/10/2021 
DR The posts   of   Personal   Assistant 
(Regional Languages) were under process 
for filling up but the higher  authority has 
directed to abandon the process and said that 
the post of  Personal Assistant (Regional 
Languages) may be filled after appointment 
of concerned language officer. As such, the 
vacancies of such position is where the 
concerned languages officer post is also 
vacant. 
18.   Assistant (Technical) 04 01 03 Deputation/DR Two posts have  been reported to 
     DR (02) SSC for filling the same on direct 
    28/05/2019 Deputation (01) recruitment basis. One incumbent is 
    02/09/2019  on deputation. 
19.   Assistant (Admn.) 03 03      -         - 
20.   Printing Assistant 02 02      -         - 
21.   Proof Reader 03 03      -         - 
22.   UDC 11 09 02 Promotion/DR Two vacancies have been reported 
    08/02/2016 DR (02) to SSC for filling up on direct 
    01/09/2016  recruitment basis. 
23   Caretaker 01 01      -         - 
24.   LDC 09 05 04 DR/Departmental Both the vacancies have already 
     Exam/Promotion been reported to SSC for filling up 
    20/07/Z018 DR(02) the same. Action for filling up the 
    11/12/2021 Promotion-(01) one post on promotion and one post 
    12/07/2022 Departmental on departmental   exam   is   under 
    (2 posts) Exam — (01) process 
25.   Librarian Grade-III 01 01      -         - 
 
 
25

26. ’   Copy Holder 02 01 01 DR/Deputation Vacancy was reported to SSC but the 
    06/08/2007 DR (01) same could not be filled due to non- 
availability of eligible candidates. The SSC 
has informed that recruitment 
      rules for the same post may   be 
      examined and a fresh requisition may 
be sent. Hence, a proposal has been 
      submitted to Department of 
Expenditure for renewal of the said 
      post and after revival of post, action 
will be initiated for filling the same. 
27.   Dispatch Rider 01 01      -         - 
28.   Library Attendant 01 01      -         - 
29.   Multi Tasking Staff 23 22 01 DR This vacancy is reported to SSC for 
      filling up the same 
    09/04/2018   
   Total 154 96 58   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26