PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 23
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N P E R S O N N E L , PU B L IC G R IE V A N C E S , 
L A W  A N D J U S T IC E
TWENTY  THIRD REPOR T
ON
GOVERNMENT’ S POLICY OF APPOINTMENT ON
COMPASSIONATE GR OUND
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 7 SEPTEMBER, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 7 SEPTEMBER, 2007)
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 7 SEPTEMBER, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 7 SEPTEMBER, 2007)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
SE PT E M B E R , 2007/B H A D R A PA D A , 1929 (SA K A )SE PT E M B E R , 2007/B H A D R A PA D A , 1929 (SA K A )

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY THIRD REPORT
ON
GOVERNMENT’S POLICY OF APPOINTMENT ON
COMPASSIONATE GROUND
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 7 TH SEPTEMBER, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 7 TH SEPTEMBER, 2007)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER, 2007/BHADRAPADA, 1929 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-45

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—20
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 21—27
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 29—40
A. Scheme for Compassionate Appointment (1998) of the Department
of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions ................................................................................................................ 31— 40

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2007)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Ram Jethmalani
9. Dr. P. C. Alexander
10. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
15. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
25. Shri Vishvendra Singh
26. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee, present its Twenty
Third Report on the Government’s Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground. The Scheme
for Compassionate Appointments is a social security scheme in a welfare state under which
appointments can be made on compassionate grounds to dependent family members of a deceased
employee dying in harness or who is retired on medical grounds leaving his family in penury. This
scheme gives relief to the family of the deceased Government employee from financial destitution
to it over the emergency.
2. The subject Government’s Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground was identified
by the Committee as a part of consideration of subject “Administrative Reforms”.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the subject, the Committee visited Goa, Mumbai,
Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Hyderabad, Kochi, Port Blair, Kolkata, Jaipur, Ahmedabad and
Bhopal and held discussions with various authorities, organisations, individuals on “Government’s
Policy of Appointment on compassionate grounds” in Public Sector Enterprises/Undertakings/
Trusts and leading Banks.
4. The Committee held discussions on the subject with the Heads of 24 banks and 40 PSUs
to gather information related to the subject and to be get acquaint with various policy, welfare
measures being implemented under this scheme.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel Public Grievances and Pensions made a detailed
presentation on the subject on 17th July, 2007.
6. While considering the subject, the Committee took note of the following documents/
information placed before it:—
(i) Background note on the subject, furnished by the Government;
(ii) Procedure and mechanism of monitoring the implementation thereof in Ministries/
Departments/Offices/Public Sector Enterprises/Public Sector Banks etc. where it is
applicable;
(iii) Replies to the questionnaire prepared by the Secretariat; and
(iv) Submissions by the banks/PSUs on the subject.
7. The Committee held-in house discussion on the subject on 29th August, 2007 and adopted
the Report on 6th September, 2007.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
6th September, 2007 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
1. In 2004 the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, after its bifurcation from Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Home Affairs, included the subject ‘Administrative Reforms’ from its parent
Committee as a part of consideration of the subject. The Committee chose to make a report on
the ‘Government’s Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground’ in the first instance. The
Scheme for Compassionate Appointments is a social security scheme in a welfare State like ours
under which appointments can be made on compassionate grounds to dependent family members
of a deceased Government employee dying in harness or who is retired on medical grounds leaving
his family in penury and without means of livelihood. This step of the Government gives relief to
the family of the deceased from financial destitution to get over the emergency. The nomenclature
of the scheme itself shows that under this scheme compassion is at the centre stage. It has been
observed that particularly in the case of prolonged illness, the family in order to save their bread
earner and beloved ones do whatever it can to save his/her life. They not only spend their entire
savings but also incur heavy debts. Despite their best efforts the cruel hands of the destiny
snatches their near and dear one. The only ray of hope thereafter is appointment of a dependent
on compassionate ground. Even in some accidental cases also same thing happens. The Committee
having the nomenclature of being the Public Grievance Committee received representations from the
employees of different banks, PSUs and Government Departments on the issue of compassionate
appointment apprising the Committee that the guideline issued from time to time by the Ministry
and DoPT were not followed properly. The Committee, in this background, decided to examine
policy’s compliance in the public sector banks/public sector undertakings along with Government
Departments and make on the spot study of the Banks/PSUs etc.
1.1 A letter in this regard was written to the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions
on 10th January 2006 to furnish the background note on the rules and guidelines followed in the
cases of appointment on compassionate grounds, procedure and mechanism of monitoring the
implementation thereof in Ministries/Departments/Offices/Public Sector Enterprises etc. where these
are applicable etc. In response, the Ministry furnished the details of the scheme as under:
OBJECTIVE
2.0 The objective of the Scheme is to grant appointment on compassionate grounds to a
dependent family member of a Government servant dying in harness or who is retired on medical
grounds, thereby leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood, to relieve the
family of the Government servant concerned from financial destitution and to help it get over the
emergency.
TO WHOM APPLICABLE
2.1. T o a dependent family member—
(A) of a Government servant who—
(a) dies while in service (including death by suicide); or
(b) is retired on medical grounds under Rule 2 of the CCS (Medical Examination)
Rules 1957 or the corresponding provision in the Central Civil Service Regulations

2
before attaining the age of 55 years (57 years for Group ‘D’ Government servants);
or
(c) is retired on medical grounds under Rule 38 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 or the
corresponding provision in the Central Civil Service Regulations before attaining the age
of 55 years (57 years for Group ‘D’ Government servants); or
(B) of a member of the Armed Forces who—
(a) dies during service; or
(b) is killed in action; or
(c) is medically boarded out and is unfit for civil employment.
Note I “Dependent Family Member” means:
(a) spouse; or
(b) son (including adopted son); or
(c) daughter (including adopted daughter); or
(d) brother or sister in the case of unmarried Government servant or
(e) member of the Armed Forces referred to in (A) or (B) of this para,
who was wholly dependent on the Government servant/member of the Armed Forces at the
time of his death in harness or retirement on medical grounds, as the case may be.
Note II “Government servant” for the purpose of these instructions means a Government
servant appointed on regular basis and not one working on daily wage or casual or apprentice or
ad-hoc or contract or re-employment basis.
Note III “ Confirmed work-charged staff” will also be covered by the term ‘Government
servant’ mentioned in Note III above.
Note IV “Service” includes extension in service (but not re-employment) after attaining the
normal age of retirement in a civil post.
Note V “Re-employment” does not include employment of ex-serviceman before the normal
age of retirement in a civil post.
AUTHORITY COMPETENT TO MAKE COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
(a) Joint Secretary incharge of administration in the Ministry/Department concerned.
(b) Head of the Department under the Supplementary Rule 2(10) in the case of attached and
subordinate offices.
(c) Secretary in the Ministry/Department concerned in special types of cases.
POSTS TO WHICH SUCH APPOINTMENTS CAN BE MADE
Group ‘C’ or Group ‘D’ posts against the direct recruitment quota.
ELIGIBILITY
(a) The family is indigent and deserves immediate assistance for relief from financial destitution;
and

3
(b) Applicant for compassionate appointment should be eligible and suitable for the post in all
respects under the provisions of the relevant Recruitment Rules.
A. EXEMPTIONS
Compassionate appointments are exempted from observance of the following
requirements:—
(a) Recruitment procedure i.e. without the agency of the Staff Selection Commission or the
Employment Exchange.
(b) Clearance from the Surplus Cell of the Department of Personnel and Training/Directorate
General of Employment and Training.
(c) The ban orders on filling up of posts issued by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure).
B. RELAXATIONS
(a) Upper age limit could be relaxed wherever found to be necessary. The lower age limit
should, however, in no case be relaxed below 18 years of age.
Note I Age eligibility shall be determined with reference to the date of application and not
the date of appointment;
Note II Authority competent to take a final decision for making compassionate appointment
in a case shall be competent to grant relaxation of upper age limit also for making such
appointment.
(b) Secretary in the Ministry/Department concerned is competent to relax temporarily
educational qualifications as prescribed in the relevant recruitment rules in the case of
appointment at the lowest level e.g. Group ‘D’ or Lower Division Clerk post, in exceptional
circumstances where the condition of the family is very hard provided there is no vacancy
meant for compassionate appointment in a post for which the dependent family member in
question is educationally qualified. Such relaxation will be permitted upto a period of two
years beyond which no relaxation of educational qualifications will be admissible and the
services of the person concerned, if still unqualified, are liable to be terminated.
Note In the case of an attached/subordinate office, the Secretary in the concerned
administrative Ministry/Department shall be the competent authority for this purpose.
(c) In the matter of exemption from the requirement of passing the typing test those appointed
on compassionate grounds to the post of Lower Division Clerk will be governed by the
general orders issued in this regard:—
(i) by the CS Division of the Department of Personnel and Training if the post is included
in the Central Secretariat Clerical Service; or
(ii) by the Establishment Division of the Department of Personnel and Training if the post
is not included in the Central Secretariat Clerical Service.
(d) Where a widow is appointed on compassionate ground to a Group ‘D’ post, she will be
exempted from the requirement of possessing the educational qualifications prescribed in the
relevant rules provided the duties of the post can be satisfactorily performed by her without
possessing such educational qualifications.

4
DETERMINATION/AV AILABILITY OF V ACANCIES
(a) Appointment on compassionate grounds should be made only on regular basis and that too
only if regular vacancies meant for that purpose are available.
(b) Compassionate appointments can be made upto a maximum of 5% of vacancies falling
under direct recruitment quota in any Group ‘C’ or ‘D’ post. The appointing authority
may hold back upto 5% of vacancies in the aforesaid categories to be filled by direct
recruitment through Staff Selection Commission or otherwise so as to fill such vacancies
by appointment on compassionate grounds. A person selected for appointment on
compassionate grounds should be adjusted in the recruitment roster against the
appropriate category viz. SC/ST/OBC/General depending upon the category to which he
belongs. For example, if he belongs to SC category he will be adjusted against the SC
reservation point, if he is ST/OBC he will be adjusted against ST/OBC point and if he
belongs to General category he will be adjusted against the vacancy point meant for General
category.
(c) While the ceiling of 5% for making compassionate appointment against regular vacancies
should not be circumvented by making appointment of dependent family member of
Government servant on casual/daily wage/ad-hoc/contract basis against regular vacancies,
there is no bar to considering him for such appointment if he is eligible as per the normal
rules/orders governing such appointments
(d) The ceiling of 5% of direct recruitment vacancies for making compassionate appointment
should not be exceeded by utilising any other vacancy e.g. sports quota vacancy.
(e) Employment under the scheme is not confined to the Ministry/Department/Office in which
deceased/medically retired Government servant had been working. Such an appointment can
be given anywhere under the Government of India depending upon availability of a suitable
vacancy meant for the purpose of compassionate appointment.
(f) If sufficient vacancies are not available in any particular office to accommodate the persons
in the waiting list for compassionate appointment, it is open to the administrative Ministry/
Department/Office to take up the matter with other Ministries/Departments/Offices of the
Government of India to provide at an early date appointment on compassionate grounds to
those in the waiting list.
BELATED REQUESTS FOR COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
(a) Ministries/Departments can consider requests for compassionate appointment even where
the death or retirement on medical grounds of a Government servant took place long back, say five
years or so. While considering such belated requests it should, however, be kept in view that the
concept of compassionate appointment is largely related to the need for immediate assistance to the
family of the Government servant in order to relieve it from economic distress. The very fact that
the family has been able to manage somehow all these years should normally be taken as adequate
proof that the family had some dependable means of subsistence. Therefore, examination of such
cases would, call for a great deal of circumspection. The decision to make appointment on
compassionate grounds in such cases may, therefore, be taken only at the level of the Secretary
of the Department/Ministry concerned.
(b) Whether a request for compassionate appointment is belated or not may be decided with
reference to the date of death or retirement on medical ground of a Government servant and not
the age of the applicant at the time of consideration.

5
WIDOW APPOINTED ON COMPASSIONATE GROUNDS GETTING REMARRIED
A widow appointed on compassionate grounds will be allowed to continue in service even
after re-marriage.
WHERE THERE IS AN EARNING MEMBER
(a) In deserving cases even where there is already an earning member in the family, a
dependent family member may be considered for compassionate appointment with prior
approval of the Secretary of the Department/Ministry concerned who, before approving
such appointment, will satisfy himself that grant of compassionate appointment is justified
having regard to number of dependents, assets and liabilities left by the Government
servant, income of the earning member as also his liabilities including the fact that the
earning member is residing with the family of the Government servant and whether he
should not be a source of support to other members of the family.
(b) In cases where any member of the family of the deceased or medically retired Government
servant is already in employment and is not supporting the other members of the family
of the Government servant, extreme caution has to be observed in ascertaining the
economic distress of the members of the family of the Government servant so that the
facility of appointment on compassionate ground is not circumvented and misused by
putting forward the ground that the member of the family already employed is not
supporting the family.
MISSING GOVERNMENT SERV ANT
Cases of missing Government servants are also covered under the scheme for
compassionate appointment subject to the following conditions:—
(a) A request to grant the benefit of compassionate appointment can be considered only
after a lapse of at least 2 years from the date from which the Government servant has
been missing, provided that:
(i) an FIR to this effect has been lodged with the Police,
(ii) the missing person is not traceable, and
(iii) the competent authority feels that the case is genuine;
(b) This benefit will not be applicable to the case of a Government servant:—
(i) who had less than two years to retire on the date from which he has been
missing; or
(ii) who is suspected to have committed fraud, or suspected to have joined any
terrorist organisation or suspected to have gone abroad.
(c) Compassionate appointment in the case of a missing Government servant also would
not be a matter of right as in the case of others and it will be subject to fulfilment
of all the conditions, including the availability of vacancy, laid down for such
appointment under the scheme;
(d) While considering such a request, the results of the Police investigation should also
be taken into account; and
(e) A decision on any such request for compassionate appointment should be taken only
at the level of the Secretary of the Ministry/Department concerned.

6
PROCEDURE
(a) The proforma as prescribed can be used by Ministries/Departments/Offices for ascertaining
necessary information and processing the cases of compassionate appointment.
(b) The Welfare Officer in each Ministry/Department/Office should meet the members of the
family of the Government servant in question immediately after his death to advise and
assist them in getting appointment on compassionate grounds. The applicant should be
called in person at the very first stage and advised in person about the requirements and
formalities to be completed by him.
(c) An application for appointment on compassionate grounds should be considered in the light
of the instructions issued from time to time by the Department of Personnel and Training
(Establishment Division) on the subject by a committee of officers consisting of three
officers — one Chairman and two Members — of the rank of Deputy Secretary/Director
in the Ministry/Department and officers of equivalent rank in the case of attached and
subordinate offices. The Welfare Officer may also be made one of the Members/Chairman
of the committee depending upon his rank. The committee may meet during the second
week of every month to consider cases received during the previous month. The applicant
may also be granted personal hearing by the committee, if necessary, for better appreciation
of the facts of the case.
(d) Recommendation of the committee should be placed before the competent authority for a
decision. If the competent authority disagrees with the committee’s recommendation, the
case may be referred to the next higher authority for a decision.
UNDERTAKING
A person appointed on compassionate grounds under the scheme should give an undertaking
in writing (as in Annexure) that he/she will maintain properly the other family members who were
dependent on the Government servant/member of the Armed Forces in question and in case it is
proved subsequently (at any time) that the family members are being neglected or are not being
maintained properly by him/her, his/her appointment may be terminated forthwith.
REQUEST FOR CHANGE IN POST/PERSON
When a person has been appointed on compassionate grounds to a particular post, the set
of circumstances, which led to such appointment, should be deemed to have ceased to exist.
Therefore,—
(a) he/she should strive in his/her career like his/her colleagues for future advancement and any
request for appointment to any higher post on considerations of compassion should
invariably be rejected.
(b) an appointment made on ‘compassionate grounds cannot be transferred to any other person
and any request for the same on considerations of compassion should invariably be rejected.
SENIORITY
(a) The inter-se seniority of persons appointed on compassionate grounds may be fixed with
reference to their date of appointment. Their interpolation with the direct recruits/promotees
may also be made with reference to their dates of appointment without disturbing the
inter-se seniority of direct recruits/promotees.
(b) Date of joining by a person appointed on compassionate grounds shall be treated as the date
of his/her regular appointment.

7
GENERAL
(a) Appointments made on grounds of compassion should be done in such a way that persons
appointed to the post do have the essential educational and technical qualifications and
experience required for the post consistent with the requirement of maintenance of
efficiency of administration.
(b) It is not the intention to restrict employment of a family member of the deceased or
medically retired Group ‘D’ Government servant to a Group ‘D’ post only. As such, a
family member of such Group ‘D’ Government servant can be appointed to a Group ‘C’
post for which he/she is educationally qualified, provided a vacancy in Group ‘C’ post
exists for this purpose.
(c) The Scheme of compassionate appointments was conceived as far back as 1958. Since then
a number of welfare measures have been introduced by the Government which have made
a significant difference in the financial position of the families of the Government servants
dying in harness/retired on medical grounds. An application for compassionate appointment
should, however, not be rejected merely on the ground that the family of the Government
servant has received the benefits under the various welfare schemes. While considering a
request for appointment on compassionate ground a balanced and objective assessment of
the financial condition of the family has to be made taking into account its assets and
liabilities (including the benefits received under the various welfare schemes mentioned
above) and all other relevant factors such as the presence of an earning member, size of
the family, ages of the children and the essential needs of the family, etc.
(d) Compassionate appointment should not be denied or delayed merely on the ground that there
is reorganisation in the Ministry/Department/Office. It should be made available to the
person concerned if there is a vacancy meant for compassionate appointment and he or she
is found eligible and suitable under the scheme.
(e) Requests for compassionate appointment consequent on death or retirement on medical
grounds of Group ‘D’ staff may be considered with greater sympathy by applying relaxed
standards depending on the facts and circumstances of the case.
(f) Compassionate appointment will have precedence over absorption of surplus employees and
regularisation of daily wage/casual workers with/without temporary status.
(g) Any request to increase the upper age-limit of 55 years for retirement on medical grounds
prescribed in para 2(A) (b) and (c) above in respect of Group ‘A’/‘B’/‘C’ Government
servants and to bring it at par with the upper age-limit of 57 years prescribed therein
for Group ‘D’ Government servants on the ground that the age of retirement has recently
(May, 1998) been raised from 58 years to 60 years for Group ‘A’/‘B’/‘C’ Government
servants (which is at par with the age of retirement of 60 years applicable to Group ‘D’
Government servants) or on any other ground should invariably be rejected so as to ensure
that the benefit of compassionate appointment available under the scheme is not misused by
seeking retirement on medical grounds at the fag end of one’s career and also keeping in
view the fact that the higher upper age-limit of 57 years has been prescribed therein for
Group ‘D’ Government servants for the reason that they are low paid Government servants
who get meagre invalid pension in comparison to others.
Guidelines/Policy laid down by Department of Personnel and Training
3.0 The Scheme for compassionate appointment has been operative for a long time. However,
on the basis of a study Report on Welfare Measures for Central government Employees prepared

8
by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances in 1994—one Section of
which was on “Employment on Compassionate Grounds”—as also keeping in view a number of
important judgments delivered by the Supreme Court, the policy guidelines on compassionate
appointment were reviewed and rationalized and a comprehensive Scheme on compassionate
appointment was issued by this Department vide O.M. dated 9th October, 1998, as amended from
time to time.
3.1 Under the Scheme, a dependent family member of a deceased or medically retired
Government employee is given appointment on compassionate grounds in order to enable the
aggrieved family to tide over the financial crisis caused due to the death or untimely retirement on
medical grounds of the sole earning member. The various features of the Scheme as also the
eligibility criteria are contained in the consolidated instructions dated 9th October, 1998 as amended
subsequently. Some of the salient features/criteria for grant of compassionate appointment under the
Scheme are indicated below:—
(a) Compassionate appointment is to be given against direct recruitment vacancies in any Group
‘C’ and ‘D’ post (excluding technical post) in the office or department of the deceased
employee, limited to a ceiling of 5% of total such vacancies (excluding technical post)
arising in a recruitment year.
(b) The family of the deceased government employee is in an indigent condition and required
immediate relief from financial destitution.
(c) The applicant for compassionate appointment should be eligible and suitable for the post in
all respects under the provision of the relevant Recruitment Rules and no relaxation will be
granted except in the matter of upper age limit and temporary relaxation of requisite
minimum educational qualification, prescribed in the Scheme.
(d) The objective of the Scheme is to provide immediate assistance to the family of the
government servant to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis. Such appointment
cannot be granted after lapse of a reasonable period. Hence, the Scheme provides that an
application for compassionate appointment can be kept under consideration by the
Department for a maximum period of 3 years, subject to yearly review of the case.
3.2 The ceiling of 5% of vacancies for making appointment on compassionate grounds
contained in para 7 of the consolidated instruction dated 9.10.1998, was first introduced in 1995
through an O.M. dated 26.9.1995. Prior to issue of the O.M. dated 26.9.1995, the percentage of
vacancies to be fIlled by compassionate appointment in a given year was being determined by
deducting from 50% the percentage of vacancies actually utilized by appointment of candidate
belonging to SC, ST, Physically Handicapped and Ex-servicemen. However, after the introduction
of reservation for OBCs to the extent of 27%, the total reservation for SC/ST and OBCs reached
49.5%. The Supreme Court has held in the MandaI Commission’s case that the over all reservation
under Article 16(4) of the Constitution should not exceed 50% of the vacancies arising in a year.
The Apex Court had further ruled that while clause (4) of Article 16 may not be held exhaustive
of reservations, the Court had cautioned against the propensity to create further classes deserving
special treatment, as too much of reservations will further reduce the vacancies available for free
competition which will not be a reasonable thing to do.
3.3 In an important judgment delivered in Umesh Kumar Nagapal Vs. State of Haryana and Ors.
[JT 1994(3) S.C. 525], the Supreme Court has laid down a number of principles governing
appointments on compassionate grounds. The Apex Court has held that as a rule, appointments in
the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit
and compassionate appointment is an exception to this general rule.

9
3.4 Strictly speaking, compassionate appointment is not a reservation. Nevertheless, keeping in
view the directions of the supreme Court in the above mentioned judgments, it was decided to
provide for a quota of 5% of direct recruitment vacancies in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ category of posts
in a year for filling up by compassionate appointment. Further, on the analogy of horizontal
reservation applicable to physically handicapped and ex-servicemen, it was provided that the
appointees on compassionate grounds belonging to SC/ST/OBCs as also general categories would
occupy the respective slots in the recruitment roster. Therefore, the limit of 5% of vacancies was
felt reasonable. No relaxations were visualized under the Scheme on this aspect.
3.5 Recently pursuant to a demand of the Staff side raised in the National Council of JCM, a
decision was taken to apply a relaxed formula for calculation of vacancies for compassionate
appointment by which it was provided that 5% quota of vacancies shall now be calculated on the
basis of gross DR vacancies in total Group C and D posts (excluding technical posts) arising in
a year, prior to reduction of vacancies by the Screening committee under Annual Direct
Recruitment Plan. However, compassionate appointment is to be actually made on the basis
of vacancies in group C and D posts ultimately cleared under ADRP. DoPT  O.M. dated
14th June, 2006 was issued containing this decision. Further, in order to give relief to small cadres/
offices, which were unable to locate one vacancy under 5% quota in the preceding three years
for the purpose of compassionate appointment, another policy Circular was issued on
9th October, 2006 allowing such small offices/cadres to club together the total DR vacancies in
Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts (excluding technical posts) having arisen in the last three years and to
calculate 5% on the basis of such grand total of vacancies, for making one compassionate
appointment. Technical posts are also considered for compassionate appointment by separately
calculating the 5% vacancies in relation to such posts.
3.6 Department of Personnel and Training’s role is confined to framing the policy guidelines on
compassionate appointment applicable to Central Government Departments/Ministries. It is the
responsibility of individual Department/Office to implement such policy instructions.
3.7 So far as the various PSUs/Banks/Trusts etc. are concerned, it is stated that the Scheme
on Compassionate Appointment administered by this Ministry is applicable to Central Government
Ministries/Departments and as such, the Scheme does not directly apply to the Banks/PSUs/Trusts
etc. Any Scheme on compassionate appointment, if operative in any of the PSUs/Banks/Trusts etc.,
the same will be governed under the Statute/Rules/Regulations of that Organisation.
IMPORTANT COURT JUDGEMENTS
4.0 In the course of its examination, the Committee also took note of leading judgments of
Supreme Court of India which time to time interpreted the scheme and guidelines in respect of
appointment on compassionate ground. Therefore, the rulings contained in the major judgements
had also to be kept in view while considering cases of compassionate appointment. Some of such
cases are enumerated below:—
(a) The Supreme Court in its judgement dated April 8, 1993 in the case of Auditor General
of India and others vs. G. Ananta Rajeswara Rao [(1994) 1 SCC 192] has held that
appointment on grounds of descent clearly violates Article 16(2) of the Constitution; but if
the appointment is confined to the son or daughter or widow of the Government servant
who died in harness and who needs immediate appointment on grounds of immediate need
of assistance in the event of there being no other earning member in the family to
supplement the loss of income from the bread winner to relieve the economic distress of
the members of the family, it is unexceptionable.

10
(b) The Supreme Court’s judgement dated May 4, 1994 in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal
vs. State of Haryana and others [JT 1994(3) S.C. 525] has laid down the following
important principles in this regard:
(i) Only dependents of an employee dying in harness leaving his family in penury and
without any means of livelihood can be appointed on compassionate ground.
(ii) The posts in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ (formerly Class III and IV) are the lowest posts in
non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on
compassionate grounds and no other post i.e. in the Group ‘A’ or Group ‘B’ category
is expected or required to be given for this purpose as it is legally impermissible.
(iii) The whole object of granting compassionate appointment is to enable the family to tide
over the sudden crisis and to relieve the family of the deceased from financial
destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
(iv) Offering compassionate appointment as a matter of course irrespective of the financial
condition of the family of the deceased or medically retired Government servant is
legally impermissible.
(v) Neither the qualifications of the applicant (dependent family member) nor the post held by
the deceased or medically retired Government servant is relevant. If the applicant finds it
below his dignity to accept the post offered, he is free not to do so. The post is not
offered to cater to his status but to see the family through the economic calamity.
(vi) Compassionate appointment cannot be granted after lapse of a reasonable period and
it is not a vested right which can be exercised at any time in future.
(vii) Compassionate appointment cannot be offered by an individual functionary on an
ad-hoc basis.
(c) The Supreme Court has held in its judgement dated February 28, 1995 in the case of the
Life Insurance Corporation of India vs. Mrs. Asha Ramchandra Ambekar and others
[JT 1994(2) S.C. 183] that the High Courts and Administrative Tribunals can not give
direction for appointment of a person on compassionate grounds but can merely direct
consideration of the claim for such an appointment.
(d) The Supreme Court has ruled in the cases of Himachal Road Transport Corporation vs.
Dinesh Kumar [JT 1996 (5) S.C. 319] on May 7, 1996 and Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited vs. Smt A. Radhika Thirumalai [JT 1996 (9) S.C. 197] on October 9, 1996 that
appointment on compassionate grounds can be made only if a vacancy is available for that
purpose.
(e) The Supreme Court has held in its judgement in the case of State of Haryana and others
vs. Rani Devi and others [JT 1996(6) S.C. 646] on July 15, 1996 that if the scheme
regarding appointment on compassionate ground is extended to all sorts of casual, ad-hoc
employees including those who are working as Apprentices, then such scheme cannot be
justified on Constitutional grounds.
4.1 After going through the judgments cited above, the Committee has an inference that
Supreme Court also upholds the relevance of the policy in the PSUs and Government Departments.
The Committee acknowledges that the court in its judgments tried to ensure implementation of the
policy in a logical manner. The Committee is however constrained to note that many of the PSUs/
Banks construed the judgments otherwise and thereby restricted the implementation of the policy
of appointment on compassionate ground. While interacting with PSUs and Banks, the Committee
came across such arguments. The Committee feels that the judgments particularly the Nagpal case

11
was very often misquoted and misrepresented as if the Supreme Court banned the appointment on
compassionate ground.
Deliberation with PSBs and PSUs
5.0 This Committee visited Goa, Mumbai, Bangalore, Bhubneshwar, Chennai, Hyderabad, Kochi,
Port Blair, Kolkata, held discussions with various authorities, organisations, individuals on “Policy
of Appointment on compassionate grounds” in Public Sector Enterprises/Undertakings/Trusts and
leading Banks.
Public Sector Banks
5.1 The Committee met the managements of Reserve Bank of India and 23 Public Sector Banks
to ascertain the implementation of the policy in the Banks. The Committee was apprised that the
Public Sector Banks do not follow the policy as per DoPT guidelines. Instead, they follow a policy
as approved by the Indian Banks Association and Ministry of Finance (Banking Division), which
provide for payment of ex-gratia to the family of the deceased. The Committee had also sent the
questionnaire to all the leading public sector banks so that the opinion of the banks can be sought
on the subject. The Banks examined by the Committee are mentioned below:
Sl. No. Name of the Bank
1. State Bank of Mysore
2. Vijaya Bank
3. Canara Bank
4. Bank of Baroda
5. Bank of India
6. Central Bank of India
7. NABARD
8. Dena Bank
9. Union Bank of India
10. Reserve Bank of India
11. Indian Overseas Bank
12. Indian Bank
13. Andhra Bank
14. State Bank of Hyderabad
15. State Bank of Travancore
16. State Bank of India
17. UCO Bank
18. United Bank of India
19. Allahabad Bank
20. State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur
21. State Bank of Saurashtra
22. SIDBI
23. IDBI
24. State Bank of Indore

12
6.0 The Committee was apprised of the details of scheme as under:—
(a) Before December 2005, the scheme of compassionate appointment was existing in banks.
(b) Based on the Government guidelines, the IBA model scheme for payment of ex-gratia
amount in lieu  of compassionate appointment was implemented.
(c) Application for the payment of Ex-gratia amount to be submitted by the family of the
deceased employee within six months from the death of the employee.
(d) Ex-gratia will be granted to the family of the employee if the monthly income of the family
from all sources is less than 100% of the last drawn salary (net of taxes) of the employee
to enable the family to maintain a decent standard of living.
IBA SCHEME
(a) Employees dying in harness (other than due to injury while performing official duty)
(b) Employees dying due to injury sustained while performing official duty within or outside
office (excluding travel from residence to place of work and back)
(c) Employees dying while performing official duty within or outside office premises due to
dacoity, robbery/terrorist attack.
(d) Employees seeking pre-mature retirement due to incapacitation before reaching the age of
55 years.
❖ In the above cases, ex-gratia amount will be paid to the family of the employee if
eligible and if requested for within six months from the date of the death of the
employee.
❖ Ex-gratia may be granted to the family of the employee in the manner and subject to
the ceilings specified below, if the monthly income of the family from all sources is
less than 60% of the last drawn salary of the employee to enable the family to maintain
a decent standard of living after the death of the sole bread winner.
❖ If the monthly income of the family arrived at is less than 60% of the last drawn
gross salary of the employee, ex-gratia amount as under will be payable.
(e) The cadre-wise ceiling on ex-gratia amount payable will be as follows:—
Category Minimum Amount Maximum Amount
Officers Rs. 4.00 lacs Rs. 8.00 lacs
Clerical Staff Rs. 3.00 lacs Rs. 7.00 lacs
Subordinate Staff Rs. 2.00 lacs Rs. 6.00 lacs
(f) In October, 2003, reviewing the entire scheme for appointment of dependants of deceased
employees on compassionate grounds in public sector banks, Government of India advised IBA that
the purpose of providing help to the family of deceased employees can be achieved by extending
suitable financial assistance to the dependants. In so advising, Government of India was guided by
the principle laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal.
Government of India had then requested IBA to frame a model scheme for payment of ex-gratia
in lieu of compassionate appointment. The model scheme as framed by IBA was approved by the
Government of India and IBA advised the scheme to the public sector banks in July, 2004 to enable
their boards to adopt the same.

13
VIEWS OF THE UNIONS/ASSOCIATIONS
6.0 After knowing the views of the management of various banks on both the issues, the
Committee felt that the views of the representatives of the Associations/Unions be also heard to
know the problem from their point of view. All the Unions of the banks were unanimous that the
policy of appointments on compassionate grounds in the banks needs to be revived. All the Unions
have put forward certain suggestions:
• At least the widow of the deceased employee (if not the son or daughter) should be given
the job in the Bank according to her qualification either in the clerical or subordinate cadre.
• If the wife of the deceased employee is aged or is otherwise not willing to take the job
for her own reasons of health, age etc then at her option, financial compensation can be
paid.
• This compensation should be adequate to take care of her and her children.
• This compensation amount can also be paid to her on monthly basis if she so desire.
• The erstwhile scheme of appointments of a family member in cases of death of employee
while discharging official duties/dacoity/robbery, etc. should be restored.
6.1 The Committee during its meeting, with the Banks at Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad impress
upon them to revise the scheme to accommodate the appointments on compassionate ground in the
spirit of DoPT guidelines and directed them to submit before the Committee the revised scheme.
The Committee desired that compassionate appointment, are required to be made at least in those
cases where the employee dies while performing official duties as a result of dacoity, terrorist
attack, violence, robbery etc.
6.2 The Committee during its visit to Jaipur, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Bhopal held discussions
with various Banks on the issue of ‘Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Grounds’. The
representative of IBA apprised the Committee that the views expressed by the Committee in its
previous study visits were discussed by the IBA and it was decided that IBA would submit the
draft modified model scheme of compassionate appointments to the Government wherein it was
decided to revive Compassionate Appointments at least in those cases where the person died while
performing official duties as a result of dacoity, terrorist attack, violence, robbery etc.
6.3 The proposed modified model scheme on Compassionate Appointments was submitted by
IBA to the Government as under:
1. Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) had proposed modification of the Model Scheme.
2. The Government is of the view that payment of ex-gratia amount should only be in
deserving cases and cannot be made into a universal rule in all cases of employees dying
in harness. If any ex-gratia  payment is made universal. It would become virtually a
condition of service. Besides, the ex-gratia payment cannot be equal or nearly equal to the
gross emoluments of deceased employee because, in that case, the result would be that
while one person fills the post, the bank would be obliged to pay twice or nearly twice the
emoluments attached to the post. Hence, payment of ex-gratia should also be subject to
certain conditions that would ensure that the benefit is available only in deserving cases.
The amount of benefit should also be such that if invested, it will fetch the deceased’s
family a reasonable income that will save them from penury.
3. The Ministry of Finance, Banking Division vide its letter dated June 19, 2007 has advised
the Indian Banks’ Association that the existing scheme may be amended by dividing it into
two parts, the first part relating to compassionate appointments, in exceptional cases and
the second relating to ex-gratia payment as explained below:

14
(A) Compassionate Appointments in exceptional cases
Compassionate appointment to one among the next of kin may be confined to
exceptional cases, where
(a) an employee dies while performing official duty as a result of violence,
terrorism, robbery or dacoity;
(b) an employee dies within five years of his first appointment or before he reaches
the age of thirty years, whichever is latter leaving a dependant spouse and/or
minor children; and
(c) the appointment shall be made only in classes III and IV . A reasonable period of
time after the death of the employee may be prescribed and eligible next of the
kin should seek employment during that period. Since the model scheme was
circulated by the IBA on 31.07.2004, this may be taken as the cut off date. All
cases of death occurring after 31.07.2004, in the circumstances described
above, may be dealt with according the new scheme.
(B) Ex-gratia payment
(a) ex-gratia payment may be made only to the family of an employee, who dies in
harness or who seeks pre-mature retirement due to total incapacitation. The
family shall be in indigent or penurious circumstances.
(b) The monthly income of the family may be calculated in accordance with the
method suggested in the model scheme circulated by IBA. If the current income
of the family does not exceed 60 percent of gross emoluments (net of taxes)
of the deceased employee, the family will be entitled to a lump sum ex-gratia
payment.
(c) Lump sum ex-gratia payment will be calculated at 60 per cent of the gross
emoluments net of taxes per month of the deceased employee (as last drawn)
multiplied by the number of remaining months of service of the deceased
employee had he/she retired in the normal course.
(d) The ceiling caps suggested in the model scheme of IBA, shall apply.
(e) The family of he deceased employee shall apply within 6 months of the death
for ex-gratia payment and such application shall be disposed off within 3
months after its receipt.
(f) All applications for ex-gratia payment pending as on 31.07.2004 shall be
considered in accordance with the Scheme to be revised now.
(g) Any application that has been disposed off prior to 31.07.2004 and any order
passed thereon shall not be reopened.
4. IBA has been advised that the existing scheme be revised suitably on the above lines and
circulated to all PSBs for adoption, preferably by 31.08.2007, with the approval of their
respective boards.
6.4 The Committee appreciates that the views expressed by the Committee in its
previous study visits regarding revival of compassionate appointments in public sector banks
atleast in those cases where the official died while performing official duty has resulted in
modifying the model scheme of compassionate appointments in the public sector banks. The

15
Committee, therefore, recommends that Government of India should accept this revised
proposal of IBA and start ‘compassionate appointments’ in public sector banks with
immediate effect. The Committee feels this act of the Government would certainly help the
family of deceased Banks employee to tide over sudden crisis.
6.5 However the Committee strongly feels that the judgment given/ delivered by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Shri Umesh Kumar Nagpal Vs. State of Haryana and others
doesn’t totally ban the employment on compassionate grounds rather it has been misquoted,
misinterpreted and misunderstood that the Hon’ble Court has totally banned the
compassionate employments. The Committee feels that Government should not put a
blanket ban on providing compassionate appointment to the family members of the deceased
employees in the public sector banks rather should find ways and means for giving
employment under compassionate grounds in view of shrinking employment opportunities
in the Banking Sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should
not totally ban the appointments on compassionate grounds in the Banking Sector rather
think of providing compassionate appointments to the family members of the deceased.
For this the power to appoint on compassionate grounds may be conferred on the CMDs
of public sector banks so as to enable them to give appointments to well deserved cases
alone.
7.0. The Committee having the nomenclature of Personnel, Public Grievance, Law and Justice
Committee receives many public grievance cases on daily basis. In one such representation it was
stated that an employee of the Central bank of India died and his son applied for a job on
compassionate ground after a gap of two years. His application was rejected by the bank on the
ground of late submission of application. The hapless son of the deceased Bank employee then
submitted a representation to the Chairman of the Committee which was forwarded to the Banking
Division for their comment. The Committee had visited Mumbai in July 2006 and held discussions
with Central Bank of India. The Committee then referred to that case. The Committee wanted to
know the reasons for not extending a helping hand to the deceased family and rejecting the
application. Whether the bank had any responsibility towards the deceased family? Why the rules
could not so interpreted so as to help the family? Whether any court judgment/order has defined
‘a family in penury’ and ‘indigent condition’ etc.
7.1 In their reply the representatives of the Central Bank of India stated that the said application
was rejected on two grounds i.e., (i) late submission and (ii) financial condition of the family was
not indigent.
7.2 The Committee was not satisfied by the reply. The Committee feels that in the hour
of crisis each and every member of the family stands together to support the family and
try to overcome the problems that come their way and in this case, the bank instead of
extending a helping hand quoted some rules and simply rejected the application. The
Committee feels that such type of incidences are unwarranted, speaks volumes about the
policy of a particular bank when our effort should be in the direction of building
relationship of trust, help, loyalty etc. The Committee desires that in such cases a realistic
and humanitarian view should be taken by the concerned authorities.
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (PSUs)
8.0 The Committee also held discussions with the representatives of Public Sector Undertakings
and other organisations/Trusts etc. on the issue. In all, the Committee met 40 odd public sector
undertakings and others on the issue. The following Public Sector Undertakings etc. were examined
by the Committee:—

16
Sl. No. Name of the Organisation
12
1. Murmagao Port Trust
2. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
3. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited
4. Indian Oil Corporation
5. National Aluminium Company Limited
6. ONGC
7. Chennai Port Trust
8. National Mineral Development Corporation
9. Bharat Dynamics Limited
10. Hindustan Latex Limited
11. Hindustan Newsprint Limited
12. Cochin Refineries Limited
13. Cochin Port Trust
14. Chennai Petroleum Corporation
15. Madras Fertilizers Limited
16. Nevyeli Lignite Corporation
17. Coal India Limited
18. IBP Company Limited
19. MSTC Limited
20. Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Limited
21. Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceutical Limited
22. National Seeds Corporation Limited
23. Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited
24. Hindustan Salts Limited
25. National Fertilizers Limited
26. Sambhar Salts Limited
27. GAIL (India) Limited
28. MMTC Limited
29. PEC Limited
30. STC Limited
31. Container Corporation Limited
32. Nuclear Power Corporation Limited
33. Cotton Corporation Limited
34. Air India Limited
35. Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation
36. LIC Limited
37. New India Assurance Company Limited
38. BHEL

17
12
39. National Handloom Development Corporation
40. Central Warehousing Corporation Limited
8.1 The Committee observes that the Public Sector Undertakings and other
organisations/Trusts etc. examined by the Committee are having separate schemes for the
benefit of their employees. Some of them were following the policy of making ex-gratia
payment to the family of the deceased and some were continuing with the policy of
appointment on compassionate grounds. The Public Sector Undertakings which are following
the policy of appointment on compassionate grounds are GAIL (India) Limited, STC
Limited, Container Corporation of India Limited, Bharat Dynamics Limited, Neyveli Lignite
Corporation Limited, Cochin Port Trust, Bharat Petroleum, Chennai Port Trust, Chennai
Petroleum Corporation etc.
8.2 Many of them have started following financial package schemes for the family member of
the deceased employees. Some schemes were unique and could really help the deceased family.
8.3 Few such schemes are mentioned below:
8.4 In GAIL (India) Limited a dependent of deceased employee will be eligible for consideration
for appointment in the company against an available vacancy commensurate with his/her
qualifications and experience. Priority will, however, be given to dependents of those employees
who die as a result of an accident while on duty. This consideration will be admissible even if the
name of such dependants is not sponsored by the Employment Exchange or if he/ she has not
applied against any advertisement provided the applicant is otherwise eligible. It is however
obligatory to notify such a vacancy to the Employment Exchange concerned indicating in the
requisition that the vacancy in question is proposed to be filled by the dependant of the deceased
employee and that nominations by the Employment Exchange are not required. Non-existence of an
earning member in the family of the deceased employee will be an important criterion in this regard.
8.5 In MMTC Limited, they have introduced the ‘Employee Family Benefit Scheme’ in place of
‘Compassionate appointments’ from the year 1996. Prior to this, appointments on compassionate
grounds were made in the company on discretionary basis. Owing to liberalization of the economy
in 1991-92 14 out of 18 items canalized through the company was decanalized. Due to excessive
manpower, embargo on fresh recruitment was imposed and V oluntary retirement scheme was
introduced in the company for rationalization of the manpower. Thus, the company decided to
introduce a scheme for the benefit of its employees. The scheme of ‘Employee Family Benefit
Scheme’ ensures 50% of the last drawn Basic Pay + DA in case the length of service is 20 yrs
or more and 40% of the last drawn Basic Pay + DA in case the length of service is less than 20
yrs subject to a maximum of Rs. 12,000/- pm is admissible to the dependent spouse/children till
the notional date of superannuation. The entire terminal benefits like PF, Gratuity, Group Insurance,
Leave Encashment etc, unlike other PSUs are released to the spouse/dependent children and in case
of any hospitalization of the employee, the entire expenditure is borne by the company. As such
there is no financial burden on the family.
8.6 In Chennai Petroleum Corporation, the company was having a very different and unique
policy for the benefits of its employees. In case of death of any employee of the PSU, the
company stands beside the family and offers full support. The company gives full salary to the
family of the deceased till the date of his actual superannuation without making any cut so that
the family survives the sudden crisis inspite of loss of bread earner of the family. Such type of
schemes actually gives much needed support to the family after the death of the ‘Karta’ of the
family. Hence an equitable compensation system was devised as under:—

18
SAMPLE FINANCIAL PACKAGE PAYABLE TO
DEPENDENTS OF DECEASED
Description W orkman in Officer in Officer in
Grade V Grade A Grade D
Pay Scale 8400-15300 12000-17500 17500-22300
Past service in years 17 17 17
Future notional service in years 18 18 18
Salary (BP/DA/SP/PP/SI) 16600 25950 34600
Encashment of EL (say 150 days) 83000 129750 173000
PF accumulation with interest 975283 1524614 2032819
Gratuity 350000 350000 350000
Employees Deposit Linked insurance 100000 100000 100000
Group Savings Linked insurance 110000 120000 125000
Personal Accident Insurance Claim 100000 100000 100000
Employees benefit fund 15000 15000 15000
Superannuation benefits 665361 1040128 1386837
Total Amount payable 2398644 3379492 4282656
Interest earned per month @ 8% p.a. 15991 22530 28551
Add: EPS 1995 pension per month 2050 2050 2050
Total income per month to family 18041 24580 30601
Waiver of House Building Advance 1000000 1200000 1400000
(max.)
Medical Benefits for spouse and Children
Domiciliary Treatment 7000 p.a. 9000 p.a. 9000 p.a.
Special Diseases 15000 p.a. 15000 p.a. 15000 p.a.
Hospitalisation (Mediclaim 1.5 Lakhs p.a. 1.5 Lakhs p.a. 1.5 Lakhs p.a.
Policy)/member
8.7 The Committee is of the opinion that the above mentioned sample financial package payable
to dependents of deceased was a very good scheme, which caters to needs of the family of the
deceased, and is worth to be mentioned in the report of the Committee. The Committee feels that
such type of welfare schemes are the need of the hour when appointments on compassionate
ground have been discontinued or offered very rarely in PSUs.
8.8 The Committee feels that though death of the ‘Karta’ of a family can never be
compensated but family can be consoled by offering compassionate appointment or financial
package to support the family. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government of India should positively think towards revival of the policy of appointments
on compassionate ground in the PSUs and other organisations falling within its jurisdiction
or the PSUs should introduce a unique scheme of ‘full salary till superannuation of the
deceased employee’ uniformly so that the bereaved family could tide over the crisis created
by the cruel hands of destiny.
8.9 The Committee took note of the views of Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions regarding uniformity in policy in all the PSUs who stated that it was a
matter on which the Department of Public Enterprises should be able to really respond better. He
also stated that because many public sector undertakings either are under restructuring or are to
be disinvested, only those PSUs, which are profit making and big public enterprises, have their own

19
policies and that the Government did not really think that it should lay down any policy in this
regard for the PSUs.
8.10 The Committee does not find the views of Secretary convincing and feels that the
Ministry of Personnel is passing on its responsibility to Department of Public Enterprises
(DPE). The Committee strongly feels that it is the policy of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions and it is obligatory for the Ministry to ensure its
implementation in toto  in not only all the Ministries/Departments of Government of India,
but also in the organisations falling within their administrative control. The role of DPE in
the case of PSUs and the Banking Division in the case of Banks is to regulate and
implement the policy as laid down by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions. The Committee however acknowledges that the policy may vary keeping in view
the specific nature of the organisations. What Committee proposes is the mechanism to
monitor the policy at both levels i.e., at the level of DPE or Banking Division and also at
the level of Ministry of Personnel.
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
9.0 The Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions in his deposition
before the Committee on 17th July, 2007 stated that there was a need for Government employee
to feel that his family would be looked after even after he was not there, and especially, if his
family was in indigent condition. He informed the Committee that the policy, in whatever shape it
exists today, operates primarily with the philosophy and view that the Government employees’ need
to be taken care of. But with the increasing trend towards reducing the size of the Government,
especially the number of employees, and, very strict adherence of the reservation rules and
regulations through various enactment’s and orders of the courts, it has now become nearly
impossible to increase the percentage from five percent, where it is pegged now.
9.1 The Committee was further informed by the Secretary that this percentage left very little
scope in most of the Ministries to really help all the dependents of employees who pass away, in
matters of giving employment. In every Ministry a large number of people are waiting for
employment because there are simply no vacancies. Earlier, the calculation of the five percent
vacancies was against the Direct Recruit quota to be filled up during the year. This Direct Recruit
quota has shrunk because in 2001, the Government decided that the 66 percent, that is, 2/3rd of the
Direct Recruit quota in every Ministry would be abolished and only 1/3rd vacancies would be filled
up. So, if there are hundred vacancies, sixty-six will be abolished and only 33 or 34 vacancies will
be filled up. And, this five percent used to be calculated of the thirty-four rather than of the entire
hundred. The Ministry has now modified the rule. While the number of vacancies to be filled up will
still be 34 but the number of vacancies for compassionate appointments will be calculated against the
entire hundred. That way, a marginal increase in the number of vacancies has been achieved. But the
problem still remains and the problem is quite acute. But in an effort to balance between the number
of people that Government should have and the reservation requirements, the Government finds itself
in a difficult position to really expand the scope of the compassionate employment.
9.2 The Committee has also come across certain representations wherein it has been
mentioned that at the time of the death of the breadwinner the wife was uneducated/ not
able to take up the job and the deceased has left small children’s where the 3 years criteria
to fill up the said vacancy cannot be applied. The Committee feels that such type of
situation can come in anybody’s life wherein the 3 year rule cannot be applied, hence such
type of cases should be dealt with separately. The Committee recommends that if the
Government really intends to help the family of the deceased employee then the
Government should come forward with certain changes in its policy on appointments on
compassionate ground like waiving of all outstanding loans, free health expenditure, free
education to the children till they attain the age of majority, family pension, housing
facilities etc. for the family of the deceased.

20
9.3 The Committee finds that the Guidelines/circulars issued in this regard by the
Government of India are actually not adhered to in true spirit and in many cases some PSUs
are not even aware of any such new guidelines etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Guidelines/circulars issued by the Government must be complied with and a feedback
must be obtained from each of the administrative Ministries so that a cross check can be in
place to see that the instructions issued are followed properly. The Committee also feels that
the role of the administrative Ministries under which the particular PSU comes become all the
more important and it should pass on each and every instruction issued by the Government
of India to the PSUs and receive the confirmation from them and send the feedback to the
Government of India. The Committee recommends that this is a continuous process and
atleast yearly report must be sent to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) by the administrative Ministries to ensure
whether the instructions issued by the Government are complied with and the Ministry of
Personnel must also call for a report on this issue per annum.
9.4 The Committee also feels that if the Government’s effort is to help the family of the
deceased employee then there must be a separate Cell in each of the Ministries or
Departments which will cater to only compassionate appointment cases. The cell should send
periodical information on number of vacancies, number of applications received, time taken
to dispose of the cases, reasons for not disposing favorably etc. to the head of the
Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should come forward
with certain new guidelines in addition to the one which is already in existence for the
benefit of the employees like creation of a separate Cell, proper monitoring of its
guidelines, gathering of information from the Ministries periodically, compliance report etc.
9.5. Finally, the Committee feels that in a welfare state like ours it is obligatory on the
part of the Government to provide a social security net to the employees and appointments
on compassionate ground is one such measure. It gives a sense of being part and parcel of
the organisation amongst its employees who feels that in case of falling victim at the hands
of cruel destiny the organisation will take care of their families. The umbrella of protection
certainly boosts the morale of not only the employees but also their families. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the policy of compassionate appointments should
continue in the Government, its PSUs, organisations, Trusts etc. as a measure of social
security net and also consider offering the package on the lines of Chennai Petroleum
corporation Ltd. so that the family of the deceased employee survives the sudden void and
crisis created by the cruel destiny.
9.6 The Committee is perturbed to note that there is lack of uniformity in the rules/
standing orders/guidelines, formulated till date, by various organisations/Departments, which
govern the policy of appointment on compassionate ground. It notes that lack of clarity/
precision is a major handicap in implementing the scheme in its true letter and spirit. It
is of the view that this has been the main reason for various conflicting judgments by the
Courts. The Committee strongly feels that common standards eligibility criteria should be
made applicable for such appointments. It is also of the view that recurrent judgments by
the courts can be avoided if a uniform and transparent policy is envisaged in all the
Organisations/Ministries/Departments. It is of the considered opinion that giving this policy
statutory backing would rectify the anomalies which exist at present in this regard.
9.7 In view of the above, the Committee unanimously recommends that concrete steps
should be taken to enact a comprehensive legislation which would govern the policy of
appointment on compassionate ground. The Committee feels that such a legislation would
render clarity to the eligibility criteria under this scheme and would make it obligatory on
the part of Ministries/Departments/Organisations to implement this beneficial policy.

21
MINUTES

23
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 17th July, 2007 in Room No ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
7. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
14. Shri Raj Babbar
15. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
16. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
** *
*** Relates to some other matter.

24
I. Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(i) Shri Satyanand Mishra, Secretary; and
(ii) Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary.
II. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
(i) Shri B.K. Sinha, Additional Secretary; and
(ii) Shri T.R. Raghunandan, Joint Secretary.
III. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary.
I. “Government Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground”
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed Members that the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel,
PG and Pension had been requested to make a presentation on the subject.
3. Thereafter the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pension, while making presentation
on the subject gave a brief introduction of the Government’s policy on appointment on
compassionate grounds. He apprised the Committee that till 1978 the policy was equally applicable
to the employees of PSUs and the Banks but later on due to restructuring of the PSUs it was
withdrawn. After the year 2001, the Government had taken the decision to abolish 2/3rd of the
Direct Recruit quota in every Ministry and fill up only 1/3rd vacancies. In order to help the
deceased family the Government had slightly modified the 5% reservation criteria and this 5%
would now be considered from the original total vacancies which were there in the pre 2001
period. That way, marginal increase in the number of vacancies had been achieved.
4. Members were unanimous that there should be a uniform policy of the Government on
policy of appointment on compassionate grounds, the Ministry should issue necessary guidelines/
circulars to the other Ministries, proper monitoring of the Government policies should be done on
regular intervals etc.
II. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
III. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting was adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

25
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday the 29th August, 2007 in Room No. ‘126’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
14. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
15. Prof. M. Ramadass
16. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
17. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
2. * * *
3. The Committee then took up in house discussion on the subject “Government’s policy of
appointment on compassionate ground”. The Committee during its deliberations, observed that the
25
*** Relates to some other matter.

26
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal vs. State of Haryana did not
enforce a blanket ban on granting appointments on compassionate ground. The Committee was of
the opinion that when an employee working in an organisation/department, loses his/her life due to
some misfortune, the organisation/department concerned should give due consideration to the
welfare of the family of the deceased. It was of the view that instead of granting exgratia/adhoc
payments to the dependants of the deceased, appropriate employment should be given,
commensurate with the educational qualifications of the dependant.
4. The Committee was of the unanimous opinion that there was lack of uniformity in the rules/
standing orders/guidelines, formulated till date, by various organisations/Departments, which govern
the policy of appointment on compassionate ground and that it was a major handicap in
implementing the scheme in its true letter and spirit. It was of the considered view that giving this
policy a statutory backing would rectify the anomalies which exist at present. For the said purpose,
the Committee stressed upon the need to enact a comprehensive legislation which would govern
the policy.
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.

27
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 6th September, 2007, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
2. The Committee considered its draft Twenty Third Report on the subject “Government
Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Grounds”. After some discussion the Committee adopted
the Report with some changes. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence
Shri Tarlochan Singh, MP to present the Report in Rajya Sabha, and Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan, MP
and in his absence Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq, MP to lay in Lok Sabha on the 7th September, 2007.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
4. The meeting was adjourned at 3.26 
P.M.
27

ANNEXURE

SCHEME
FOR
COMPASSIONATE
APPOINTMENT
1998
Department of Personnel and Training
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Government of India
31

32
32
No.14014/6/94-Estt(D)
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension
(Department of Personnel and Training)
New Delhi-110001
October 9, 1998
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:- Scheme for compassionate appointment under the
Central Government – Revised consolidated instructions–
The undersigned is directed to say that the existing instructions for making compassionate
appointment under the Central Government have since been reviewed in the light of the various
court judgements and other decisions including those taken on the various recommendations
contained in the Fifth Central Pay Commission Report as well as the Study Reports of 1990 and
1994 prepared by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances on the subject
and they have accordingly been revised/simplified and consolidated as in the enclosed scheme
which will supercede all the existing instructions on the subject. This may be brought to the notice
of all concerned for information, guidance and necessary action.
Sd/-
(K.K. JHA)
Director (Establishment)
To
All Ministries/Departments of the Government of India
Copy to:–
1. The Comptroller and Auditor General of India
2. The Secretary, Union Public Service Commission
3. Rajya Sabha Secretariat
4. Lok Sabha Secretariat
5. All State Governments/Union Territories Administrations
6. All attached/subordinate offices under the Department of Personnel and Training/
Ministry of Home Affairs
7. National Commission for SC/ST, New Delhi
8. National Commission for OBC, New Delhi
9. The Secretary, Staff Side, National Council
10. The Registrar General, The Supreme Court of India
11. The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, Sardar Patel
Bhavan, New Delhi-110001
12. All Offices/Sections of DOP&T
13. Establishment(D) Section (500 copies)

33
SCHEME FOR COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
1. OBJECT
The object of the Scheme is to grant appointment on compassionate grounds to a dependent
family member of a Government servant dying in harness or who is retired on medical grounds,
thereby leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood, to relieve the family of
the Government servant concerned from financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
2. TO WHOM APPLICABLE
To a dependent family member—
(A) of a Government servant who—
(a) dies while in service (including death by suicide); or
(b) is retired on medical grounds under Rule 2 of the CCS (Medical
Examination) Rules 1957 or the corresponding provision in the Central
Civil Service Regulations before attaining the age of 55 years (57 years
for Group ‘D’ Government servants); or
(c) is retired on medical grounds under Rule 38 of the CCS(Pension)
Rules, 1972 or the corresponding provision in the Central Civil Service
Regulations before attaining the age of 55 years (57 years for Group ‘D’
Government servants); or
(B) of a member of the Armed Forces who—
(a) dies during service; or
(b) is killed in action; or
(c) is medically boarded out and is unfit for civil employment.
Note I “Dependent Family Member” means:
(a) spouse; or
(b) son (including adopted son); or
(c) daughter (including adopted daughter); or
(d) brother or sister in the case of unmarried Government servant or member
of the Armed Forces referred to in (A) or (B) of this para,
who was wholly dependent on the Government servant/member of the Armed
Forces at the time of his death in harness or retirement on medical grounds, as
the case may be.
Note II “Government servant” for the purpose of these instructions means a Government
servant appointed on regular basis and not one working on daily wage or casual
or apprentice or ad-hoc or contract or re-employment basis.
33

34
Note III “ Confirmed work-charged staff”  will also be covered by the term ‘Government
servant’ mentioned in Note III above.
Note IV “Service” includes extension in service (but not re-employment) after attaining the
normal age of retirement in a civil post
Note V “Re-employment”  does not include employment of ex-serviceman before the
normal age of retirement in a civil post.
3. AUTHORITY COMPETENT TO MAKE
COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
(a) Joint Secretary incharge of administration in the
Ministry/Department concerned.
(b) Head of the Department under the Supplementary Rule 2(10)
in the case of attached and subordinate offices.
(c) Secretary in the Ministry/Department concerned in special types of cases.
4. POSTS TO WHICH SUCH APPOINTMENTS CAN BE MADE
Group ‘C’ or Group ‘D’ posts against the direct recruitment quota.
5. ELIGIBILITY
(a) The family is indigent and deserves immediate assistance for relief from financial
destitution; and
(b) Applicant for compassionate appointment should be eligible and suitable for the
post in all respects under the provisions of the relevant Recruitment Rules.
6. A. EXEMPTIONS
Compassionate appointments are exempted from observance of the following
requirements:—
(a) Recruitment procedure i.e. without the agency of the Staff
Selection Commission or the Employment Exchange.
(b) Clearance from the Surplus Cell of the Department of Personnel
and Training/Directorate General of Employment and Training.
(c) The ban orders on filling up of posts issued by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure).
B. RELAXATlONS
(a) Upper age limit could be relaxed wherever found to be necessary. The lower age
limit should, however, in no case be relaxed below 18 years of age.
Note I Age eligibility shall be determined with reference to the date of application and not
the date of appointment;
Note II Authority competent to take a final decision for making compassionate
appointment in a case shall be competent to grant relaxation of upper age limit
also for making such appointment.

35
(b) Secretary in the Ministry/Department concerned is competent to relax temporarily
educational qualifications as prescribed in the relevant recruitment rules in the
case of appointment at the lowest level e.g. Group ‘D’ or Lower Division Clerk
post, in exceptional circumstances where the condition of the family is very hard
provided there is no vacancy meant for compassionate appointment in a post for
which the dependent family member in question is educationally qualified. Such
relaxation will be permitted upto a period of two years beyond which no
relaxation of educational qualifications will be admissible and the services of the
person concerned, if still unqualified, are liable to be terminated.
Note In the case of an attached/subordinate office, the Secretary in the concerned
administrative Ministry/Department shall be the competent authority for this
purpose.
(c) In the matter of exemption from the requirement of  passing the typing test those
appointed on compassionate grounds to the post of Lower Division Clerk will be
governed by the general orders issued in this regard:—
(i) by the CS Division of the Department of Personnel and Training if the post
is included in the Central Secretariat Clerical Service; or
(ii) by the Establishment Division of the Department of Personnel and Training
if the post is not included in the Central Secretariat Clerical Service.
(d) Where a widow is appointed on compassionate ground to a Group ‘D’ post, she
will be exempted from the requirement of possessing the educational qualifications
prescribed in the relevant rules provided the duties of the post can be
satisfactorily performed by her without possessing such educational qualifications.
7. DETERMINATION/AV AILABILITY OF VACANCIES
(a) Appointment on compassionate grounds should be made only on regular basis and
that too only if regular vacancies meant for that purpose are available.
(b) Compassionate appointments can be made upto a maximum of 5% of vacancies
falling under direct recruitment quota in any Group ‘C’ or ‘D’ post. The
appointing authority may hold back upto 5% of vacancies in the aforesaid
categories to be filled by direct recruitment through Staff Selection Commission
or otherwise so as to fill such vacancies by appointment on compassionate
grounds. A person selected for appointment on compassionate grounds should be
adjusted in the recruitment roster against the appropriate category viz. SC/ST/
OBC/General depending upon the category to which he belongs. For example, if
he belongs to SC category he will be adjusted against the SC reservation point,
if he is ST/OBC he will be adjusted against ST/OBC point and if he belongs to
General category he will be adjusted against the vacancy point meant for General
category.
(c) While the ceiling of 5% for making compassionate appointment against regular
vacancies should not be circumvented by making appointment of dependent family
member of Government servant on casual/daily wage/ ad-hoc /contract basis
against regular vacancies, there is no bar to considering him for such appointment
if he is eligible as per the normal rules/orders governing such appointments.
(d) The ceiling of 5% of direct recruitment vacancies for making compassionate
appointment should not be exceeded by utilising any other vacancy e.g. sports
quota vacancy.

36
(e) Employment under the scheme is not confined to the Ministry/Department/Office
in which deceased/medically retired Government servant had been working. Such
an appointment can be given anywhere under the Government of India depending
upon availability of a suitable vacancy meant for the purpose of compassionate
appointment.
(f) If sufficient vacancies are not available in any particular ‘office to accommodate
the persons in the waiting list for compassionate appointment, it is open to the
administrative Ministry/Department Office to take up the matter with other
Ministries/Departments/Offices of the Government of India to provide at an early
date appointment on compassionate grounds to those in the waiting list
8. RELATED REQUESTS FOR COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
(a) Ministries/Departments can consider requests for compassionate appointment
even where the death or retirement on medical grounds of a Government servant
took place long back, say five years or so. While considering such belated
requests it should, however, be kept in view that the concept of compassionate
appointment is largely related to the need for immediate assistance to the family
of the Government servant in order to relieve it from economic distress. The very
fact that the family has been able to manage somehow all these years should
normally be taken as adequate proof that the family had some dependable means
of subsistence. Therefore, examination of such cases would call for a great deal
of circumspection. The decision to make appointment on compassionate grounds
in such cases may, therefore, be taken only at the level of the Secretary of the
Department/Ministry concerned.
(b) Whether a request for compassionate appointment is belated or not may be
decided with reference to the date of death or retirement on medical ground of
a Government servant and not the age of the applicant at the time of
consideration.
9. WIDOW APPOINTED ON COMPASSIONATE GROUNDS GETTING REMARRIED
A widow appointed on compassionate grounds will be allowed to continue in service even
after re-marriage.
10. WHERE THERE IS AN EARNlNG MEMBER
(a) In deserving cases even where there is already an earning member in the family,
a dependent family member may be considered for compassionate appointment
with prior approval of the Secretary of the Department/Ministry concerned who,
before approving such appointment, will satisfy himself that grant of
compassionate appointment is justified having regard to number of dependents,
assets and liabilities left by the Government servant, income of the earning
member as also his liabilities including the fact that the earning member is residing
with the family of the Government servant and whether he should not be a source
of support to other members of the family.
(b) In cases where any member of the family of the deceased or medically retired
Government servant is already in employment and is not supporting the other
members of the family of the Government servant, extreme caution has to be
observed in ascertaining the economic distress of the members of the family of

37
the Government servant so that the facility of appointment on compassionate
ground is not circumvented and misused by putting forward the ground that the
member of the family already employed is not supporting the family.
11. MISSING GOVERNMENT SERV ANT
Cases of missing Government servants are also covered under the scheme for
compassionate appointment subject to the following conditions:—
(a) A request to grant the benefit of compassionate appointment can be considered
only after a lapse of at least 2 years from the date from which the Government
servant has been missing, provided that:
(i) an FIR to this effect has been lodged with the Police,
(ii) the missing person is not traceable, and
(iii) the competent authority feels that the case is genuine;
(b) This benefit will not be applicable to the case of a Government servant:—
(i) who had less than two years to retire on the date from which he has been
missing; or
(ii) who is suspected to have committed fraud, or suspected to have joined any
terrorist organisation or suspected to have gone abroad.
(c) Compassionate appointment in the case of a missing Government servant also
would not be a matter of right as in the case of others and it will be subject to
fulfillment of all the conditions, including the availability of vacancy, laid down for
such appointment under the scheme;
(d) While considering such a request, the results of the Police investigation should
also be taken into account; and
(c) A decision on any such request for compassionate appointment should be taken
only at the level of the Secretary of the Ministry/Department concerned.
12. PROCEDURE
(a) The proforma as in Annexure may be used by Ministries/Departments/Offices for
ascertaining necessary information and processing the cases of compassionate
appointment.
(b) The Welfare Officer in each Ministry/Department/Office should meet the members
of the family of the Govemment servant in question immediately after his death
to advise and assist them in getting appointment on compassionate grounds. The
applicant should be called in person at the very first stage and advised in person
about the requirements and formalities to be completed by him.
(c) An application for appointment on compassionate grounds should be considered in
the light of the instructions issued from time to time by the Department of
Personnel and Training (Establishment Division) on the subject by a Committee of
officers consisting of three officers — one Chairman and two Members — of the
rank of Deputy Secretary/Director in the Ministry/Department and officers of
equivalent rank in the case of attached and subordinate offices. The Welfare
Officer may also be made one of the Members/Chairman of the committee

38
depending upon his rank. The committee may meet during the second week of
every month to consider cases received during the previous month. The applicant
may also be granted personal hearing by the Committee,  if necessary, for better
appreciation of the facts of the case.
(d) Recommendation of the committee should be placed before the competent
authority for a decision. If the competent authority disagrees with the
committee’s recommendation, the case may be referred to the next higher
authority for a decision.
13. UNDERTAKING
A person appointed on compassionate grounds under the scheme should give an undertaking
in writing (as in Annexure) that he/she will maintain properly the other family members who were
dependent on the Government servant/member of the Armed Forces in question and in case it is
proved subsequently (at any time) that the family members are being neglected or are not being
maintained properly by him/her, his/her appointment may be terminated forthwith.
14. REQUEST FOR CHANGE IN POST/PERSON
When a person has been appointed on compassionate grounds to a particular post the set
of circumstances, which led to such appointment, should be deemed to have ceased to
exist. Therefore,—
(a) he/she should strive in his/her career like his/her colleagues for future
advancement and any request for appointment to any higher post on
considerations of compassion should invariably be rejected.
(b) an appointment made on compassionate grounds cannot be transferred to any
other person and any request for the same on considerations of compassion
should in variably be rejected.
15. SENIORITY
(a) The inter-se seniority of persons appointed on compassionate grounds may be
fixed with reference to their date of appointment. Their interpolation with the
direct recruits/promotees may also be made with reference to their dates of
appointment without disturbing the inter-se seniority or direct recruits/promotees.
(b) Date of joining by a person appointed on compassionate grounds shall be treated
as the date of his/her regular appointment.
16. GENERAL
(a) Appointments made on grounds of compassion should be done in such a way that
persons appointed to the post do have the essential educational and technical
qualifications and experience required for the post consistent with the requirement
of maintenance of efficiency of administration.
(b) It is not the intention to restrict employment of a family member of the deceased
or medically retired Group ‘D’ Government servant to a Group ‘D’  post only. As
such, a family member of such Group ‘D’ Government servant can be appointed
to a Group ‘C’ post for which he/she is educationally qualified, provided a
vacancy in Group ‘C’ post exists for this purpose.

39
(c) The Scheme of compassionate appointments was conceived as far back as 1958
Since then a number of welfare measures have been introduced by the
Government which have made a significant difference in the financial position of
the families of the Government servants dying in harness/retired on medical
grounds. An application for compassionate appointment should, however, not be
rejected merely on the ground that the family of the Government servant has
received the benefits under the various welfare schemes. While considering a
request for appointment on compassionate ground a balanced and objective
assessment of the financial condition of the family has to be made taking into
account its assets and liabilities (including the benefits received under the various
welfare schemes mentioned above) and all other relevant factors such as the
presence of an earning member, size of the family, ages of the children and the
essential needs of the family, etc.
(d) Compassionate appointment should not be denied or delayed merely on the ground
that there is reorganisation in the Ministry/Department/Office. It should be made
available to the person concerned if there is a vacancy meant for compassionate
appointment and he or she is found eligible and suitable under the scheme.
(e) Requests for compassionate appointment consequent on death or retirement on
medical grounds of Group ‘D’ staff may be considered with greater sympathy by
applying relaxed standards depending on the facts and circumstances of the case.
(f) Compassionate appointment will have precedence over absorption of surplus
employees and regularisation of daily wage/casual workers with/without temporary
status.
(g) Any request to increase the upper age-limit of 55 years for retirement on medical
grounds prescribed in para 2(A) (b) and (c) above in respect of Group ‘A’/‘B’/
‘C’ Government servants and to bring it at par with the upper age-limit of 57
years prescribed therein for Group ‘D’ Government servants on the ground that
the age of retirement has recently (May, 1998) been raised from 58 years to 60
years for Group ‘A’/‘B’/‘C’ Government servants (which is at par with the age
of retirement of 60 years applicable to Group ‘D’ Government servants) or on
any other ground should invariably be rejected so as to ensure that the benefit of
compassionate appointment available under the scheme is not misused by seeking
retirement on medical grounds at the fag end of one’s career and also keeping in
view the fact that the higher upper age-limit of 57 years has been prescribed
therein for Group ‘D’ Government servants for the reason that they are low paid
Government servant; who get meagre invalid pension in comparison to others.
17. IMPORTANT COURT JUDGEMENTS
The ruling contained in the following judgements may also be kept in view while
considering cases of compassionate appointment:—
(a) The Supreme Court in its judgement dated April 8, 1993 in the case of 
Auditor
General of India and others vs. G. Ananta Rajeswara Rao [(1994) 1 SCC 192] has
held that appointment on grounds of descent clearly violates Article 16(2) of the
Constitution; but if the appointment is  confined to the son or daughter or widow
of the Government servant who died in harness and who needs immediate
appointment on grounds of immediate need of assistance in the event of there
being no other earning member in the family to supplement the loss of income

40
from the bread winner to relieve the economic distress of the members of the
family, it is unexceptionable.
(b) The Supreme Court’s judgement dated May 4, 1994 in the case of Umesh Kumar
Nagpal vs. State of Haryana and others [JT 1994(3) S.C. 525] has laid down the
following important principle in this regard:
(i) Only dependents of an employee dying in harness leaving his family in
penury and without any means of livelihood can be appointed on
compassionate ground.
(ii) The posts in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ (formerly Class III and IV) are the lowest
posts in non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be
offered on compassionate grounds and no other post i.e. in the Group ‘A’
or Group ‘B’ category is expected or required to be given for this purpose
as it is legally impermissible.
(iii) The whole object of granting compassionate appointment is to enable the
family to tide over the sudden crisis and to relieve the family of the
deceased from financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
(iv) Offering compassionate appointment as a matter of course irrespective of
the financial condition of the family of the deceased or medically retired
Government servant is legally impermissible.
(v) Neither the qualifications of the applicant (dependent family member) nor
the post held by the deceased or medically retired Government servant is
relevant. If the applicant finds it below his dignity to accept the post
offered, he is free not to do so. The post is not offered to cater to his
status but to see the family through the economic calamity.
(vi) Compassionare appointment cannot be granted after lapse of a reasonable
period and it is not a vested right which can be exercised at any time in
future.
(vii) Compassionate appointment cannot be offered by an individual functionary
on an ad-hoc basis.
(c) The Supreme Court has held in its judgement dated February 28, 1995 in the case
of the 
Life Insurance Corporation of India vs. Mrs. Asha Ramchandra Ambekar
and others [JT 1994(2) S.C 183] that the High Courts and Administrative
Tribunals can not give direction for appointment of a person on compassionate
grounds but can merely direct consideration or the claim for such an appointment.
(d) The Supreme Court has ruled in the cases of 
Himachal Road Transport
Corporation vs. Dinesh Kumar [JT 1996 (5) S.C. 319] on May 7, 1996 and
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited vs. Smt A. Radhika Thirumalai [JT 1996 (9) S.C.
197] on October 9, 1996 that appointment on compassionate grounds can be
made only if a vacancy is available for that purpose.
(e) The Supreme Court has held in its judgement in the case of 
State of Haryana and
others vs. Rani Devi and others [JT 1996(6) S.C. 646] on July 15, 1996 that if
the scheme regarding appointment on compassionate ground is extended to all
sorts of casual, ad-hoc employees including those who are working as
Apprentices, then such scheme cannot be justified on Constitutional grounds.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.