PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 34
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT JUDGES
(SALARIES AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 FEBRUARY, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA1930 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

57
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT JUDGES (SALARIES AND
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-67

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—16
4. S UMMARY OF R ECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................ 17—18
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 19—28
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 29—56
A. The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions
of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008 ........................................................................ 31—44
B. List of individuals/organisations who submitted memoranda ............................. 45—46
C. Comments of the Department of Justice on the Memoranda received
from individual/organisations .................................................................................. 47—56

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2008)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Shri Ram Jethmalani
10. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
14. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
15. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Adv. P. Sathedevi
25. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
26. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
27. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
28. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, The Chairman of the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and
Justice, having been authorised by the Committee, present this Thirty-fourth Report of the
Committee relating to the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Bill, 2008 ( See Annexure A).
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha
on the 22nd December, 2008 to this Committee.
3. The Committee decided to issue Press Release in print, audio, visual and electronic media to
solicit views/suggestions from interested individuals/organisations/experts/institutions on the various
provisions of the Bill. The Press Release appeared in print media on the 22nd January, 2008.
4. In response thereto, 51 memoranda containing the suggestions were received by the
Committee which were subsequently forwarded to the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and
Justice for their comments thereon.
5. The Committee considered the Bill and heard the presentation of the Additional Secretary,
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice and took oral evidence of Bar Council of India,
the Supreme Court Bar Association and Rakshak Foundation to have better appreciation of the
subject.
6. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:—
(i) Background note on the Bill received from the Department of Justice;
(ii) The High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1954;
(iii) The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Condition of Service) Act, 1958;
(iv) Views/suggestions tendered by the witnesses who appeared before the Committee;
(v) Report of the Committee of Judges, Constituted by the Chief Justice of India on the
salaries, allowances and other service conditions of Chief Justice of India and Judges
of Supreme Court and Chief Justice of High Court and Judges of High Courts.
(vi) Written submission received from the Delhi High Court;
(vii) W ritten submissions received from the Bombay High Court (Aurangabad Bench); and
(viii) Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice on the views/suggestions contained in
the memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on various provisions of
the Bill.
7. The Committee held 4 meetings to discuss the Bill in details.
♣Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 45652) dated the 31st December, 2008.

8. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observation and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
16th February,  2009 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
(iv)

1
REPORT
1.0 The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Services)
Amendment Bill, 2008 introduced in Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2008 seeks to revise by
increasing the (a) Salaries of Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court; (b) Doubling the
existing rate of sumptuary allowance and scale of free furnishing admissible to the Judges;
(c) Pension, additional pension and maximum pension of the Judges of the High Courts and the
Supreme Court; and (d) Additional quantum of pension and family pension as applicable in the case
of the Central Government pensioners and family pensioners.
1.1 To attain the objective, the Bill seeks to amend the High Court Judges (Salaries and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Act, 1958 by substituting the word “thirty thousand rupees per mensem” with the word
“ninety thousand rupees per mensem” and “twenty six thousand rupees per mensem” with the
word “eighty thousand rupees per mensem” in Section 2 of the said relevant Acts. The Bill was
referred by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha to this Committee on 31st December, 2008 for examination and report on or before
15 February, 2009
1.2 The statement of objects and reasons appended to the Bill elucidate the reasons and the need
for bringing forth the present Bill. It states as under:—
“The need to increase the salaries, allowances and pension of the Judges of
Supreme Court and High Courts has been necessitated because of the increase in the
salaries and allowances  and pensions of the Central Government employees on acceptance
of the recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission by  the Government. The Bill
also seeks to revise the rates of the sumptuary allowances and scale of free furnishing
admissible to the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts by doubling the existing
with effect from the 1st day of September, 2008”.
“The rates of pension of the Judges of the High Court and Supreme Court were last
enhanced with effect from 1st January, 1996 by the High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Salaries and Conditions of Services) Amendment Act, 1998 and the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2005. The Sixth
Central Pay Commission recommended revision in the pensionary benefits of the Central
Government employees including the members of the All India Services. The revised pension
rules have come into force on the 1st day of January, 2006. It is, therefore, necessary to
increase suitably the existing pension, additional pension and maximum pension of the
Judges of the High Court and the Supreme Court”.
1.3. The statement of objects and reasons further states:—
“Based on the recommendations of Sixth Central Pay Commission the Central
Government has decided to grant additional quantum of pension and family pension with
reference to the age of the Central Government pensioner and family pensioner. On the same
analogy, it has been decided to extend the similar benefit to all retired Judges” .
1.4 While considering the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/suggestions from various
individuals/organisations/stakeholders on the subject matter of the Bill. The Committee accordingly
authorized the Secretariat to issue a press release for inviting views/suggestions on the Bill.
Accordingly, the Secretariat issued a press release on the Bill on 22nd January, 2009 which was

2
published in the major English and Hindi dailies and vernacular newspapers all over the country.
In response, thereto, a number of representations/memoranda were received.
2.0 The major points raised in various representations/memoranda (total 51 memoranda) were
considered and, a list of individuals/organisations who submitted the memoranda is at (Annexure B)
are summarized as follows:—
(i) The Pay of Chief Justice of India is against his decorum. Now it is less than the pay
of a Governor. While before it was Rs. 9000 when the pay of the President of India
was Rs. 1000 i.e. 90%. But proposed pay is only 66.66%. An Advocate of High
Court earns Rs. 1,00,000 per month. So a worthy and intelligent advocate will not
come in Judiciary. This step deemed in public as to control and make pressure over
the Judiciary.
(ii) The salaries/perks/service condition of the judges can be increased based on their
performances.
(iii) The world is seeing such a recession because of which everybody everywhere is
talking about job cuts and pay cuts, so it is highly strange that we are thinking about
the pay and perks for the judges. But if we go ahead with the proposed pay and perk
hikes, will they agree to disclose the property at the time of joining?
(iv) The salaries/perks of the judges should be increased on one condition that they must
accept unconditional and full accountability to the people of this Democracy,
Democratic Republic of India.
(v) The Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts should declare their assets to
the President of India and he/she should then release their full details for public
information and scrutiny. Those who impose high standards of conduct on others
should themselves also appear to follow them in their own lives.
(vi) The retired Judges suffer from some ailment or disability after retirement and they
are unable to drive their cars themselves. Hence, retired judges may be given
Rs. 6000 per month for engaging a driver, Rs. 4000 as sumptuary allowance, 300
litres of petrol, 2000 free telephone calls.
(vii) It is senseless to fulfill formality of inviting suggestions when the changes including
salary hike listed in draft bill have already been affected through an ordinance. Any
increase in salaries, pensions and other facilities of judges from higher courts should
only be affected simultaneously with other pending bills concerning judiciary like’
Judges Inquiry Bill 2008’. Other aspects including reforms in judicial system like
constitution of Nation Judicial Commission for appointment and probe of complaints
of Judges should also be taken simultaneously with bill about salary for judges. In
view of recent controversy on declaration of wealth and assets by judges, provision
for making wealth and assets of judges and their family members should be made
public, rather provision of declaring gifts received by them and revealing personal
expenses made above rupees 20000 should also be made. It may be noted that USA
has a system where judges have to make their wealth and assets public apart from
declaring received gifts worth above 50 US Dollars.
(viii) The salaries of Judges should be made very attractive. The enhanced salary and
allowances are proposed to take effect from 1st September, 2008. There is no
justification for this, particularly when the increase is being provided pursuant to the
report of the Pay Commission.

3
(ix) Pay and Perks be correlated to performance and other higher services in the
Government of India. These should not be arbitrarily increased, but correlated to the
highest service in the Government.
(x) Every Judge should give full details of expenses for which allowances are allowed to
him.
(xi) A healthy revision of 15% to 30% of salary hike of High Court and Supreme Court
Judges is permissible for the Bill which is pending before the House. It would be
necessary to trim and provide the economical luxury to High Court and Supreme
Court Judges’ for the benefit of the nation.
(xii) Increasing the salary and improving the conditions of service of High Court and
Supreme Court Judges is a welcome step which was long due in ensuring that the
esteemed judges receive the requisite compensation for their hard work and service.
(xiii) This Bill in its present form seeks to increase the salary of judges nearly threefold
and pension amount almost 2 times, which is substantial by any standard and rarely
seen in revision of Government pay scales or of any constitutional post. The
Government must ensure that this increase in the salary ensures that the esteemed
Judges are held responsible and do everything within their means to ensure the
speedy and quality disposal of the cases before them. In response to the increase in
salary and conditions of service, Hon’ble Judges must be held accountable and
responsible to demonstrate their commitment towards the citizens of India by
(a) reducing their own yearly vacation time; (b) reducing the number of adjournments
per case; (c) restoring public trust in judicial system and integrity by declaring their
total assets yearly (d) working towards clearing the huge backlog of cases before
them.
(xiv) It is high time that the salaries of judges should be linked with the quality of
judgments delivered. In our country, emphasis has always been on the quantity of
cases disposed off by judges, but never on quality of judgments.
(xv) The annual increase in, salary should be directly linked with the performance of each
judge to be reviewed by the Judicial Commission. Since the information about the Act
and rules that are sought to be amended is not available in Public Domain, we suggest
that the existing and proposed cost to country of each judge is published and then
the suggestions from public be invited and the contributors may please be invited to
place their views before the Hon’ble Committee.
(xvi) Increase in salaries should be conditional on performance parameters. Scientific
performance parameters/quality audits should be the sole criteria for determining
raises like cost to country per judgment etc.
(xvii) The justification stated by Hon’ble Law Minister that the need to increase the salaries,
allowances and pension of the judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts has
been necessitated because of the increase in the salaries and allowances and pensions
of the Central Government employees on acceptance of the recommendations of the
Sixth Central Pay Commission by the Government is totally ridiculous. Does this
reasoning enough to give 300% salary hike to judges when the hard working central
Government employees have been given merely 25% salary hike.
(xviii) Marginal hike may be given to the Judges at par with the Central Government employee
and never with IAS or IPS etc. No hike to be given in the allowances. Pension to be
provided on the similar pattern and rules as of central Government employees.

4
3. In order to be enlightened further on the issues involved in the Bill, the Secretary, Ministry
of Law and Justice (Department of Justice) was requested to obtain the opinion/view point of the
Hon’ble Judges, Registrars, Registrar General of Supreme Court and High Courts for better and
effective appraisal of the provisions of the Bill. In response thereto, the Committee received the
comments/views of the following:—
HON’BLE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
“... Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India is in agreement with the recommendations of the
Committee of Hon’ble Judges sent to Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice and reiterates
the same”.
HIGH COURT OF DELHI
3.1 “Not in a position to give any views in the matter”.
BOMBAY HIGH COURT (AURANGABAD BENCH)
3.2 “With reference to the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Bill, 2008, we are of the considered view that the pay structure envisaged
under the proposed Bill is required to be in keeping with the suggestions of the Hon’ble Committee
nominated by the Supreme Court of India. The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee may
be, therefore, implemented in letter and spirit.
3.3 We are of the view that Section 4 (2) (iii) and Section 4A of the High Court Judges
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 require amendments. The outer limit for encashment of
accumulated leave may be removed in context of the High Court Judges. The Judges of the High
Court may be allowed to encash whole of the level to their credit at the time of retirement. The
case of High Court Judges stands on totally different footings as compared to that of those covered
under the All India Service (Leave) Rules, 1955. The employees of union or State, including the
Judicial Officers working in the subordinate Courts and entitled to full pay and allowances for leave
beyond 45 days. The High Court Judges, however, are entitled to full pay leave only upto 45 days.
The subordinate Judicial Officers, in view of implementation of Shetty Commission Report, are
entitled to encash leave at credit to the extent of 30 days in a given year. This facility is not
available to the judges of the High Court. We recommend, therefore, following amendment in
Section 4A:
3.4 The last sentence
“to the extent of the maximum period prescribed for encashment of such leave
under the All India Service (Leave) Rules, 1955" be deleted from Section 4A.
3.5. The following section may be added by way of amendment:
“Section 4B : A Judge shall be entitled to encash the leave at his credit upto 45
days in each calendar year as per the availability of leave at his/her credit.”
4.0 The Committee, considered the background note submitted by the Ministry of Law and
Justice (Department of Justice) which reads as follows:—
“The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008 had been introduced in the Lok Sabha further to amend the High
Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1954 and the Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill,  1958. Pursuant to the
Sixth Central Pay Commission submitting its report to the Government, the Chief Justice of

5
India constituted a Committee of three sitting Judges to recommend appropriate and revised
salaries, allowances and other service conditions for the  CJI, Judges of the Supreme Court
and Chief Justices and Judges of the High Courts. CJI has suggested that this Committee’ s
report may be accepted by the Government and necessary orders be  issued early to give
effect to its recommendations. Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice forwarded a copy of
the letter from the Chief Justice of India with its enclosures to the Hon ‘ble Finance
Minister for examination and comments of his Ministry. The Finance Minister vide his letter
dated 08/10/2008  conveyed comments of his Ministry on the salaries, allowances and
pension proposed in the report of the Committee of Judges. The salaries of Chief Justice
of India and Judges of Supreme Court are prescribed in Section 12A of the Supreme Court
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 and that of Chief Justices and
Judges of High Courts are prescribed in section 13A of High Court Judges (Salaries and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 respectively. The Cabinet in its meeting held on
27th November, 2008 had considered this Department’ s note for the Cabinet dated
5th November, 2008 and approved the proposals relating to revision in the salaries, house
rent allowance, furnishing allowance and modified rates of sumptuary allowance etc of the
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts and pensions, gratuity etc., to retired Judges.
To implement the decision of the Cabinet, a Bill namely “The High Court and Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008 was prepared and
after securing approval of the President under Article 117 (1) of Constitution of India, the
Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha. The Bill, however, could not be taken up for
consideration and passing in the Lok Sabha and meanwhile, both the Houses of Parliament
have been prorogued. The Central Government  Officers/Staff are already drawing revised
pay and enhanced pension etc, with. retrospective effect on the basis of the
recommendations of the 6th CPC: as accepted by the Government. The Judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts (both sitting and retired) have yet to get the revised salary,
pension etc, that were approved by Government for want of an amendment in the relevant
Acts. Keeping this in view, the Government has decided to bring an Ordinance to achieve
the aforesaid objects”.
5.0 The Chief Justice of India/Chief Justice of High Courts and other Judges of the Supreme
Court/High Courts were getting the Salary of Rs.33,000/Rs.30,000 and Rs.30,000/Rs.26,000 per
month respectively. Now, with the introduction of the High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008, it seeks to amend section 12A of the
Supreme Court (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 and section 13A of the High Court
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 to substitute the words” thirty-three
thousand rupees per mensem” with the “one lakh rupees per mensem” and ‘’thirty thousand rupees
per mensem with the” ninety thousand rupees per mensem” in the case of CJI/Supreme Court
Judges and to substitute the words ‘’thirty thousand rupees per mensem” with the “ninety thousand
rupees per mensem” and” twenty-six thousand rupees per mensem with the “eighty thousand
rupees per mensem” in the case of the Chief Justice of High Courts/Judges of High Courts. The
resultant increase in salaries would be as follows:—
SUPREME COURT
Pre-revised Revised
Chief Justice of India Rs. 33, 000 + DP Rs. 1,00,000 p.m.
For other Judges Rs. 30,000 + DP Rs. 90,000 p.m.

6
HIGH COURT
Pre-revised Revised
Chief Justice Rs. 30,000 + DP Rs. 90,000 p.m.
For other Judges Rs. 26,000 + DP Rs. 80,000 p.m.
6. Similarly in case of pensioners, the Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts were earlier
getting Dearness Relief equal to 50 percent of the pension which was merged with the pension and
shown distinctly as Dearness Pension from 1st April, 2004. Now, the present bill seeks to amend
section 16A of the Supreme Court Judges Act and section 17A of the High Court Judges Act by
omitting the words “plus fifty per cent of his dearness pay” and “plus thirty per cent of his
dearness pay” from the section 16A and 17A and by inserting a new section 16B and 17B in the
Supreme Court Judges Act and High Court Judges Act respectively. After this Amendment every
retired Judge of the Supreme Court/High Court or after their death, their family, as the case may
be, shall be entitled to an additional quantum of pension or family pension in accordance with the
following scale:—
Age of Pensioner or Additional Quantum of pension
Family Pensioner or family pension
From eighty years to less Twenty per cent of basic pension of
than eighty-five years family pension
From eighty years to less Thirty per cent of basic pension of
than ninety years family pension
From ninety years to less Forty per cent of basic pension of
than ninety-five years family pension
From ninety-five years to Fifty per cent of basic pension of
less than hundred years family pension
From hundred years or more Hundred per cent of basic pension
of family pension
6.1 The Chief Justice of India/Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts are
entitled for rent free furnished accommodation or HRA of 30% of Pay per month (income
tax free) in lieu of official residence in line with the recommendations of the Sixth Pay
Commission.
7.0 The Chief Justices and Judges are required to hold periodical meetings with brother Judges,
Judicial Officers and members of the Bar. Sumptuary allowance is paid to the Judges to entertain
the guests at such meetings, with tea, snacks, etc. The rates of sumptuary allowance were last
fixed in 2004. Keeping in view the increase in costs of such items and the number of dignitaries
who call on the Chief Justice of India and the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts,
especially in view of the globalization trends, the rate of sumptuary allowance is proposed to be
revised. For this purpose the words” plus thirty percent of the dearness pay” in section 23 of the
Supreme Court Judges Act and section 22A of the High Court Judges Act has to be omitted and
in section 23B of the Supreme Court Judges Act and in section 22C of the High Court Judges Act,
the following is to be substituted:—

7
Pre-revised Revised
Chief Justice of India Rs. 10,000 Rs. 20,000
Judges of the Supreme Court Rs. 7,500 Rs. 15,000
Chief Justice of the High Courts Rs. 7,500 Rs. 15,000
Judges of the High Courts Rs. 6,000 Rs. 12,000
DELIBERATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
8.0 In the meeting held on 7th January, 2009, the Committee heard the presentation of
Additional Secretary, Department of Justice. The Chairman of the Committee in its opening remarks
made the following observation :—
“...we find that there was news in the media that already an Ordinance has been
promulgated for that purpose. Even then, since the Hon ‘ble Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
has referred this  Bill to this Committee, we are taking up this Bill for discussion. I hope,
you have made this Ordinance on the basis of this Bill itself, and there is no change in
that. Therefore, it will not be a futile exercise to go into it and then present a report to
Parliament.
On the face of it, you have come forward with enhancement of salary to the different
judges, High Courts and the Supreme Court, which is a very good effort. But, at the same
time, we find that you are making some structured pension system. Is there in any other
Department or any other services wherein this type of structured pension system is there
because you are saying that when age goes up, you are increasing the pension structure also.
What we would like to know is the basis on which you have fixed their salaries. We
would like to know whether there is any report given by the judiciary itself or you yourself
have drawn inspiration from the Pay Commission recommendations. How have you come to
the conclusion? Then only would we be able to study and understand We would try to
improve upon their salary and other things based on this study. Regarding MPs’ salaries,
there is no question; but the question is, the judicial officers are speaking outside that their
salaries are very low as compared to the international judicial officers. We would like to
know whether our judicial officers are at par with the international judicial officers. We do
not want to make a recommendation without studying this aspect also. There could be
guidelines for the future flxation of the salaries of the judges also. You know very well that
they have a  restriction with regard to expressing their views. They can express their views
only in the annual conferences or in their judgments. Instead of allowing them to express
their views, why should we, the Members of Parliament, realise their needs and come out
with certain recommendations? That is the effort of the Committee.”
9.0 The Additional Secretary, Department of Justice, in her presentation before the Committee
made the following observation:—
“...as regards the structured pension, we are following the same system as has been
recommended in the Sixth Pay Commission. It has been done on the basis of also, the
number of years of individual so that there is an enhancement in the basic pension. If a
person is between the age of 80 and 85, 85 and 90, 90 and 95, and, of course, 95-100,
the increase goes on up to 50% of the basic of the pension. If the individual is above 100,
it would be double. This is provided to bring them in line with the general spirit of the
Pay Commission recommendations.

8
Sir, enhancement of the salary has been done in the basic spirit of the Pay Commission
recommendations, not in the context of allowances. Allowances are something which are
specific to the Supreme Court judges and the High Court judges. They have no parity at
all with any of the Government servant. That is something which they are continued to
enjoy and there is an enhancement depending on the increase in the general cost of living”.
10.0 The Committee heard the views of Chairman, Bar Council of India in its meeting held on
28th January, 2009. In his opening remark, the Chairman of the Committee observed:
“...as you all know very well, judges are elevated from the Bar. They have the rich
experience and as a member of the Bar, they contribute a lot in developing the legal
system and other things. After going through this. Bill, we find that a structured pension
system is given. This system is already in existence. On the basis of the basic rule, if a
person has worked for at least for 14 or 15 years, he is entitled to 50 per cent additional
pension. If this particular scale is applied to the members of the Bar who are elevated as
judges, then, the persons who have worked for five years or seven years as High Court
judge will be entitled to only 20 per cent of additional pension. That is why attraction
towards this profession is nowadays going down. And if we do this, then, we feel that many
of the legal luminaries will not choose this position. Therefore, there is a feeling amongst
us that let us make it 50 per cent. We can give them even full provided that they do not
go for any other job. If that is done, the system would work very well and corruption will
soon be history. We feel that the salary system of judges should not be compared with that
of the bureaucrats. Then only, this system will be able to address the need of the hour.
Their way of working and perquisites are different. As regards the Judiciary, it is totally
different. They work in completely different conditions. Again, they go back to the same
position; only the cycle is completed. If they become the Supreme Court Judges, they have
got no other opportunity except for having some position by way of the Chairman of a
particular Statutory Committee or something like that. The average lifespan has increased.
The normal age nowadays is 90 years. Therefore, we have to consider all these things.
Kindly come out with some more ideas/suggestions, because we do not want to be very
conservative in this aspect. We think the Judicial service is the best service people can
join, with all peacefulness and without worrying about the financial aspect. They should
not have the worry as to how their family will be looked after their demise. We think the
Bar Council of India is the best forum which can air its views on this particular subject.”
11.0 The Chairman, Bar Council of India then made the following observation:—
“...we would suggest that in order to attract talents from the Bar to join Judicial
Service, the Judge’s Salary, which has been fixed, requires further enhancement so that a
lawyer of good standing may choose to join Bar because these days what is happening is
that the lawyers’ with lucrative practice, even if offered, refuse to join the High Court
judgeship. Therefore, though the salaries have been enhanced, yet I think, it should be
further enhanced and it should be made tax-free. That would be the suggestion. So, Sir, so
far as this aspect is concerned, the Bar Council of India has no objection in this regard.
We are seeing every day that our boys and girls who are coming out of the National
Law Schools choose to go to corporate or other sectors. But they are not coming to the
litigation. That is the whole trouble. Ninety-five per cent of them go for that. You see, Sir,
in the beginning, a lawyer has to face great hardship. That is the known fact. There should
be some legislation to attract all those boys who are coming out from these good schools
and colleges, all meritorious boys. At our end, we are also going to put a check on it
saying that ‘look here, if you don’t qualify like this, you can’t be allowed to go for
practice. You will be disallowed.  There will be no licence.’  We are proposing for that also.

9
But be that what it may be, at present, talents, which are coming out from the schools, are
not coming to join Bar. Unless they join Bar, how  can they become a Judge? They remain
there in the company from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. They get a salary of Rupees one lakh just the
next day. But our Judges are getting one lakh at the fag end of their career. Therefore, these
young boys and girls choose to go there. So, there must be some legislation to attract those
boys to come here. For example, in the beginning, they should be provided some facilities
so that they may establish their office, etc”.
12.0 The Committee also heard the President, Supreme Court Bar Association on the provisions
of the Bill. The Chairman of the Committee made the following observation:
“...that is what we cannot understand because when you make it proportionate, a
person who has been promoted from a District Judge to the High Court, his service as a
District Judge is calculated for the purpose of pension. But, if a lawyer, who has been
practising till that date, his practice is not counted for the purpose of pension. That is why,
Bar members are not ready to become Judges. Someone cannot sacrifice his entire life’ s
experience just like that. If a lawyer having a good practice in a High Court is elevated
as Judge at the age of 58 years, then he will have only four years of service as Judge.
And, after retirement, he cannot practise in the High Court; he will have to go to the
Supreme Court. So, we have to understand their constraint also. In many cases, you have
elevated lawyers at the age of 58 years. That means, they will serve only for four years
as Judges. They cannot practice in the same High Court. They have to shift to Delhi, and
shifting to Delhi is not an easy job. Therefore, you have to give a blanket 50 per cent
pension”.
13.0 In his presentation the President: Supreme Court Bar Association stated that:
“...with respect to the Judges who are directly taken from the Bar, a situation arose in
the case of Justice Kuldeep Singh. As you know, in the Supreme Court, we had only six
Judges who were directly recruited from the Bar. Our Constitution prescribes three sources.
First one, of course, is the High Court Judges coming to the Supreme Court; second is the
eminent jurists where a Member of the Bar can be taken up, and, moreover, even an
academician can become a Supreme Court Judge, although that has never been done. As
far as the Members of the Bar are concerned, only six of them have become Judges. When
Justice Kuldeep Singh retired, he was not getting full pension, and, in fact, on behalf of
Justice Kuldeep Singh, I had the privilege of filing a Writ Petition in the Supreme Court
wherein this issue, which you just mentioned, was taken up that a Member of the Bar who
is directly recruited couldn’t have sufficient number of years of service as a Judge. There
are many who are District Judges, who become High Court Judges and then come to the
Supreme Court. Those who are High Court Judges, they would have sufficient number of
years of service to get full pension. So, full pension must be given when you  recruit
someone directly from the Bar. It is well known that those whom you recruit directly from
the Bar are really earning well. I do not know whether it is a correct criterion or not but
having good practice is taken as a correct criterion for appointment as a Judge. So, there
should not be any discrimination between them. ”
“He further informed the Committee that there was an association called the Retired
Judges’ Association in which the retired Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts are
Members. Justice Santosh Hegde was also another direct recruit to the Supreme Court. After
he retired, an amendment came which gave him the benefit, but, because it has not been
given retrospective effect, Justice Kuldeep Singh does not get its benefit. So, Justice Santosh
Hegde, who retired subsequently, has got the benefit. The retired High Court Judges are
asking for the same thing. They are speaking about the High Court Judges who are

10
appointed as High Court Judges directly but do not go to the Supreme Court. There also,
the discrimination is there between those who come from the District courts and those who
are recruited directly. This Bill covers only the Supreme Court Judges and has a prospective
effect, which only helps Justice Hegde and not Justice Kuldeep Singh. It is very, very
necessary that we take care of this and I agree with the observation that you made with
respect to the service that they render as Members of the Bar. At least, some part of it can
be included and that will be good enough for them to see that they get full pension.
As far as the Supreme Court is concerned, from 1950 till today, there have been only
six Judges who were directly recruited There is not a single direct recruit Judge functioning
in the Supreme Court today. So, the budgetary provisions are not going to be affected too
much. So, I think, it should be done to give full pension to those who are directly recruited
When you recruited them, you knew that they would not be having sufficient number of
years of service to get the full pension, but you still decided to recruit them.
So, the amendments in respect of the Supreme Court Judges should be made applicable
for the High Court Judges also and it should be given retrospective effect so that those who
are not getting the full pension today become eligible for the same. This is with respect to
the first point.
On the issue of equating a Supreme Court Judge with the Cabinet Secretary and a High
Court Judge with a Secretary to the Government of India in terms of the salary which they
get. He stated that the Statement of Objects and Reasons says that because we have
increased the salaries of the Central Government employees, we are thinking of increasing
the Judges’ salaries. Otherwise, we all had forgotten Judges since 1996.  They got it from
1.1.1996. After that, they were forgotten. And, it says, because of the Sixth Pay
Commission, we are thinking of giving an increase.
The President, Supreme Court Bar Association then suggested that there should be a
separate Pay Commission to look into the emoluments of the judiciary. It is not correct to
equate a Supreme Court Judge with the Cabinet Secretary. I am not demeaning what the
civil servants do for us. They are absolutely necessary; they are part of the system, and,
we need them. However, in today’s situation, with respect to the type of work that the
Judges put in, I agree that there are many problems where you can make criticism, and, I
will also join you because of certain things, which are happening in judiciary. When you
are equating a  High Court Judge with a Secretary to the Government of India — of course,
they also work hard — I am sure that Judges do much more hard work than that. There
is an impression about the Supreme  Court Judges that they do not work as much as they
should But, I think, they really work very hard. On Saturdays and Sundays, they do the
work of readings of all the briefs.
He told the Committee that in present situation, where things have changed and a lot
of responsibilities have come — whether you may call it over-reacting or whatever — the
common man still has a lot of faith in our judiciary. Fortunately, the Chief Justice had
appointed a three-Judge Committee comprising of Justice Kabir, Justice Ashok Bhan, and,
Justice A.P . Shah, who was the Chief Justice of Madras High Court at that time, and, now
he is the Chief Justice of Delhi High Court. This Committee made a recommendation, which
the Chief Justice, finding it to be reasonable, forwarded to the Government. Now, when that
Committee ‘s recommendation is accepted, it really makes a difference of ten thousand
rupees more to be given to the Judges.
The Committee was further informed that at the time of Independence, the salary of
the Secretary to the Government of India was Rs. 3,000 p.m. and the salary of a High

11
Court Judge was Rs. 3,500. At that time, the difference between the two was there. It is
only in 1965 that the salary of the Secretary to the Government of India was increased to
make it at par with the salary of the High Court Judge. It does not send a good signal
when we say that they would be treated at par. As I said, I am not at all demeaning the
contribution of the civil servants. You cannot function without them. But the High Court
and the Supreme Court Judges are  discharging functions, which perhaps the Cabinet
Secretary or the Secretary to the Government of India is not discharging, or, is not
empowered by the Constitution to discharge, and, is not factually doing. About the hard
work, I won’t say any thing. Of course, there are many Secretaries who are working very
hard. The High Court Judges are now given Rs. 80,000/- p.m. and the Committee has
recommended to make it Rs. 90,000/- p.m. Similarly, the Supreme Court Judges are given
Rs. 90,000/- p.m. and the Committee has recommended to make it Rs. 1,00,000/- p.m. So,
my submission is that this linkage between the two should be stopped. Right now, this is
reflected in the Statement of Objects and Reasons which says that because of the increase
in salary of the Secretary to the Government of India, after the implementation of the Sixth
Pay Commission, let us make the High Court Judge equivalent to the Secretary to the
Government of India, and, make the Supreme Court Judge equivalent to the Cabinet
Secretary.
Referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, he stated that the
statement mentions that the salary, allowances and pensions of the Judges of the Supreme
Court and the High Courts were last revised w.e.f. 1st January, 1996 as per the High Court
and Supreme Court Judges Salaries and Conditions of Ser vice (Amendment) Act, 1998 .
Then, it says about the Sixth Pay Commission. So, probably, they did not increase it at the
time of Fifth Pay Commission.
The Committee was further told that now, secretarial allowances are given to the retired
Chief Justice of India and the Supreme Court Judges, but not to the retired High Court
Judges. He then suggested that it should be applied to them also. You may  give a little less
than what you give to the retired Supreme Court Judges. And, now, retired Supreme Court
Judges are given 1500 calls per month free and that Committee has recommended to make
it double. But the retired High Court Judges are not getting this. These are all minor things
in terms of revenue expenditure to the Government. But they do matter. We must respect
people who have retired. They are told to come in the queue is not a good thing. I will
be able to send you copy of both these writ petitions”.
14.0 While deposing before the Committee, the Director, Rakshak Foundation made the following
observation:—
“... anything that can be measured counts and can be improved, so, continuous
performance measurement should be there. We believe that the four metrics mentioned by
us should be used. In metrics criteria one, we have given how to measure impartiality and
integrity of judges. We have given some sub-titles which can be used. In metrics two, we
have mentioned how to measure expertise of judges, treatment and attitude of judges, etc.
Sir, the last point is about shortcomings of this Bill. One shortcoming is this.
Attractive salaries are being given to judges, but there is no commitment for better
performance, accountability, declaration of assets, etc. Also, it has not really taken into
account the additional burden that will be incurred by the Government if 30 per cent
vacancies, which are currently there in the high courts, get filled up. They have
recommended that the number of judges be increased four-fold. If this is implemented, then,
what will happen in terms of financial burden to the Government? These things need to be
taken into account. Our prime focus is, ‘yes’, they must have  better pay and perks, but,

12
they must also, in turn, give us the assurance that there will be more speed and better
efficiency. Certainly, one important thing is voluntarily reducing the vacation time and
making themselves available to the general public under the RTI. I don’t mean what their
judgements are because they are already in the public domain. I mean to say that
information about their assets and other personal information should be disclosed.”
15.0 In his written submission Justice R. Jayasimha Babu, former Judge of High Court of
Madras and Karnataka informed the Committee on the issues of retirement benefits to the
permanent judges of High Court elevated from the Bar. He stated that:
“Judges of the High Courts are recruited either from the Bar (2/3rds to 3/4th of the
strength of the Court) or from among persons in the cadre of District Judges or Judicial
members of Tribunals (l/4th to l/3rd the strength of the court). The vast majority of those
recruited from the Bar are 50 and over in age at the time of their appointment, more
particularly in the Southern States. The age at which a member of the Bar is offered
appointment is not in the hands of the appointee. The appointment process is complex, and
several factors, disclosed and undisclosed affect the time at which and the person to whom
the appointment is offered.
15.1 The present Scale of pension in the schedule to the High Court Judges (Salaries and
Conditions of Service) Act 1954, as amended from time to time, are so structured that District
Judges elevated to the High Court despite their tenure on the High Court being very often less than
five years, become eligible to draw the maximum pension, while those elevated from the Bar who
have also put in 5 years as High Court Judges, are only given a minimum pension which is less
than 1/3rd of the maximum pension. (The maximum pension under the Act as amended by
Ordinance 1/2009 is Rs. 40,000/- per month. The minimum pension payable to those appointed
from the Bar with less than 7 years service on the High Court is Rs.13,139/-per month).
15.2 For those appointed from the Bar the present Rules require minimum of 7 years of service
to qualify for pension and require 14 years service to earn full pension. For those who have put
in less than 7 years service — be it two years or 1 day short of 7 years, only the minimum is
payable (that minimum works out roughly to a deemed service of 4½ years). The result is, on a
rough estimate more than about 60 per cent of those elevated to the High Court from the Bar
cannot draw full pension despite their substantial period of service on the High Court.
15.3 Judges, on retirement cannot practice law in the States in which they served as Judges. As
the initial appointment of the Judge is always in his/her home State–the State in which he or she
will live after retirement–reentering practice is not a serious option. Only a handful can afford to
practice at Delhi before the Supreme Court, that too without any assurance of success. Some do
serve on Tribunals but their pension are deducted from their total emoluments, and their number
is a small percentage of the total number of retired Judges. The vast majority of retired Judges
have to live on their pension. Law practice – the only profession they know apart from being
Judges- not being an option. They cannot live a decent and dignified life unless a reasonable
amount is paid to them by way of pension.
15.4 Preparation for Judgeship at the High Court can either be by way of practice at the Bar
till elevation, or service in the subordinate Judiciary. Both service, and practice require knowledge
of law. The long years of practice cannot be completely ignored for those elevated from the Bar,
while each year of service in the subordinate Judiciary is counted for those appointed to the High
Court from the subordinate Judiciary for the purpose of pension.
15.5 Those elevated from the Bar should at the least, be on par with those elevated from the
subordinate Judiciary for purposes of pension, and both should be enabled to reach the maximum
pension for a High Court Judge with in five years of service as High Court Judge.

13
15.6 Com parison with the executive is wholly inappropriate. There is no High Court Judges
Service for which a person can apply and get recruited at age 25 or any other young age. It is
only those who are mature, experienced and skilled in law, and who would have been well past
middle age, that are suitable and capable of being efficient and learned Judges of the High Court.
Their age at the time of appointment as High Court Judge is almost never below 45 and the median
age is well above 50.
15.7 There is an urgent and compelling need to revise downward the number of years of service
as High court Judge for earning the maximum pension. Even the 6th Pay Commission for Central
Government Employees has reduced the number of years of service required to earn the maximum
pension from 33 years to 20 years (perhaps the maximum age at the entry level and the mandatory
age for retirement have been the criteria). Adopting the same proportion of reduction in the number
of years of service, the number of years of service as High Court Judge to earn the maximum
pension has to be revised from 14 years to 8 years.
15.8 The law as it now stands, though apparently requiring 7 years of service to qualify for
pension, and 14 years of service to qualify for maximum pension, is in fact, in practice different
for those elevated to the High Court from the subordinate Judiciary, as each year of their service
in the High Court is deemed to be service in the cadre in which they were serving prior to their
elevation, with an additional allowance towards pension being added for each year of service in the
High Court.
15.9 The result is persons elevated to the High Court from the subordinate Judiciary earn the
maximum pension for a high court judge even though they serve for five years or less in the high
court. In contrast persons elevated from the Bar do not qualify for even one half of the maximum
pension even if they have served as High Court Judges for a period of up to seven years. Such
Judges are paid a minimum pension, which is less than 1/3rd of the maximum pension.
15.10 lt is to be remembered that there is no scale of pay for High Court Judges, and Supreme
Court Judges. All Judges in the High Court except the Chief Justice are entitled to the same pay
irrespective of the number of years of their service. The pay for the new entrant is the same as
that of most senior piscine Judge. All of them are possessed of the same powers. The jurisdiction
in which they exercise that power is determined by the allocation of the work within the Court.
All permanent Judges on their retirement are subject to the same restriction against law practice
before the Courts in which they had served and before all other subordinate Courts and Tribunals
all over the country.
15.11 The age at which one becomes a Judge of the High Court is dependent more upon luck
than any other factor. The fact that the invitation to become a Judge is received, when one is past
the age of 52 or 55 is not indicative of any lack of ability prior to that age. The requirement of
a long period of service of 14 years to earn maximum pension only results in unjust denial of a
well earned benefit to those who for no fault of theirs receive the invitation to become a Judge
only after they have crossed the age of 50, 52 or 55 years of age.
15.12 The years of service required to earn the maximum pension, has therefore, in the interest
of fairness and justice required to be reduced to five years or at best 8 years, if the reduction is
required to be in the same proportion as has been done for Central Government Employees. Such
reduction should be for all retired permanent Judges and the benefit of the same should be payable
from 1-1-2006.
15.13 Retired High Court Judges need health care and assistance at home, on the same lines as
those afforded by the Central Government to the retired Judges of the Supreme Court. Retired
judges of the Supreme Court are now entitled to health care and medical reimbursement (attended
to by the Supreme Court itself) on par with the serving Judges of the Supreme Court. Similar

14
provisions are urgently required to be made for all retired Judges of the High Courts, as part of
the High Court Judges Conditions of Service and Pension Rules, as there is at present great
disparity in the extent of health care and medical disbursement, provided by the States. Old age
and illness are close companions, and retired Judges of the High Courts should be enabled to lead
a decent and dignified life with adequate health care. Retired Judges ought not to be subjected to
the indignity of waiting in endless queues to see CGHS specialists. They should have the freedom,
as serving Judges do, to go to doctors/hospitals of their choice and obtain full reimbursement, even
as retired Judges of the Supreme Court, and retired Judges of some High Courts, such as, the High
Court of Andhra Pradesh, do.
15.14 Allowances now paid to the retired Supreme Court Judges for having the services of
servant/driver, secretarial assistance is currently Rs. 14,000/-p.m. Similar allowance for the retired
Judge of the High Court, at Rs. 12000/-, should be paid by amending the High Court Judges’
Condition of service Act/Rules, as there is at present wide disparity among the States with some
of the state such Tamil nadu paying no allowance at all to the retired High Court Judges.
15.15 There is, as of now, no institutional mechanisms for determining what should be fair and
just emoluments including pension and post retirement allowances and reimbursements, for Judges
of the High Court and of the Supreme Court. The Pay Commission is for Government Employees
and the Judicial Pay Commission is for members of the Subordinate Judiciary. The emoluments of
the High Court and the Supreme Court Judges including pension etc., is now determined by
bureaucrats who, naturally, regard themselves as the point of reference, and to whom it is
apparently anathema to allow anyone outside their ranks to receive emoluments higher than what
they receive. The result is Judges, in the calculations of the executives, are made to become
equivalent to some position in the executive hierarchy, and treated as if they are also members of
the executive. To the executive which frequently is at the receiving end of the wrath of the courts
in cases of illegal and unjust administrative actions, an objective recognition of the extremely
important role of Judiciary in a democracy with a written Constitution and guaranteed fundamental
rights, is difficult to accomplish.
15.16 There is no rationale for making Judge’s salary and pension dependent upon what some
cadre in the bureaucracy receives as salary or as pension. The work and responsibility are vastly
different. Judgeship of the High Court is a Constitutional position with enormous power and
responsibility, while no position in the executive hierarchy is a constitutional one and is not vested
with powers any where near to that exercised by the Judges of the High courts.
RECOMMENDATIONS
16.0. The Constitution of India mandates “Separation of Judiciary from Executive” even
though the Sixth Pay Commission Report has not been prepared by giving sufficient
opportunity to them to explain the service conditions in Judiciary. The principle of
application is made at par with Executive. The Judiciary and Finance Ministry are taking the
ad hoc  Committee’s Report for fixing the salary and pension. The Committee therefore
recommends to constitute a comprehensive National Judicial Service Commission on the
basis of a Statue to have a permanent body to address these issues.
17.0. The Committee feels that all the suggestions/views expressed by the individuals/
experts/stakeholders through their memoranda indicate towards the dire need for reforms
in the Indian Judicial system, of which salaries, allowances and other perks are important
constituents. Though the Government has proposed an increase in pension and other
allowances to the Judiciary, through this legislation, there are certain other issues which
need to be addressed simultaneously like huge accumulation of cases in the Supreme Court/
High Courts/Subordinate Courts, vacancies of Judges, absence of infrastructural facilities,

15
etc., which have posed greater challenges before the judiciary and have engaged attention
of this Committee for quite sometime. The Committee therefore recommends that the
Government should deal with these problems as part of judicial reforms and hope that the
enhanced salary and allowances with these reforms may bring noticeable changes, both in
the functioning of Judiciary and the Perception of the people.
18.0 The Committee also recommends that the Government should immediately examine
the feasibility of introducing the pattern of allowances and salary, applicable to the Judges
of some advanced countries of the world by constituting National Judicial Service
Commission with the powers to revise the salaries according to the service conditions and
accountability.
19.0 The Committee makes a note of the suggestion/views expressed by the witnesses that
only one-third Judges of High Courts enrolled from the Bar will become entitled to full
pensionary benefits and similarly, many of the Judges of the Supreme Court inducted from
the Bar do not get full pension, as they retire before completing the qualifying period for
full pension. The Committee is of the strong opinion that the differentiation between the
Judges appointed direct from the Bar and promoted from State Judiciary need to be
removed as the lawyer before elevation would have Income Tax Assessment to show on
assessment of the income and expenditure and as per the Income Tax Act which should be
taken into account for calculating full pension. The Committee feels that this is one of the
reasons that talented legal persons are not joining or do not want to be elevated as judges
of High Court and Supreme Court.
20.0 The Committee also feels that the post retirement benefits already given to the
retired Judges of the Supreme Court are not given to the retired High Court Judges and
due to this lot of problem are being faced by these High Court Judges. The Committee
therefore recommends that Government should seriously look into the matter and extend
basic facilities like medical, telephone, secretarial allowances etc. to the retired High Court
Judges by fixing a suitable quantum keeping their stature in mind.
21.0 The Committee has received lots of memoranda from various Individuals/
Organisation/Stakeholders wherein they have highlighted the issue of performance based
salary structure, accountability, corruption and other related issues. The Committee
appreciates the concern shown by citizens and recommends to the Government to
immediately address issues appointing a Judicial Commission for the appointment of Judges
of the High Court and Supreme Court, like increasing the age of Judges of High Court,
revision of court fees in civil and criminal cases, Benches of Supreme Court, fill up the
vacancies of Judges, pending cases, reference procedure recommended by the Committee in
its 21st, 26th and 28th Reports etc. to improve and strengthen the entire judicial system
in the country.
22.0 The Committee feels that the holidays to High Court and Supreme Court should be
at par with subordinate judiciary. As Bombay High Court (Aurangabad Bench) suggested
“the subordinate judicial officers, in view of implementation of Shetty Commission Report
are entitled to encash leave at credit to the extent of 30 days in a given year”. The
Committee feels that this suggestion can be implemented in the case of High Court and
Supreme Court Judges also.
23.0 The Committee recommends that the Government to constitute a Commission to go
into the revenues through the Judicial system at the three levels such as Supreme Court,
High Court and Subordinate Judiciary and create a system to balance revenue, expenditure
and investment for this service industry.

16
24.0 The Committee, having regard to the explanation given by the Secretary, Department
of Justice, and the statement of objects and reasons appended to the Bill, agrees with the
proposals for increasing pension and other monetary benefits for judges of the Supreme
Court and the High Court subject to the implementation of said recommendation for full
pension instead of structured or scaled pension as proposed in the Bill. The Committee is
optimist that Government would take into consideration the observations made by it in the
preceding paras.

17
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
16.0 The Constitution of India mandates “Separation of Judiciary from Executive” even
though the Sixth Pay Commission Report has not been prepared by giving sufficient
opportunity to them to explain the service conditions in Judiciary. The principle of
application is made at par with Executive. The Judiciary and Finance Ministry are taking the
ad hoc  Committee’s Report for fixing the salary and pension. The Committee therefore
recommends to constitute a comprehensive National Judicial Service Commission on the
basis of a Statue to have a permanent body to address these issues.
17.0 The Committee feels that all the suggestions/views expressed by the individuals/
experts/stakeholders through their memoranda indicate towards the dire need for reforms
in the Indian Judicial system, of which salaries, allowances and other perks are important
constituents. Though the Government has proposed an increase in pension and other
allowances to the Judiciary, through this legislation, there are certain other issues which
need to be addressed simultaneously like huge accumulation of cases in the Supreme Court/
High Courts/Subordinate Courts, vacancies of Judges, absence of infrastructural facilities,
etc., which have posed greater challenges before the judiciary and have engaged attention
of this Committee for quite sometime. The Committee therefore recommends that the
Government should deal with these problems as part of judicial reforms and hope that the
enhanced salary and allowances with these reforms may bring noticeable changes, both in
the functioning of Judiciary and the perception of the people.
18.0 The Committee also recommends that the Government should immediately examine
the feasibility of introducing the pattern of allowances and salary, applicable to the Judges
of some advanced countries of the world by constituting National Judicial Service
Commission with the powers to revise the salaries according to the service conditions and
accountability.
19.0 The Committee makes a note of the suggestion/views expressed by the witnesses that
only one-third Judges of High Courts enrolled from the Bar will become entitled to full
pensionary benefits and similarly, many of the Judges of the Supreme Court inducted from
the Bar do not get full pension, as they retire before completing the qualifying period for
full pension. The Committee is of the strong opinion that the differentiation between the
Judges appointed direct from the Bar and promoted from State Judiciary need to be
removed as the lawyer before elevation would have Income Tax Assessment to show on
assessment of the income and expenditure and as per the Income Tax Act which should be
taken into account for calculating full pension. The Committee feels that this is one of the
reasons that talented legal persons are not joining or do not want to be elevated as judges
of High Court and Supreme Court.
20.0 The Committee also feels that the post retirement benefits already given to the
retired Judges of the Supreme Court are not given to the retired High Court Judges and
due to this lot of problem are being faced by these High Court Judges. The. Committee
therefore recommends that Government should seriously look into the matter and extend
basic facilities like medical, telephone, secretarial allowances etc. to the retired High Court
Judges by fixing a suitable quantum keeping their stature in mind.
17

18
21.0 The Committee has received lots of memoranda from various Individuals/
Organisation/Stakeholders wherein they have highlighted the issue of performance based
salary structure, accountability, corruption and other related issues. The Committee
appreciates the concern shown by citizens and recommends to the Government to
immediately address issues appointing a Judicial Commission for the appointment of Judges
of the High Court and Supreme Court, like increasing the age of Judges of High Court,
revision of court fees in civil and criminal cases, Benches of Supreme Court, fill up the
vacancies of Judges, pending cases, reference procedure recommended by the Committee in
its 21st, 26th and 28th Reports etc. to improve and strengthen the entire judicial system
in the country.
22.0 The Committee feels that the holidays to High Court and Supreme Court should be
at par with subordinate judiciary. As Bombay High Court (Aurangabad Bench) suggested
“the subordinate judicial officers, in view of implementation of Shetty Commission Report
are entitled to encash leave at credit to the extent of 30 days in a given year”. The
Committee feels that this suggestion can be implemented in the case of High Court and
Supreme Court Judges also.
23.0 The Committee recommends that the Government to constitute a Commission to go
into the revenues through the Judicial system at the three levels such as Supreme Court,
High Court and Subordinate Judiciary and create a system to balance revenue, expenditure
and investment for this service industry.
24.0 The Committee, having regard to the explanation given by the Secretary, Department
of Justice, and the statement of objects and reasons appended to the Bill, agrees with the
proposals for increasing pension and other monetary benefits for judges of the Supreme
Court and the High Court subject to the implementation of said recommendation for full
pension instead of structured or scaled pension as proposed in the Bill. The Committee is
optimist that Government would take into consideration the observations made by it in the
preceding paras.

19
MINUTES

21
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 7th January, 2009 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Brinda Karat
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Adv. P. Sathedevi
11. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.S. Rana, Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
A. WITNESSES
** *
2. * * *
B. The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Services
Amendment) Bill, 2008
WITNESSES
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice)
(i) Shrimati Bhupinder Prasad, Additional Secretary; and
(ii) Shri Shashi Bhushan, Joint Secretary.
*** Relates to some other matter.

22
3. The Chairman welcomed the Additional Secretary, Department of Justice and her colleague
at the meeting and requested her to make presentation on the High Court and Supreme Court
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Services Amendment) Bill, 2008. The Additional Secretary
informed the Committee that the Government has introduced this Bill to hike the salaries and
pension of Judges of Supreme Court and High Court in the wake of the recommendations of the
Sixth Pay Commission. Members raised some queries, which were replied to by the witness.
Chairman also requested that all supporting documents to the replies may be made available to the
Committee for its consideration.
The witnesses then withdrew.
C. WITNESSES
** *
4. * * *
5. * * *
D. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

23
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 28th January, 2009, in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Raj Babbar
6. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
7. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
9. Dr. C. Krishnan
10. Shri Harin Pathak
11. Prof. M. Ramadass
12. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
2. * * *
A. The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Services)
Amendment Bill, 2008
WITNESSES
1. Shri Suraj Narayan Prasad, Chairman, Bar Council of India;
2. Shri Jai Ram Beniwal, Vice-Chairman, Bar Council of India;
3. Shri Jagdev, Member, Bar Council of India;
4. Shri P.H. Parekh, Sr. Advocate and President, Supreme Court Bar Association; and
5. Ms. Pallavi Srivastava, Advocate, Supreme Court Bar Association.
23
*** Relates to some other matter.

24
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice)
1. Shri Shashi Bhushan, Joint Secretary; and
2. Shri Anurag Bhalla, Under Secretary.
The Chairman, Bar Council of India
3. The Chairman then welcomed the Chairman, Bar Council of India and his colleagues to the
meeting and requested them to make their presentation. The Chairman, Bar Council of India
apprised the Committee that to attract the best talents from the Bar to join judicial service, the
salary of Judges should be enhanced further.
(The witness then withdrew)
The President, Supreme Court Bar Association
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the President Supreme Court Bar Association to the
meeting and requested him to make his presentation. The President, Supreme Court Bar Association
made an exhaustive presentation which inter alia includes issues like constitution of National
Judicial Commission; disparity in pension between the Judges appointed direct from the Bar and
promoted from State Judiciary; extension of post retirement benefits already given to the retired
Judges of the Supreme Court to the retired High Court Judges etc. Thereafter, Members raised
certain clarifications which were responded to by the witness.
(The witness then withdrew)
B. * * *
5. * * *
C. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 1.01 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

25
RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 6th February, 2009, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Tariq Anwar
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
A. * * *
WITNESS
** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
B. * * *
WITNESSES
** *
5. * * *
6. * * *
25
*** Relate to some other matters.

26
C. * * *
WITNESSES
** *
7. * * *
8. * * *
D. The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008
WITNESS
Rakshak Foundation
Dr. Anupama Singh.
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary; and
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Deputy Legal Counsel.
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice)
1. Shrimati Bhupinder Prasad, Additional Secretary;
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan, Joint Secretary; and
3. Shri Ramesh Abhishek, Joint Secretary.
9. The Committee then heard the views of the representative of Rakshak Foundation on the
High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008.
She pointed out the shortcomings of the Bill and suggested measures to improve the functioning
of the Judiciary.
10. The witness replied to the queries put forward by the Committee.
(The witness then withdrew)
E . Clause by Clause consideration of the Representation of the People (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2008 and the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and
Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008.
11. The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Representation of the
People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 and High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and
Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008. The Committee adopted the clauses of both the Bills
subject to minor amendments in clauses 2 and 7 of the Representation of the People (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2008 and redrafting clause 6(h) of the Bill de novo .
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The meeting adjourned at 1.41 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

27
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16th February, 2009, in Committee Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
9. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Adv. P. Sathedevi
12. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
A. Adoption of draft 33rd and 34th Reports
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft 33rd Report on the Representation of the
People (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 and the draft 34th Report on the High Court and Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2008, suggesting minor
changes in both the Reports. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shrimati
Brinda Karat, to present both the Reports in Rajya Sabha; and Dr. C. Krishnan, and in his absence
Adv. P. Sathedevi, to lay them in Lok Sabha on the 18th February, 2009.
B. * * *
3. * * *
27
*** Relate to some other matters.

28
C. * * *
WITNESSES
** *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 5.05 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

29
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-A
AS I NTRODUCED  IN T HE L OK S ABHA
22 DEC., 2008
Bill No. 80 of 2008
THE HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT JUDGES
(SALARIES AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions
of Service) Act, 1954 and the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1958.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the High Court and Supreme
Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment
Act, 2008.
(2) Sections 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 13 shall be deemed to
have come into force on the 1st day of January, 2006 and the
remaining provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have come into
force on the 1st day of September, 2008.
CHAPTER II
A
MENDMENT  OF THE H IGH COURT J UDGES (S ALARIES AND C ONDITIONS
OF S ERVICE) A CT, 1954
2. In the High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the High Court Judges
Act), in section 13A,—
31
Short title, and
commencement.
28 of 1954.
Amendment of
section 13A.

32
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words "thirty thousand
rupees per mensem", the words "ninety thousand rupees
per mensem" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “twenty-six
thousand rupees per mensem”, the words “eighty thousand
rupees per mensem”, shall be substituted.
3. In section 17A of the High Court Judges Act, in sub-
section ( 1),—
(a) the words “plus fifty per cent of his dearness pay”,
shall be omitted.
(b) the words “plus thirty per cent of his dearness pay
subject to a minimum of one thousand nine hundred and thirteen
rupees per month” shall be omitted;
4. After section 17A of the High Court Judges Act, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“17B. Every retired Judge or after his death, the family,
as the case may be, shall be entitled to an additional quantum
of pension or family pension in accordance with the following
scale:—
Age of Pensioner or Family Additional quantum of
Pensioner pension or family
pension
From eighty years to less than T wenty per cent of
eighty-five years basic pension or family
pension
From eighty-five years to less Thirty per cent of
than ninety years basic pension or family
pension
From ninety years to less than Forty per cent of
ninety-five years basic pension or family
pension
From ninety-five years to less Fifty per cent of basic
than hundred years pension or family
pension
From hundred years or more Hundred per cent of
basic pension or family
pension.
5. In section 22A of the High Court Judges Act, in sub-
section ( 2), the words “plus thirty per cent of the dearness pay” shall
be omitted.
6. In the High Court Judges Act, for section 22C, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 17A.
Insertion of
new section
17B
Amendment
of section 22A.
Amendment
of section 22C.
Additional
quantum of
pension or
family pension.

33
“22C. The Chief Justice and each of the other Judges of
every High Court shall be entitled to a sumptuary allowance of
fifteen thousand rupees per month and twelve thousand rupees
per month respectively”.
7. In the First Schedule to the High Court Judges Act,—
(a) in Part I,—
(i) in paragraph 2,—
(A) in clause (a), for the letters and
figures “Rs. 21,945”, the letters and figures
“Rs. 43,890” shall be substituted;
(B) in clause (b), for the letters and
figures “Rs. 16,725”, the letters and figures
“Rs. 34,350” shall be substituted;
(C) in the proviso, for the letters and
figures “Rs. 2,70,000” and “Rs. 2,34,000”, the
letters and figures “Rs. 5,40,000” and
“Rs. 4,80,000” shall respectively be substituted;
(ii) in paragraph 8, for the letters and figures
“Rs. 2,70,000”, the letters and figures “Rs. 5,40,000”
shall be substituted;
(iii) in paragraph 9, for the letters and figures
“Rs. 76,785”, the letters and figures “Rs.l,57,670”
shall be substituted;
(b) in part II,—
(i) in the proviso to paragraph 2, for the
letters and figures “Rs. 2,70,000” and “Rs. 2,34,000”,
the letters and figures “Rs.5,40,000” and “Rs.4,80,000”
shall respectively be substituted;
(ii) in paragraph 3, for the figures “16,898”,
“20,280”, “23,649”, “27,033”, “30,420” and “33,799”,
the figures “34,696”, “41,642”, “48,559”, “55,508”,
“62,462” and “69,402” shall respectively be substituted;
(c) in Part III,—
(i) in paragraph 2,—
(A) in clause (b), for the letters and
figures “Rs. 7,800”, the letters  and figures
“Rs.16,020” shall be substituted;
(B) in the proviso, for the letters and
figures “Rs. 2,70,000” and “Rs. 2,34,000”,
the letters and figures “Rs. 5,40,000” and
“Rs. 4,80,000” shall respectively be substituted.
Amendment of
the First
Schedule.
Sumptuary
allowance.

34
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT OF THE S UPREME C OURT J UDGES (S ALARIES AND
CONDITIONS OF S ERVICE) A CT, 1958
8. In the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the Supreme Court
Judges Act), in section 12A,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “thirty-three
thousand rupees per mensem”,  the words “one lakh rupees
per mensem” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “thirty thousand
rupees per mensem”, the words "ninety thousand rupees
per mensem” shall be substituted.
9. In section 16A of the Supreme Court Judges Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1)—
(i) in clause ( a), the words “plus fifty per cent
of his dearness pay” and “plus thirty per cent of his
dearness pay” shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause ( b), the words "plus thirty per cent
of his dearness pay" shall be omitted;
10. After section 16A of the Supreme Court Judges Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“16B. Every retired Judge or after his death, the family,
as the case may be, shall be entitled to an additional quantum
of pension or family pension in accordance with the following
scale:—
Age of Pensioner or family Additional quantum of
Pensioner pension or family
pension
From eighty years to less than T wenty per cent of
eighty-five years basic pension or family
pension
From eighty-five years to less Thirty per cent of
than ninety years basic pension or family
pension
From ninety years to less than Forty per cent of basic
ninety-five years pension or family
pension
From ninety-five years to less Fifty per cent of basic
than hundred years pension or family
pension
From hundred years or more Hundred per cent of
baisc pension or family
pension.
Amendment
of section
12A.
Amendment
of section
16A.
41 of 1958.
Insertion of
new section
16B.
Additional
quantum of
pension or
family
pernsion.

35
11. In section 23 of the Supreme Court Judges Act, in sub-
section ( 1A), the words “plus thirty per cent of the dearness pay”
shall be omitted.
12. In section 23B of the Supreme Court Judges Act, for the
words “ten thousand” and “seven thousand five hundred”, the words
“twenty thousand” and “fifteen thousand” shall respectively be
substituted.
13. In the Schedule to the Supreme Court Judges Act,—
(a) in Part I,—
(i) in paragraph 2,—
(A) in clause ( b), for the letters and
figures “Rs. 6,030”, “Rs. 1,82,820” and
“Rs.15,360”, the letters and figures
“Rs.12,180”, “Rs. 3,69,300” and “Rs. 31,030”
shall respectively be substituted;
(B) in the proviso, for the letters and
figures “Rs. 2,97,000”, the letters and figures
“Rs. 6,00,000” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the proviso to paragraph 3, for the
letters and figures “Rs. 2,70,000”, the letters and
figures “Rs. 5,40,000” shall be substituted;
(b) in Part II,—
(i) in paragraph 2, in clause ( b), for the
letters and figures “Rs. 16,898”, the letters and
figures “Rs. 33,795” shall be substituted;
(c) in Part III,—
(i) in paragraph 2,—
(A) in clause ( b), for the letters and
figures “Rs. 7,800”, the letters and figures
“Rs. 16,020” shall be substituted;
(B) in the proviso, for the letters and
figures “Rs. 2,97,000” and “Rs. 2,70,000”, the
letters and figures “Rs. 6,00,000” and
“Rs. 5,40,000” shall respectively be substituted.
Amendment of
section 23.
Amendment of
section 23B.
Amendment of
the Schedule.

36
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Salaries, allowances and pensions of the Judges of the Supreme Court
and High Courts were last revised with effect from the 1st day of January,
1996, as per the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions
of Service) Amendment Act, 1998. The Sixth Central Pay Commission
recommended revision in the salaries and other allowances, and pensionary
benefits of the Central Government employees including the members of All India
Services. The Government has accepted the majority of the recommendations of
the Commission and issued orders. The revised pension rules have come into
force on the 1st day of January, 2006.
2. The need to increase the salaries, allowances and pension of the Judges
of the Supreme Court and the High Courts has been necessitated because of the
increase in the salaries and allowances and pensions of the Central Government
employees on acceptance of the recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay
Commission by the Government.
3. The High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Bill, 2008 seeks to revise the salaries of the Judges with
effect from the 1st day of January, 2006, as follows:—
Chief Justice of India — from Rs. 33,000/- p.m. to Rs.1,00,000/- p.m.
Judges of Supreme Court — from Rs.30,000/- p.m. to Rs.90,000/- p.m.
Chief Justice of High Court— from Rs.30,000/- p.m. to Rs.90,000/- p.m.
Judges of the High Courts — from Rs.26,000/- p.m. to Rs.80,000/- p.m.
The Bill also seeks to revise the rates of sumptuary allowance and scale of
free furnishing admissible to the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts
by doubling the existing rates with effect from the 1st day of September, 2008.
4. The rates of pension of the Judges of High Court and Supreme Court
were last enhanced with effect from the 1st January, 1996 by the High Court
and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act,
1998 and the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Act, 2005. The Sixth Central Pay Commission
recommended revision in the pensionary benefits of the Central Government
employees including the members of All India Services. The revised pension
rules have come into force on the 1st day of January, 2006. It is, therefore,
necessary to increase suitably the existing pension, additional pension and
maximum pension of the Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court.
5. Based on the recommendation of the Sixth Central Pay Commission the
Central Government has decided to grant additional quantum of pension and
family pension with reference to the age of the Central Government pensioner
and family pensioner. On the same analogy, it has been decided to extend the
similar benefit to all retired Judges.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; H.R. BHARDWAJ
The 9th December, 2008.

37
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. L-11017/1/2008-Jus., dated the 11th December,
2008 from Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the High
Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008, recommends the introduction and consideration of the Bill
in Lok Sabha under article 117(1) and (3) of the Constitution.

38
38
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to amend the High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions
of Service) Act, 1954 and the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions
of Service) Act, 1958 so as to revise the salaries of the Chief Justice of India,
Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and Judges of High
Courts.
2. The Bill also seeks to revise the pension, family pension of the Judges
of the Supreme Court and High Courts. It further increases the sumptuary
allowance so as to enable the Judges to get double the existing rates of
sumptuary allowance.
3. The additional expenditure in respect of the Judges of the High Courts
is to be borne by the concerned State Governments under article 290 of the
Constitution of India. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will involve
an additional expenditure of approximately Rs. 46 crore out of which a recurring
expenditure of Rs. 4 crore per annum for payment of salary and Rs. 42 crore
as non-recurring expenditure towards arrears of salaries, pension and family
pension from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of either recurring or
non-recurring nature.

39
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE H IGH C OURT J UDGES (S ALARIES AND C ONDITIONS
OF S ERVICE) A CT, 1954
28 OF 1954
** * * *
CHAPTER III
SALARIES AND PENSIONS
13A. ( 1) There shall be paid to the Chief Justice of a High
Court, by way of salary, thirty thousand rupees per mensem.
(2) There shall be paid to a Judge of a High Court, by way of
salary, twenty-six thousand rupees per mensem.
** * * *
17 A. ( 1) Where a Judges who, being in service on or after the
commencement of the High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1986, dies whether before or
after retirement in circumstance to which section 17 does not apply,
family pension calculated at the rate of fifty per cent of his salary plus
fifty per cent of his dearness pay on the date of his death amount to
payable shall be paid from the day following the date period up to the
date on which the Judge would have attained the age of sixty-five
years, had the survived, whichever is earlier, and thereafter at the rate
of thirty per cent. of his salary plus thirty per cent. of his dearness
pay subject to a minimum of one thousand nine hundred and thirteen
rupees per month.
Explanation.—For the purposes of determining the person or
persons entitled to family pension under this sub-section:—
Provided that in no case the amount of family pension
calculated under this sub-section shall exceed the pension payable
to the Judge under this Act.
(i) in relation to a Judge who elects or is eligible to
receive pension under Part I of the First Schedule, the rules,
notifications and orders for the time being in force with regard
to the person or persons entitled to family pension in relation to
an officer of the Central Civil Services, Group ‘A’, shall apply;
(ii) in relation to a Judge who elects to receive pension
under Part II or Part III of the First Schedule, the ordinary
rules of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge with
respect to the person or persons entitled to family pension shall
apply and his service as a Judge being treated as service therein.
(2) Where any Judge, who has elected to received the pension
payable to him under Part II or Part III of the First Schedule, retires,
or dies in circumstances to which section 17 does not apply, gratuity,
Salaries of the
Judges.
39
Family pensions
and gratuities.

40
if any, shall be payable to the person or persons entitled thereto under
the ordinary rules of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge,
his service as a Judge being treated as service therein for the purpose
of calculating that gratuity.
** * * *
22A.(1)* * * * *
(2) Where a Judge does not avail himself of the use of an
official residence, he may be paid every month an allowance equivalent
to an amount of thirty per cent. of the salary plus thirty per cent of
the dearness pay.
22C. The Chief Justice and each of the other Judges of every
High Court shall be entitled to sumptuary allowance of seven thousand
and five hundred rupees per month and six thousand rupees per
month, respectively.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See sections 14 and 15)
P
ENSIONS OF J UDGES
PART I
(1)  *  * *   * *
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, the pension
payable to a Judge to whom this Part applies and who has completed
not less than seven years of service for pension shall be,—
(a) for service as Chief Justice in any High Court,
Rs. 21,945 per annum for each completed year of service;
(b) for service as any other Judge in any High Court,
Rs. 16,725 per annum for each completed year of service:
Provided that the pension under this paragraph shall in no case
exceed Rs. 2,70,000 per annum in the case of a Chief Justice and
Rs. 2,34,000 per annum in the case of any other Judge.
** * * *
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions
of this Part, the pension payable to a Judge who has completed
fourteen years of service for pension, including not less than six years
of service as Chief Justice of one or more of the High Courts, shall
be Rs. 2,70,000 per annum.
9. Where a Judge to whom this Part applies retires or has
retired at any time after the 26th January, 1950 without being eligible
for pension under any other provision of this Part, when,
notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions, a pension
of Rs. 76,785 per annum shall be payable to such a Judge:
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply—
(a) to an additional Judge or acting Judge; or
Facility of
rentfree
houses.
Sumptuary
allowance.

41
(b) to a Judge who at the time of his appointment is in
receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound pension)
in respect of any previous service under the Union or a State.
PART II
1. ** * * *
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be—
(a) the pension to which he is entitled under the ordinary
rules of the Indian Civil Service if he had not been appointed
Judge, his service as a Judge being treated as service therein
for the purpose of calculating that pension; and
(b) the additional pension, if any, to which he is entitled
under paragraph 3:
Provided that the pension under clause ( a) and the additional
pension under clause ( b) together shall in no case exceed Rs. 2,70,000
per annum in the case of a Chief Justice and Rs. 2,34,000 per annum
in the case of any other Judge.
3. If such a Judge has completed not less than seven years of
service for pension in a High Court, he shall be entitled to an additional
pension in accordance with the following scale:—
For seven completed years of service for pension 16,898/-
For eight completed years of service for pension 20,280/-
For nine completed years of service for pension 23,649/-
For ten completed years of service for pension 27,033/-
For eleven completed years of service for pension 30,420/-
For twelve or more completed years of service for pension
33,799/-
P
ART III
1.  ** * * *
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be—
(a) the pension to which he is entitled under the ordinary
rules of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge, his
service as a Judge being treated as service therein for the
purpose of calculating that pension; and
** * * *
Provided that the pension under clause (a) and the additional
pension under clause ( b) together shall in no case exceed
Rs. 2,70,000 per annum in the case of a Chief Justice and
Rs. 2,34,000/- per annum in the case of any other Judge.

42
EXTRACTS FROM THE S UPREME C OURT J UDGES (S ALARIES AND
CONDITIONS OF S ERVICE)
ACT, 1958
(41 OF 1958)
** * * *
CHAPTER III
SALARIES AND PENSIONS
12A. ( 1) There shall be paid to the Chief Justice of India, by
way of salary, thirty-three thousand rupees per mensem.
(2) There shall be paid to a Judge of the Supreme Court, by
way of salary, thirty thousand rupees per mensem.
** * * *
16A. ( 1) Where a Judges who, being in service on or after the
commencement of the High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1986,—
(a) dies before retirement, family pension calculated at
the rate of fifty per cent of the pension admissible to him on
the date of his death shall be payable to the person or persons
entitled thereto and the amount so payable shall be paid from
the day following the date of death of the Judge for a period
of seven years or for a period up to the date on which the
Judge would have attained the age of sixty-five years, had he
survived, whichever is earlier, and thereafter at the rate of half
of the family pension so admissible; and
(b) dies after retirement, family pension calculated at the
rate of half of the pension so admissible to him shall be payable
to the person or persons entitled thereto.
Explanation.—For the purposes of determining the person
or persons entitled to family pension under this sub-section,—
(i) in relation to a Judge who elects or is eligible to
received pension under Part I of the Schedule, the rules,
notifications and orders for the time being in force with regard
to the person or persons entitled to family pension in relation to
an officer of the Central Civil Services Group ‘A’, shall apply;
(ii) in relation to a Judge who elects to receive pension
under Part II or Part III of the Schedule, the ordinary rules of
his service if he had not been appointed a Judge with respect
to the person or persons entitled to family pension shall apply
and his service as a Judge being treated as service therein.
** * * *
23. (1) * * * * *
(1A) Where a Judge does not avail himself of the use
of an official residence, he may be paid every month an
allowance equivalent to an amount of thirty per cent of the
salary plus thirty per cent of the dearness pay.
Salaries of
the Judges.
Family
pensions and
gratuity.
Facility of
rentfree
houses.

43
23B. The Chief Justice and each of the other Judges shall be
entitled to sumptuary allowance of ten thousand rupees per month and
Seven thousand and five hundred rupees per month respectively.
THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 13 and 14)
PENSIONS OF J UDGES
PART I
** * * *
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, the pension
payable to a Chief Justice to whom this Part applies shall be an
amount equal to the sum of the following amounts, that is to say,—
** * * *
(b) an additional amount of Rs. 6,030/- per annum for
each completed year of service as the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court until he has become entitled to a pension of
Rs.1,82,820/- per annum and thereafter an additional amount of
Rs.15,360/- for each completed year of such service:
Provided that the aggregate amount of his pension shall in
no case exceed Rs. 2,97,000/- per annum.
PART II
** * * *
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be—
** * * *
(c) the additional pension of Rs. 16,898 per annum for
each completed year of service of pension in the Supreme Court:
Provided that the pension under clause (a) and the additional
pension under clause ( b) together shall in no case exceed
Rs. 2,97,000 per annum in the case of a Chief Justice and
Rs. 2,70,000 per annum in the case of any other judge.
PART III
** * * *
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be—
** * * *
(b) a special additional pension of Rs. 7,800/- per annum
in respect of each completed year of service for pension as a
Judge in India:
Provided that the pension under clause ( a) and the additional
pension under clause ( b) together shall in no case exceed Rs. 2,97,000
per annum in the case of a Chief Justice and Rs. 2,70,000 per annum
in the case of any other Judge.
** * * *
Sumptuary
allowance.

44
44
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and
the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1958.
(Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice)

45
45
ANNEXURE-B
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/ORGANIZATIONS WHO SUBMITTED MEMORANDA
1. Shri Joy James
2. Shri D. Krishna Mohan
3. Ms. Swati Dangi, Advocate
4. Shri Ramesh Bhatnagar, Addl. General Manager (Retd.)-BHEL
5. Shri Rajiv Mishra
6. Shri Ashok R. Tolat
7. Shri Deepak Narain
8. Justice Ram Nandan Prasad, Former Judge Patna High Court Former Chairman, National
Commission for Backward Classes
9. -do-
10. Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal
11. Shri Takorbhai Ramjibhai Kanthazia
12. Shri H.M.G . Murthy
13. Shri Krishna Kumar Prasad, I.A.S. (Retd.), Advocate
14. Shri Vinay Misra
15. Shri Manoj Gupta
16. Shri K.N. Jagadesh Kumar,
17. Shri Sachin Bansal, Rakshak Foundation California, USA
18. Shri B.B. Paul, Advocate
19. Shri Deendayal M. Lulla
20. Shri Anil Sood
21. Shri Rajiv Kakria, Chairman
22. Shri Sachin Bansal, Rakshak Foundation
23. Shri Bhushan Kumar
24. Shri Narayan Chandra Sahu
25. Shri Gururaja Rao B.K., Advocate
26. Shri Munihanuman Thappa, Advocate

46
27. Shri P.K. Gupta, Professor
28. Shri Tara Chand
29 Shri Shaik Ali, Manager (Retd.) (P&A), Pensioner Government of A.P.
30. Shri R.M. Agrawal, Advocate
31. Shri Mangaleshwar Singh
32. Dr. Y .K. Agarwal
33. Shri Niladri Shekhar Das, Secretary, Gender Human Rights Society (Regd.)
34. Shri Abhimanya Singh
35. Shri K.L. Kapoor
36. Shri Piyush Paul
37. Shri Sachin Bansal, Rakshak Foundation
38. Shri Gurmeet Singh
39. Shri K.S. Narayana Rao, IAAS (Retd.)
40. Shri C.H. Prabhakara Rao, Former Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice
41. Shri B.K. Meen
42. Shri B.B. Palit
43. Shri Mani Vankatrman Iyar
44. Shri Ashish Mukhi, Save Family Foundation
45. Shri Naresh Kumar Verma, Founder President, Global Public Prosecutors Bar Association,
India Young Men Hindu Association (Regd.) Y .M.H.A.
46. Shri Raghunath Singh Chouhan, Regional Minister, Jan Sangharsh Samiti, Rajasthan
47. Shri K.K. Sharma Vidrohi
48. Shri Bhagwan Singh Chouhan
49. Shri Mahesh Chand Mittal
50. Shri Ved Kumar
51. Shri Ramchandra N. Koppar

47
ANNEXURE-C
Comments of the Department of Justice on the Memoranda received from
individual/organisations
Memorandum - 1
Views of the individual: (i) The Judges are already getting good salary and handsome packages,
(ii) all the courts today are influenced by money and muscle power (iii) the courts and judgments
are today mostly for the rich and mighty, for others it is only dates and dates. He has asked to
suggest a time bound solutions for the poor and down-trodden or weaker sections of the society
because they are the most sufferers.
Comments of the Department: The judiciary is independent and no institution can, therefore,
interfere with the affairs of the judicial functions of courts. The courts are entrusted with
extraordinary powers of punishing those who indulge in acts, whether inside or outside the courts,
which tend to undermine the authority of law.
Hon’ble Prime Minister, in his address to the conference of Chief Justices and Chief
Ministers held on September 18, 2004 has inter-alia  observed as follows;
“The framers of our Constitution wanted to protect and preserve the independence of our
judiciary. This places a greater onus and responsibility on the members and practitioners of our
judiciary to maintain the highest standards of probity and integrity. Accountability and transparency
norms cannot, and should not, be imposed on the judiciary from outside. It is, I believe, up to
the judiciary to do some soul-searching and ensure how this can best be done.”
The Chief Justice of a High Court has the competence to receive complaints against the
conduct of a Judge of his Court, and, when he receives any, he would look into it whether the
allegations deserve to be closely looked into. In some recent cases, the Chief Justice of India set
up inquiry committees under in-house procedure to deal with cases of deviant behaviour of Judges.
As regards the members of Judicial Service of a State, under article 235 of the Constitution of
India, the administrative control over the members of subordinate judiciary in the States vests with
the concerned High Court and the State Government.
To ensure speedier and inexpensive justice to the poor, especially those in the rural areas,
The Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 has been enacted to provide for the establishment of Gram
Nyayalayas at the grass roots level for the purposes of providing access to justice to the citizens
at their doorsteps and to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen
by reason of social, economic or other disabilities.
Memorandum - 2
Views of the individual: The individual has opined that increase in the salaries and service
conditions of Judges in no way would help the litigants but only their quality of service and
judgments are more important in our legal system.
Comments of the Department: The individual has only expressed his views in the context of
dismissal and non-restoration of his case due to advocates’ fault and not made any specific
comment on the Bill. The views appear to be an outcome based on his experience.
47

48
Memorandum - 3
Views of the individual: Pay of the Chief Justice of India is against his decorum and is now less
than the pay of Governor. A general Advocate of High Court earns Rs.l,00,00/- p.m. A worthy and
intelligent will not come to judiciary because of this step.
Comments of the Department: The Parliament has fixed the salaries for the Judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts in consonance with the provisions of the Constitution and
maintaining parity in salaries and allowances admissible to other Constitutional functionaries.
Memorandum No. 4:
Views of the individual:  The salaries/perks/service conditions of the Judges can be increased
based on their performances at par with IAS/Military services of equivalent years after meeting the
targets set by the Department and approved by a Committee, headed by a retired Judge.
Comments of the Department:  The salaries of the constitutional functionaries including the
Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, are fixed by making necessary reference to the pay
scales recommended by the Pay Commissions.
Memorandum No. 5:
Views of the individual: Judges are already amongst the best paid public servants in India and
this proposed move to increase the pay and perks should take care of this fact. People will term
this act as a populist move in the election year. Will they agree to disclose the property at the time
of joining?
Comments of the Department:  The salaries of the constitutional functionaries including the Judges
of Supreme Court and High Courts, are fixed by making necessary reference to the pay scales
recommended by the Pay Commissions and cannot be contingent upon fulfilling other conditions.
Memorandum No. 6:
Views of the individual:  Increase in salaries and perks of all Judges subject to one condition that
they must accept unconditional and full accountability to the people of this Democracy, Democratic
Republic of India.
Comments of the Department:  The judiciary is independent and no institution can, therefore,
interfere with the affairs of the judicial functions of courts.
Memorandum No. 7:
Views of the individual: Those who impose high standards of conduct on others should
themselves also appear to follow them in their own lives. Such people do not deserve a raise in
their salaries as is presently under consideration of a Standing Committee of the Rajya Sabha. There
cannot and should not be double standards.
Comments of the Department:  The salaries have been raised on account of rise in cost of living
etc.
Memorandum No. 8 and 9:
Views of the individual:  The individual has suggested grant of sumptuary allowance at the rate
of Rs.4000/-p.m., Rs.6000/-p.m. for engaging a driver, 300 ltrs. of fuel, free 2000 telephone calls
to retired Judges of High Courts.

49
Comments of the Department: Retired High Court Judges often find placement in Commissions,
Tribunals etc. and are not debarred from practicing in courts other than the court from which they
superannuated/retired.
Memorandum No. 10
View of the individual: He has suggested that any increase in salaries, pensions and other facilities
of judges from higher courts should only be effected simultaneously with other pending bills
concerning judiciary ‘Judges Inquiry Bill, 2008’ including reforms in judicial system like
constitution of National Judicial Commission for appointment and probe of judges. Provision for
making wealth and assets of Judges and their family members public and provision for declaring
gifts received by them and revealing personal expenses made above rupees 20,000/- should be made
as is in USA.
Comments of the Department: The matter regarding revision in salaries, allowances, pension
etc. of Judges is delinked from declaration of assets by Judges as the two stand on separate
footing. The Government is responsive to the needs of the Judges who are required to keep
aloof from society. Hence, the Government is periodically in the process of improving the
service conditions of the Judges and from time to time grants some liberal benefits which are not
enjoyed by the executive. This is also because of the fact that the Government wants to attract
better talent on the Bench to ensure better dispensation of justice. Apart from this, The Judges
Inquiry Bill, 2006 is already with Parliament which will, inter-alia , address issues of complaints
against Judges.
Memorandum No. 11
Comments of the individual:  The judicial staff is expected to be neutral and also accountable to
public for any of the incorrect procedure or wrong decision affecting public interests. Lack of
accountability on any ruling leads to resulting in loss of faith in the divine judicial service by
common poor men who do not have funds or capability to challenge the same. Judgments are to
be reviewed/audited or many lapses would be noticed.
Comments of the Department: Court orders are subject to judicial review by a superior
court.
Memorandum No. 12
Views of the individual:  The individual has suggested further more increase in the salaries of
Judges.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 4.
Memorandum No. 13
Views of the individual:  The individual has suggested that the pay and perks be correlated to
performance and other higher services in the Government of India. He has further suggested that
increase in the number of Judges, improvement in the method of disposal of cases, procedure for
appointment, removal etc. of Judges etc.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in Memorandum No.3. Further, there
is presently no system in Government where salaries and perks are linked to performance.
Annual appraisal of work performed by an individual is maintained and further promotion is linked
to that.

50
Memorandum No. 14
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested various codes of ethics/measures to be
followed by the Judges relating to working hours, reservation of judgments, disposal of cases per
day, declaration of assets etc.
Comments of the Department: As the suggestions contained in the memorandum fall under the
purview of the court procedures and code of ethics to be followed by Judges in their individual
and professional capacity, no comments are being offered.
Memorandum No. 15
Views of the individual: There are many loopholes in our legal system and the lawyers use them
to delay the process of law.
Comments of the Department: The individual has not suggested anything in the context of the
Bill.
Memorandum No. 16
Views of the organization:  If we hike the salaries of High Court and Supreme Court Judges to
300% to 350% of their salary, this is not justified. If at all, salaries of High Court and Supreme
Court Judges have to be hiked, it should be in the range of 15% to 30% of their total salary. It
would be necessary to trim and provide the economical luxury to High Court and Supreme Court
Judges.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 4.
Memorandum No. 17
View of the organization:  The organization has suggested that in response to the increase in
salary and conditions of service, Hon’ble Judges must be held accountable and responsible to
demonstrate their commitment towards the citizens of India by (i) reducing their own yearly
vacation time, (ii) reducing the number of adjournments per case, (iii) restoring public trust in
judicial system and integrity by declaring their total assets, and (iv) working towards clearing the
huge backlog of cases before them.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 14.
Memorandum No. 18
View of the individual:  The individual has put up various suggestions regarding reduction in
salaries, method of appointment, cut in vacation of courts, disciplinary action against Judges,
abolition of Court Fee Act, National Judicial Commission to deal with corrupt Judges etc.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 15.
Memorandum No. 19
Views of the individual:  The individual has emphasized the need for quality of judgments,
performance based salary, bringing accountability for Judges, disciplinary action against the errant
Judges etc.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 10.

51
Memorandum No. 20
Views of the Organisation: The organization has suggested methods for time-frame for
judgments, linkage of salary with performance, formation of National Judicial Commission to deal
with corruption cases against Judges, appointment of competent Judges etc.
Comments of the Department: As mentioned in Memorandum No.19 above.
Memorandum No. 2l
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested increase in salaries should be conditional
on performance parameters, cut in vacations of courts, speedy judgments, rationalization of
transfers, adjournments, etc. check corruption cases.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 10.
Memorandum No. 22
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested revamping of the subordinate judiciary.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 15.
Memorandum No. 23
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested marginal hike in salary, pension at par with
the Central Government employees, no hike in the allowances, performance related salary,
competitive based selection, etc.
Comments of the Department:  The salaries of the constitutional functionaries including the
Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, are fixed by making necessary reference to the pay
scales recommended by the Pay Commissions. Keeping in view the above, the salaries of Judges
have been decided. There is presently no system in Government where salaries and perks are linked
to performance. Annual appraisal of work performed by an individual is maintained and further
promotion is linked to that
Memorandum No. 24
Views of the individual:  The individual has not suggested anything.
Comments of the Department: No comments.
Memorandum No. 25
Views of the individual:  The individual has suggested that the hike in salary and other perquisites
is to keep in tune with the inflationary and recessionary situations of the national economy in terms
of good services.
Comments of the Department:  As mentioned in Memorandum No. 23 above.
Memorandum No. 26
Views of the individual:  If we hike the salaries of High Court and Supreme Court Judges to
300% to 350% of their salary, this is not justified. if at all, salaries of High Court and Supreme
Court Judges have to be hiked, it should be in the range of 15% to 30% of their total salary. It
would be necessary to trim and provide the economical luxury to High Court and Supreme Court
Judges.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 4.

52
Memorandum No. 27
Views of the individuals: The individuals have not favoured increase in salaries, rise in the
existing rate of sumptuary allowance etc.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 3.
Memorandum No. 28
Views of the individual:  The individuals have not favoured increase in salaries etc.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 3.
Memorandum No. 29
Views of the individual:  The individual has not suggested any thing.
Comments of the Department:  No comments.
Memorandum No. 30
View of the individual:  The individual has not favoured hike in salaries, perks etc. of Judges.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 3.
Memorandum No. 31
Views of the individual:  The individual has suggested the conditions of service including enquiry
against dishonest judges and punishment including dismissal of Judges should be at par with Central
Government employees.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 5.
Memorandum No. 32
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested salaries of judges should be enhanced as
per the norms adopted by the 6th CPC applicable to equivalent posts of Central Government
officers. No need to enhance sumptuary allowance.
Comments of the Department:  The salaries of the constitutional functionaries including the
Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, are fixed by making necessary reference to the pay
scales recommended by the Pay Commissions.
Sumputary allowances have been increased because of rise of cost of living etc.
Memorandum No. 33
Views of the organisation: The organisation has suggested marginal hike in salary etc., at par
with the Central Government employees, performance related salary, competitive based selection,
cut in vacation of courts, dealing with corrupt cases etc.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 5.
Memorandum No. 34
Views of the individual:  The individual has suggested the salaries, perks and other benefits are
to be doubled on the basis of the recommendations of the 6th CPC.

53
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 4.
Memorandum No. 35
Views of the individual:  The individual has suggested doubling of salaries and adopt a system that
works automatically. The evil must be curbed and curtailed with firm hand.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 4.
Memorandum No. 36
Views of the individual:  The individual has touched various points for judicial reforms and
requested both purity and transparency in justice delivery system in India.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 14.
Memorandum No. 37
Views of the organization:  The organization has suggested that in response to the increase in
salary and conditions of service, Hon’ble Judges must be held accountable and responsible to
demonstrate their commitment towards the citizens of India by (i) reducing their own yearly
vacation time, (ii) reducing the number of adjournments per case, (iii) restoring public trust in
judicial system and integrity by declaring their total assets, and (iv) working towards clearing the
huge backlog of cases before them.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 14.
Memorandum No. 38
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested the claim for proposed hike in salary should
be set aside and substituted with productivity, performance, efficiency etc.
Comments of the Department: Same as mentioned in the Memorandum No. 5.
Memorandum No. 39
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested that the long vacations enjoyed by the
superior judiciary are to be abolished forthwith. Sumptuary Allowance must be granted by way of
reimbursement of the expenses already incurred. Doubling the scale of free furnishing is totally
uncalled for. Pension and family pension are always determined with reference to basic pay drawn
prior to retirement and this basic structure should be the same for all Central Government servants.
Judges are privileged to commute 50% of their pension. This invidious distinction ought to be done
away with and instead allowed to commute 40%. Like any other Central Government officer
(Group ‘A’), the Judges should also submit a list of assets (properties) every year.
Comments of the Department: The working days in the Supreme Court and High Courts are
regulated by the rules framed by the respective Courts. According to available information, the
Supreme Court of India works for 222 days in a year; all High Courts in the country normally have
210 working days in a year and the number of working days of the District/Subordinate Courts
are regulated by the concerned High Court. The Department of Justice had, in the year 2002-2003,
examined the matter of increasing the number of working days in Courts. In order to reduce the
pendencies prevailing in the High Courts, this Department addressed to all the High Courts,
requesting them to fix the period of vacations in such a way that the number of working days of
High Courts generally do not fall below 222 days in a year.

54
The matter regarding revision in salaries, allowances, pension etc. of Judges has no
connection with the declaration of assets by Judges as the two stand on separate footing. The
Government is responsive to the needs of the Judges who are required to keep aloof from society.
Hence, the Government is periodically in the process of improving the service conditions of the
Judges and from time to time grants some liberal benefits which are not enjoyed by the executive.
This is also because of the fact that the Government wants to attract better talent on the Bench
to ensure better dispensation of justice.
Memorandum No. 40
Views of the individual: The individual has opined that calling for views from the public on the
Bill appears to be no need. He has suggested the same scale of salaries of Judges as has been
proposed in the Bill by the Government.
Comments of the Department: The individual has only expressed his views and has not made
any specific comment on the Bill.
Memorandum No. 41
Views of the organisation: The organization has suggested that marginal hike in salary, pension
at par with the Central Government employee, no hike in the allowances, performance related
salary, competitive based selection, etc.
Comments of the Department: The salaries of the constitutional functionaries including the
Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, are fixed by making necessary reference to the pay
scales recommended by the Pay Commissions. Keeping in view the above, the salaries of Judges
have been decided. There is presently no system in Government where salaries and perks are linked
to performance. Annual appraisal of work performed by an individual is maintained and further
promotion is linked to that.
Memorandum No. 42
Views of the individual:  The individual has stated that Advocates should not be appointed as
Judges as they favour colleague advocates illegally. The selection of Judges of High Courts is not
going through a proper selection committee and competitive examination. From his personal
experience, the advocates are corruptive and are not to be appointed. He is not in favour of
increase in the salaries and the emoluments of the Judges at this period of financial crisis.
Comments of the Department:  At the High Court and Supreme Court level, the appointment of
the Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts are made under articles 124 and 217 of the
Constitution of India respectively.
Memorandum No. 43
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested that use of electronic devices/media should
be encouraged to dispose of backlog of old and pending cases. The cases of riots, murders, land
and property disputes and rape cases should be given to Chief Justice, Supreme Court and the
judgments thereon should be implemented by a ‘Special Action Cell’. Eminent industrialists,
politicians, social activists, legal luminaries should also be appointed as Supreme Court/High Court
Judges on ad-hoc basis for a period of 2-5 years.
Comments of the Department:  The Central Government has taken up comprehensive
computerization of courts in the country covering all District and Subordinate Courts in the
country, upgradation of IT infrastructure in Superior Courts and electronically linking the lowest

55
courts to the apex court. The Scheme has been taken up for implementation as a Mission Mode
Project. Phase I of the project to be completed at a total cost of Rs. 442 crore was approved by
the Government on 8.2.2007.
National Informatics Centre (NIC) is the implementing agency for this project. Under the
project, 13,365 Judicial Officers have so far been provided with laptops, 55025 Judicial Officers
and Court staff have been trained in the use of ICT tools and 12599 laser printers have been
supplied to the courts.
Internet connectivity has been provided at 486 District Courts and 1272 Taluka Court
complexes. In addition, internet connections have also been provided at the home offices of 10744
Judicial Officers. The connectivity has been provided through Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited.
At the High Court and Supreme Court level, the appointment of the Judges of Supreme Court
and High Courts are made under articles 124 and 217 of the Constitution of India respectively.
Memorandum No. 44
Views of the organisation: The organisation has suggested marginal hike in salary, pension at par
with the Central Government employees, no hike in the allowances, performance related salary,
competitive based selection, etc.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in Memorandum No. 4.
Memorandum No. 45
The views of the individual:  The individual is an Asstt. Public Prosecutor and has opined that
there should be no upper limit of salary and conditions. The reasonable salary may be provided in
ordinary manner and he/she should be allowed to draw as much money (as unlimited as natural
resources) as he/she requires for his/her personal use even after retirement.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in Memorandum No. 40.
Memorandum No. 46
Views of the organization: The organization has observed that corrupt Judges are also getting
salary and other facilities more than they deserve. All the courts today are influenced by money
and the poor and the weaker sections of the society could not get justice from courts. The poor
and down trodden or weaker sections of the society are the most sufferers. The poor and the
weaker people are dying and the elite, bureaucratic, political leaders, VIPs will only survive. Judges
are not to be appointed to head any Commission.
Comments of the Department:  There is no concrete suggestion. Hence, no comments.
Memorandum No. 47
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested that appointments and promotions must be
based on pure merit, work, conduct and high moral character. Declaration of property and assets
is a must to avoid corruption, biased and prejudiced decisions.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in Memorandum No. 5.
Memorandum No. 48
Views of the individual:  The individual has suggested that the salaries of Judges should be more
than others so that they will not go for earning by corrupt ways with the condition to dispose of

56
cases speedily. They should be provided free furnished house. Pension/family pension should be
increased considerably.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in Memorandum No. 5.
Memorandum No. 49
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested that in view of the increase in the salaries,
allowances etc. of IAS, IPS and Central Government servants on the basis of 6th Central Pay
Commission’s recommendations, the salaries, allowances etc. of the Judges should also be
increased.
Comments of the Department:  As against Memorandum No. 3 and 5.
Memorandum No. 50
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested that there should be separate pay
commissions for special categories like Judges, Parliamentarians etc. There should be a separate
Pension Commission.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in Memorandum No. 3 and 5.
Memorandum No. 51
Views of the individual: The individual has suggested that salaries must be linked to working
hours. The long holidays being enjoyed by the courts are to be abolished and holidays to be allowed
on par with other sectors in the country. The working hours of the courts are to be increased by
45 minutes to 1 hour extra on every working day. The Government should devise schemes for all
senior citizens to make their life comfortable in their twilight years instead of conferring pensionary
benefits to the privileged few.
Comments of the Department:  Same as mentioned in Memorandum No. 41.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.