PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 41
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
FORTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN RD
THE 23  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON “GOVERNMENT’S 
POLICY OF APPOINTMENT ON COMPASSIONATE GROUND”
th 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2010)
th 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2010)
th 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2010)
th 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2010)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2010/SHRAVANA 1932 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2010/SHRAVANA 1932 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
FORTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE 23 RD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON “GOVERNMENT’S
POLICY OF APPOINTMENT ON COMPASSIONATE GROUND”
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 th AUGUST, 2010)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4 th AUGUST, 2010)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2010/SHRA V ANA, 1932 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-81

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1
(i) C HAPTER – I – Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry ................................................................................................................... 2
(ii) C HAPTER – II – Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue for now in view of the Government’s Action Taken Replies .... 3—6
(iii) C HAPTER – III – Recommendations/observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry ............................................. 7—10
(iv) C HAPTER – IV – Recommendations/observations in respect of which Final
Replies of the Ministry have not been received ..................................................... 11
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS  OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................ 13—16

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
9. Shri H.K. Dua
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Bhajan Lal
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
14. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
15. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
16. Dr. Monazir Hassan
17. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
18. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
19. Shri Lalu Prasad
20. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
21. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
22. Shri Devji M. Patel
23. Shri Harin Pathak
24. Shri S. Semmalai
25. Shri Shailendra Kumar
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad
28. Shri Manish Tewari
29. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
30. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty First Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-third Report of this Committee on
“Government Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground”.
2. The Twenty-third Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 7
th September, 2007.
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action Taken
Replies on the Report on 7 th December, 2009. Statement regarding status of implementation of
recommendations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee has also been made
by the Minister of State for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions in the Rajya Sabha on
25th February, 2010.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
29
th July, 2010.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee on the Action Taken Replies have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
JAYANTHI NATARAJAN
New Delhi; Chairperson,
29th July, 2010 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations of the Department
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its
23
rd Report on “Government Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground”. The Report was
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7 th September, 2007.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned
Report. These replies have been categorised as follows:
Chapter–I – The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry in
respect of para 6.4 and 6.5. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter–II – The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
for now in view of the replies given by the Ministry in respect of paras 7.2, 8.1, 8.8, 9.5, 9.6
and 9.7. The Committee is convinced with the explanations advanced by the Ministry and does not
want to pursue them as of now.
Chapter–III – The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted
replies given by the Ministry with regard to paras 8.10, 9.2 and 9.3, The Committee expresses its
concern for not accepting the recommendations of the Committee contained in Chapter–III of this
Report and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations in respect of these
recommendations.
Chapter–IV – The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry
have not been received with regard to paras 9.4. The Committee observes that the Ministry has
furnished evasive or interim replies and therefore desires that the Ministry should furnish action
taken notes in respect of recommendations categorised in Chapter–IV .
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 23
rd Report, the A TRs furnished
by the Ministry, statement made by the Minister on House in the implementation of the Committee’s
recommendations, if any, and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been
dealt with in the succeeding Chapters.

2
CHAPTER–I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
The Committee appreciates that the views expressed by the Committee in its
previous study visits regarding revival of compassionate appointments in public sector banks
at least in those cases where the official died while performing official duty has resulted in
modifying the model scheme of compassionate appointments in the public sector banks. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Government of India should accept this revised
proposal of IBA and start ‘compassionate appointments’ in public sector banks with
immediate effect. The Committee feels this act of the Government would certainly help the
family of deceased Banks employee to tide over sudden crisis. [Para 6.4]
However, the Committee strongly feels that the judgment given/delivered by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Shri Umesh Kumar Nagpal Vs. State of Haryana and Others
doesn’t totally ban the employment on compassionate grounds rather it has been misquoted,
misinterpreted and misunderstood that the Hon’ble Court has totally banned the
compassionate employments. The Committee feels that Government should not put a
blanket ban on providing compassionate appointment to the family members of the deceased
employees in the public sector banks rather should find ways and means for giving
employment under compassionate grounds in view of shrinking employment opportunities in
the banking sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should not
totally ban the appointments on compassionate grounds in the banking sector rather think
of providing compassionate appointments to the family members of the deceased. For this,
the power to appoint on compassionate grounds may be conferred on the CMDs of public
sector banks so as to enable them to give appointments to well deserved cases alone.
[Para 6.5]
Action Taken Reply
Department of Financial Services have adduced their views that: with the approval of the
Government, the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) circulated the revised scheme to all Public Sector
Banks (PSBs) vide their letter No. PD/GSN/GOVT/532/185 dated 19.7.2007 amending the then
existing scheme by dividing it into two parts; the first relating to compassionate appointment in
exceptional cases and the second to ex-gratia payment. They have further added that the board of
the bank, however, reserves its right to substitute, amend or vary from time to time any provision
of the Scheme.
The above mentioned arrangement of issuing policy guidelines by IBA for banking sector
is to ensure the functional autonomy of the financial institutions for augmenting operational
efficiency of the organizations.
2

3
3
CHAPTER–II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
The Committee was not satisfied by the reply. The Committee feels that in the hour
of crisis each and every member of the family stands together to support the family and
try to overcome the problems that come their way and in this case, the bank instead of
extending a helping hand quoted some rules and simply rejected the application. The
Committee feels that such type of incidences are unwarranted, speaks volumes about the
policy of a particular bank when our effort should be in the direction of building
relationship of trust, help, loyalty etc. The Committee desires that in such cases a realistic
and humanitarian view should be taken by the concerned authorities. [Para 7.2]
Action Taken Reply
The Department of Financial Services have also stated with reference to para 7.2 that the
revised scheme provides for compassionate appointment/grant of ex-gratia to the family of
deceased employees in a certain manner and subject to specified ceilings, i.e. the monthly income
of the family from all sources should be less than 60% of last drawn salary (net of taxes) of the
employee. This meets the recommendation of the Committee.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee observes that the Public Sector Undertakings and other
organizations/Trusts etc. examined by the Committee are having separate schemes for the
benefit of their employees. Some of them were following the policy of making ex-gratia
payment to the family of the deceased and some were continuing with the policy of
appointment on compassionate grounds. The Public Sector Undertakings which are following
the policy of appointment on compassionate grounds are GAIL(India) Limited, STC Limited,
Container Corporation of India Limited, Bharat Dynamics Limited, Neyveli Lignite
Corporation Limited, Cochin Port Trust, Bharat Petroleum, Chennai Port Trust, Chennai
Petroleum Corporation etc. [Para 8.1]
Action Taken Reply
Department of Public Enterprises vide their letter No. 2(63)07--DPE(GM) dated 11
th March,
2008 has expressed that Vittal Committee has reviewed the guidelines issued by them in the matter
of compassionate appointment. CPSEs were given autonomy to frame their own guidelines on
compassionate appointment keeping in view their operational/business requirements.

4
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the Reply.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee feels that though death of the ‘Karta’ of a family can never be
compensated but family can be consoled by offering compassionate appointment or financial
package to support the family. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government of India should positively think towards revival of the policy of appointments
on compassionate ground in the PSUs and other organisations falling within its jurisdiction
or the PSUs should introduce a unique scheme of ‘full salary till superannuation of the
deceased employee’ uniformly so that the bereaved family could tide over the crisis created
by the cruel hands of destiny. [Para 8.8]
Action Taken Reply
Department of Public Enterprises vide their letter No. 2(63)07--DPE(GM) dated 11
th March,
2008 has expressed that Vittal Committee has reviewed the guidelines issued by them in the matter
of compassionate appointment. CPSEs were given autonomy to frame their own guidelines on
compassionate appointment keeping in view their operational/business requirements.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the Reply.
Recommendation/observation
Finally, the Committee feels that in a welfare state like ours it is obligatory on the
part of the Government to provide a social security net to the employees and appointments
on compassionate ground is one such measure. It gives a sense of being part and parcel of
the organisation amongst its employees who feels that in case of falling victim at the hands
of cruel destiny the organisation will take care of their families. The umbrella of protection
certainly boosts the morale of not only the employees but also their families. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the policy of compassionate appointments should
continue in the Government, its PSUs, organisations, Trusts etc. as a measure of social
security net and also consider offering the package on the lines of Chennai Petroleum
Corporation Ltd. so that the family of the deceased employee survives the sudden void and
crisis created by the cruel destiny. [Para 9.5]
Action Taken Reply
According to Department of Public Enterprises, since the CPSE has to operate commercial
activities in the competitive environment and has also to meet social responsibilities this issue
should be left with concerned Management of CPSE to frame the Rules as per their operational
requirements and also to take care of the interest of the family of the deceased employee.
Department of Expenditure have clarified that consequent upon the implementation of Sixth
CPC Recommendation by the Government of India, the various terminal benefits available to the
family of the deceased Government employee (leave encashment, family pension, death Gratuity)
have undergone an upward revision. The recommendation relating to enhancement of the Insurance

5
Cover is still under the consideration of the Government. Therefore, there appears to be little
justification for contemplating further benefits.
According to Department of Financial Services, the scheme relating to compassionate
appointment has been revised to address to the humanitarian angle as espoused by the various
Unions. Keeping in mind the social obligations, the Government has agreed to modify the scheme
for payment of ex-gratia/to provide for compassionate appointments in certain exceptional cases;
and continuance of payment of ex-gratia amount in other deserving cases to the families of the
deceased employees, dying in harness; to help them to survive the sudden void and crises, caused
by the cruel destiny.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee appreciates that the Government has agreed upon to revise the scheme
of Compassionate appointment as per the abovementioned two pronged policy. Also, the
Committee takes into account the need of giving autonomy to CPSE’s to frame their own
policies vis-a-vis Compassionate appointments/payment of ex-gratia amount to the family of
deceased employee in accordance with their commercial requirements. However, the Committee
feels that the Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd.’s policy of providing compensation package
to the family of a deceased employee presently is a model to be followed. Thus, the possibilities
of replicating this model may be explored in other PSUs as well.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee is perturbed to note that there is lack of uniformity in the rules/
standing orders/guidelines, formulated till date, by various organizations/Departments, which
govern the policy of appointment on compassionate ground. It notes that lack of clarity/
precision is a major handicap in implementing the scheme in its true letter and spirit. It
is of the view that this has been the main reason for various conflicting judgements by the
Courts. The Committee strongly feels that common standards eligibility criteria should be
made applicable for such appointments. It is also of the view that recurrent judgements by
the Courts can be avoided if a uniform and transparent policy is envisaged in all
the Organisations/ Ministries/Departments. It is of the considered opinion that giving this
policy statutory backing would rectify the anomalies which exist at present in this regard.
[Para 9.6]
Action Taken Reply
The Department of Public Enterprises have expressed that the problems of CPSE vary from
one CPSE to another. Uniform policy for CPSEs in the matter of appointment on compassionate
grounds may take away the flexibility available to CPSEs.
The existing policy instructions issued by DoPT are conceptually very clear and the
eligibility criteria have been spelt out in unambiguous terms. These are also being implemented
uniformly by the Ministries/Departments.
According to Department of Financial Services, the scheme formulated and circulated by
the Indian Banks’ Association to all the public sector banks, ensures the uniform application of the
appointment on compassionate grounds or ex-gratia in lieu thereof.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the reply.

6
Recommendation/observation
In view of the above, the Committee unanimously recommends that concrete steps
should be taken to enact a comprehensive legislation which would govern the policy of
appointment on compassionate ground. The Committee feels that such legislation would
render clarity to the eligibility criteria under this scheme and would make it obligatory
on the part of Ministries/Departments/Organisations to implement this beneficial policy.
[Para 9.7]
Action Taken Reply
The existing policy is contained in executive instructions which clearly define the eligibility
criteria. Compassionate appointment being a welfare measure of the Government, the same should
operate through executive instructions and it is felt that there is no need for legislation, at least
at this stage.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the reply.

7
7
CHAPTER–III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
The Committee does not find the views of Secretary convincing and feels that the
Ministry of Personnel is passing on its responsibility to Department of Public Enterprises
(DPE). The Committee strongly feels that it is the policy of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions and it is obligatory for the Ministry to ensure its
implementation in toto  in not only all the Ministries/Departments of Government of India,
but also in the organizations falling within their administrative control. The role of DPE in
the case of PSUs and the Banking Division in the case of Banks is to regulate and
implement the policy as laid down by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions. The Committee, however, acknowledges that the policy may vary keeping in view
the specific nature of the organisations. What Committee proposes is the mechanism to
monitor the policy at both levels i.e., at the level of DPE or Banking Division and also at
the level of Ministry of Personnel. [Para 8.10]
Action Taken Reply
According to Department of Public Enterprises, after the liberalization of the Indian
economy, Govt. has given more autonomy to CPSEs. The operational requirements vary from
CPSE to CPSE. Therefore, CPSE take decision about meeting their operational requirements as well
as their corporate social obligations. Under the Allocation of Business Rules, the DoPT has been
assigned the task of laying down, inter alia , the general questions relating to recruitment,
promotion and seniority pertaining to Central Services.
Department of Financial Services monitors the policy through the Indian Banks’ Association
(IBA). The recommendations made by IBA are given due consideration.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee acknowledges the need of providing functional and financial autonomy
to the PSEs in the era of economic liberalization. However, the Committee would like to draw
the attention of the Department to the fact that despite adopting the path of economic
liberalization, our nation still has a strong faith in the philosophy of Welfare State, thereby
endeavoring to provide the required social security net for the people belonging to the lower
income group. The policy of appointment on compassionate ground for group ‘C’ and ‘D’
employees is one of such measures. Needless to say, this group of Government employees
generally belongs to the lower income group of the society. What the Committee favors in this
regard is a balancing act to fulfill the obligations of economic liberalization as well as the

8
commitments of a Welfare State.
Thus despite being in agreement with the logic of functional and financial autonomy to
the PSEs, the Committee finds that existing anomalies in such organizations regarding the
Policy of Appointment on the Compassionate Grounds need to be monitored at various level, if
any. To this end, the Committee reiterates that the Department has been entrusted to oversee the
implementation of the Policy of Appointment on the Compassionate Ground in various
Departments and PSUs.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee has also come across certain representations wherein it has been
mentioned that at the time of the death of the breadwinner the wife was uneducated/not
able to take up the job and the deceased has left small children where the 3 years criteria
to fill up the said vacancy cannot be applied. The Committee feels that such type of
situation can come in anybody’s life wherein the 3 year rule cannot be applied, hence such
type of cases should be dealt with separately. The Committee recommends that if the
Government really intends to help the family of the deceased employee then the
Government should come forward with certain changes in its policy on appointments on
compassionate ground like waiving of all outstanding loans, free health expenditure, free
education to the children till they attain the age of majority, family pension, housing
facilities etc. for the family of the deceased. [Para 9.2]
Action Taken Reply
Para 8 of the scheme on compassionate appointment issued on 9.10.1998 contains the
provision of entertaining belated requests for compassionate appointment even where the death took
place long back, say 5 years or so. Ministry of Urban Development have adduced their views that
due to acute shortage of Government accommodation, it would not be possible to allow the family
of the deceased Government employee to retain the accommodation till the notional date of
superannuation. In all such cases the family should be provided adequate financial assistance to
own a house. Department of Expenditure has not supported the benefits recommended as they
involve huge expenditure on the part of Central Govt. Ministry of Health has also conveyed that
CS(MA) Rules 1944 do not permit such an arrangement.
Committee’s further observation
Though the Committee does not negate the fact that there is shortage of Government
accommodations, this argument can not be considered sufficiently tenable if it supports the act
of throwing the family of a deceased employee out of the Government accommodation to address
the prevailing shortfall.
The Committee finds it is righteous that the bereaved families of a deceased employee
need extra attention and care. If there is shortage of Government accommodations the concerned
Department may explore other ways to meet the challenge. Throwing the family of a deceased
employee out of the Government accommodation is not the only left solution. However, the
Committee does not advocate the facility to be applied uniformly, an objective criterion to
identify the deserving candidates may be preferred in this regard.

9
Recommendation/observation
The Committee finds that the Guidelines/circulars issued in this regard by the
Government of India are actually not adhered to in true spirit and in many cases some
PSUs are not even aware of any such new guidelines etc. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Guidelines/circulars issued by the Government must be complied with
and a feedback must be obtained from each of the administrative Ministries so that a cross
check can be in place to see that the instructions issued are followed properly. The
Committee also feels that the role of the administrative Ministries under which the
particular PSU comes become all the more important and it should pass on each and every
instruction issued by the Government of India to the PSUs and receive the confirmation
from them and send the feedback to the Government of India. The Committee recommends
that this is a continuous process and at least yearly report must be sent to the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) by
the administrative Ministries to ensure whether the instructions issued by the Government
are complied with and the Ministry of Personnel must also call for a report on the issue
per annum. [Para 9.3]
Action Taken Reply
This Department is aware that the instructions being issued are being applied in the case
of Central Government civilian employee/posts in all Ministries/Departments on uniform basis.
In pursuance of these recommendations, the Department has collected the relevant
information regarding the status of compassionate appointment in the Ministries/Departments.
The Administrative Ministries are required to monitor the state of implementation of
compassionate appointment scheme under their jurisdiction and it is not feasible for DOP&T to
exercise centralized monitoring and control over the myriad policy guidelines being issued by the
Department from time-to-time.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee is constrained to know that the Department is not ready to accept the
responsibility of monitoring the implementation of the Policy of Appointment on Compassionate
Ground in various Ministries /Departments. Further, the Committee finds that merely collecting
the information in an ad-hoc manner regarding the Status of Compassionate Appointment in the
Ministries/Departments would not provide for an effective check thereon in this regard. Besides,
if the Department feels that the guidelines issued on this subject are too myriad to be effectively
monitored then why the efforts should not be made to evolve common standards binding on
various Ministries/Department/organizations regarding the Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground.
The Committee feels that policy challenges in this regard may be genuine but not
insurmountable if the efforts are continued in the right direction. Besides, the Committee
observes that information provided by the Department is not updated and covers the period only
till 31
st March, 2007, therefore not much helpful in deriving a concrete conclusion regarding the
subject in the present scenario.

10
However, on the basis of information provided by the Ministry the Committee finds that
the main reason behind the pendency regarding compassionate appointment cases is the non-
availability of vacancies under Compassionate Appointment Quota that is only five percent of the
regular vacancies. In this regard, the Committee feels that it would be difficult to reduce the
existing pendency as the regular vacancies meant for the purpose are too less in numbers. The
Committee, therefore, opines that special drives to reduce the existing pendency may be initiated
by the respective Ministries/Departments.

11
CHAPTER–IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation/observation
The Committee also feels that if the Government’s effort is to help the family of the
deceased employee then there must be a separate Cell in each of the Ministries or
Departments which will cater to only compassionate appointment cases. The cell should send
periodical information on number of vacancies, number of applications received, time taken
to dispose of the cases, reasons for not disposing favorably etc . to the head of the
Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should come forward
with certain new guidelines in addition to the one which is already in existence for the
benefit of the employees like creation of a separate Cell, proper monitoring of its
guidelines, gathering of information from the Ministries periodically, compliance report etc
[Para 9.4].
Action Taken Reply
Smaller Departments do not require a separate cell. It may be left to the Ministries to decide
whether there is a need for creation of a separate cell. A circular is being issued advising the
Ministries/Departments on these lines after completion of necessary formalities.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee appreciates that a circular regarding creation of separate cells in each
Departments/Ministries is being issued by the Government on the lines of recommendations of
the Committee. In fact, the raison d’etre behind this recommendation was to ensure the specific
attention of the respective Departments towards the issue of appointment on compassionate
ground. The Committee, therefore, feels that apart from issuing circulars there is need to
continuously prod the Ministries/ Department into ensuring their specific attention on the
abovementioned subject. In this context, the Committee would like to be apprised of the feed-
back of the Departments/Ministries over the issue of creation of the separate cell to cater to the
cases of compassionate appointment cases.
11

MINUTES

15
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 29 th July, 2010 in Room No. ‘63’, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Tiruchi Siva
4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
5. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Bhajan Lal
7. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
8. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
9. Shri S. Semmalai
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad
13. Shri Manish Tewari
14. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
15. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. The Chairperson made an obituary reference to the sad demise of Shri Virendra Bhatia, who
was the Member of the Committee. The Committee observed a minutes’ silence as a mark of
respect to the departed soul.

16
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted its draft 40 th and 41 st Reports on
(i)* * *; and (ii) Action T aken Replies of the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the 23 rd Report of the Committee on “Government’s
Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground” respectively. The Committee authorised Shri
Shantaram Laxman Naik and in his absence, Shri Tiruchi Siva to present both the reports in Rajya
Sabha and Shri Manish Tewari and in his absence, Shri Shailendra Kumar to lay the said reports
in Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 4
th August, 2010
4. * * *
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.40 P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.