Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY NINTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013
REPORT NO. 
69


Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

181
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY NINTH REPORT
The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L)-136

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (v)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—13
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 14—17
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 19—32
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 33 —169
A. The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 .......................................... 35—59
B. Comments of the Department of Personnel and Training of the views/
suggestions contained in Memoranda submitted by State Governments/
individuals/organisations/experts on the provisions of the Bill ................................ 60—169
8. A
PPENDIX ................................................................................................................................ 171—180
A List of Reports Presented by the Committee .......................................................... 173—180

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on  31 st August, 2013)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do
hereby present the Sixty-ninth Report on the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013
(Annexure-A). The Bill seeks to amend further the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill, as Introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
19
th August, 2013 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 23 rd August, 2013 for examination
and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communiqué
in national and local newspapers and dailies, to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/
organisations on the provisions of the Bill. In response thereto many memoranda containing suggestions
were received, from various organizations/individuals/experts, by the Committee. The views/suggestion
received by Committee in written memoranda along with comments of DoPT, Ministry of Personnel
Public Grievances and Pensions are at (Annexure-B).
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training,
Ministry of Personnel Public Grievances and Pensions on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting
held on the 13
th September, 2013. During its Study Visit to Chennai, Mumbai and Jaipur from 3 rd to
10th October, 2013 the Committee interacted with the representatives of State Governments of Tamil
Nadu, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, managements of Indian Bank, Chennai Port Trust and Neyveli Lignite
Corporation, Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd., Bank of Baroda, Shipping Corporation Ltd., State
Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, Instrumentation Ltd., Kota and Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Ltd.
and select NGOs, select Chambers of Commerce and Industry and other stakeholders on the Bill. The
Committee also heard the views of Central Vigilance Commissioner, Director, Central Bureau of
Investigation and Director, Enforcement of Directorate on the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment)
Bill, 2013 on the 3
rd January, 2014. The Committee also heard the views of stakeholders/NGOs in its
meeting held on 16 th January, 2014 in Delhi.
4.1 The Committee during its study visit to Kolkata and Guwahati from 21 st to 24 th January, 2014
interacted with State Governments of West Bengal and Assam, representatives of select Chambers of
Commerce and Industry and select NGOs working in the field of anti-corruption drive, managements
of UCO Bank, United Bank of India (UBI), Metal Scrap Trading Corporation Ltd., North-eastern
Development Finance Corporation Ltd. (NeDFi), Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Ltd. and
Food Corporation of India (FCI) etc. on the Bill.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it :–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Personnel and Training,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts and State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, West Bengal and Assam on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of
the Department of Personnel and Training thereon;

(iv)
(iii) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the
stakeholders such as Foundation for Democratic Reforms (FDR) and Lok Satta,
Hyderabad, Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India (BPNI), Member Prime Ministers’
Council on India’s Nutrition Challenges, Alliance against Conflict of Interests (AACI),
Delhi Society for Justice (Regd.), Punjab, Residents and Shopkeepers Welfare Society
(Regd.), Delhi and other individuals on 16
th January, 2014;
(iv) Replies of the Department of Personnel and Training and State Governments of Tamil
Nadu, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, West Bengal and Assam to the questionnaire of the
Committee on the Bill;
(v) Replies of Stakeholders to the questionnaire of the Committee on the Bill; and
(vi) Other research material/documents related to the Bill.
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 5
th February, 2014
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
5th February , 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
Magha 16, 1935 on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice

ACRONYMS
AACI : Alliance against Conflict of Interests
ACB : Anti Corruption Bureau
BPNI : Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India
CBI : Central Bureau of Investigation
CCTV : Close Circuit Television
CrPC : Code of Criminal Procedure
CVC : Central Vigilance Commission
CVO : Chief Vigilance Officer
DA : Disproportionate Asset
DOPT : Department of Personnel and Training
DSPE : Delhi Special Police Establishment
ED : Enforcement Directorate
FDR : Foundation for Democratic Reforms
FCI : Food Corporation of India
IO : Investigating Officer
ITR : Income Tax Return
MLA : Member of Legislative Assembly
MP : Member of Parliament
NeDFi : North-eastern Development Finance Corporation Ltd.
NGO : Non-Government Organisation
PC Act : Prevention of Corruption Act
PMLA : Prevention of Money Laundering Act
UBI : United Bank of India
U K : United Kingdom
UNCAC : United Nations Convention Against Corruption
USA : United States of America
USFCPA : US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
SFEMA : Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators Act
(v)

1
REPORT
The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 seeks to amend further the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 (PC Act), the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (DSPE Act) and
the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944 in order to achieve following objectives:–
● Widening of description of both demand and supply sides of corruption by providing
criminalization of
(i) bribe giving by any person/organization to public servant;
(ii) bribe taking by public servant by direct or indirect manner; and
(iii) corporate liability in bribe giving.
● Protection of honest public servants.
● Laying down of criteria and procedure for sanction of prosecution.
● Confiscation of proceeds of corruption.
2. The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill mentions that changes proposed to the
aforesaid Acts/Ordinance have been necessitated due to ratification of the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption (UNCAC) in May, 2011 by our country; and Judicial pronouncements in corruption
cases to fill in gaps in description and coverage of offence of bribery so as to bring it in line with
the current international practice.
Nature of Proposed Amendments
3. The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 proposes following changes in aforesaid
Acts/Ordinance to widen the description and coverage of offence of bribery in the line with current
international practice.
3.1 Substitution of following Sections of the PC Act, 1988 have been proposed:–
(i) Sections – 7, 8, 9 and 10 – (Clause 3 of the Bill)
(ii) Section – 12 – (Clause 5 of the Bill)
(iii) Section – 14 – (Clause 7 of the Bill)
(iv) Section – 20 – (Clause 11 of the Bill)
3.2 Amendment of following Sections is proposed in the PC Act, 1988:–
Section – 1 – (Clause 1 of the Bill)
Section – 5 – (Clause 2 of the Bill)
Section – 13 – (Clause 6 of the Bill)
Section – 15 – (Clause 8 of the Bill)
Section – 19 – (Clause 10 of the Bill)
3.3 Amendment is proposed to Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946
(Clause 14 of the Bill).

2
3.4 Insertion of a separate Chapter i.e. Chapter-IV-A captioned ‘Attachment and Forfeiture of
Property’ after Chapter-IV of the PC Act, 1988 on the lines of Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance,
1944 (Clause 9 of the Bill).
3.5 Deletion of following Sections of the PC Act, 1988:–
Section – 11 – (Clause 4 of the Bill)
Section – 24 – (Clause 12 of Bill)
3.6 Para 4A of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944 (Clause 13 of the Bill).
Salient Features of the Proposed Amendment
Offering of Bribe is an Offence
4.  No provision of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 deals with the supply side of
corruption directly. However, only Section 12 of that Act deals with supply side of corruption
indirectly through the route of abetment which provides minimum punishment of six months extendable
to five years of imprisonment with fine. But Section 24 of that Act provides that statement made by
the bribe giver in any proceedings against public servant for the crime of corruption (described under
Sections 7 to 11, 13 and 15 of the Act) shall not subject that person to prosecution. It is mentioned
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill that in vast majority of cases the bribe giver goes
scot free by taking resort to provisions of Section 24 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and
therefore it becomes increasingly difficult to tackle consensual bribery in particular. In order to plug
such deficiencies in the law, Section 8 of that Act has been substituted by introducing a new definition
of ‘bribe giving’ which is largely based on Section 1 of the UK Bribery Act, 2010 under Clause 3
of the Bill. Thus any person who now offers, promises or gives financial or other advantage to
another person (third party/intermediaries) or public servant to induce or reward the public servant to
perform improperly any public function or activity would constitute as on act of corruption. Even the
offering/giving or promising financial other advantage by the bribe giver itself constitutes ‘improper’
performance of relevant public function or activity’. It therefore implies that bribe giver can not give
any pecuniary or non-pecuniary advantage to public servant even in the case of proper function of
public function or activity. In simpler term any advantages given or provided to public servant even
without demand from the bribe taker could be considered as bribe as the public servant is supposed
not to take any thing other than legal remuneration for discharging his/her duty. The terms ‘illegal
gratification’ has been substituted by ‘financial or other advantage’ in proposed Sections 7, 8 and 9
of the Act which includes undue advantages of pecuniary and non-pecuniary nature including sexual
favour, membership of club, employment of close relatives/associates, etc.
5. The minimum punishment proposed for that offence is three years which is extendable to
seven years of imprisonment with fine. The punishment prescribed for bribe giver is equal to the
punishment prescribed for the bribe taker in corruption cases. At the same time the immunity provided
to the bribe giver for subsequent reporting during proceedings in the Court of law has been proposed
for abolition under Clause 12 of the Bill.
Widening of Description of Bribe Receiving by Public Servant and Enhanced Punishment
therefor
6. Demand side of corruption is now under Sections 7 to 11, 13 and 14 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act 1988 which were lifted from Sections 161 to 165 and 165A of Indian Penal Code, 1860
during amendment to PC Act way back in 1988. Public servant taking illegal gratification other than
legal remuneration for official act constitute offence of bribe taking under Sections 7 to 11, 13 and

3
14 of that Act is proposed to be modified on the lines of Section 2 of the UK Bribery Act, 2010.
The new provisions under proposed Section 7 of PC Act make it an offence for any public servant
to request, agree to receive or accept or attempt to obtain from any person any financial or other
advantage:–
(a) intending that, in consequence, a relevant public function or activity should be performed
improperly either by himself or by another public servant;
(b) where such request, agreement, acceptance or attempt itself constitutes the improper
performance of a relevant public function or activity.
The proposed Section defines ‘public function/activity’ and ‘improper function of public
function/activity’. Any function/activity in order to become public function must be of public nature
and performed in course of person’s employment and is performed impartially and in good faith. The
public function is construed to be performed improperly when it is performed in breach of ‘relevant
expectation’ Again test of ‘relevant expectation’ is what a reasonable person in our country expect in
relation to performance of public function/activity. In addition, failure to perform public function/
activity is itself a breach of relevant expectation. The enhanced punishment proposed for bribe taking
is minimum of three years extendable to seven years of imprisonment and fine in addition to
confiscation of proceeds of bribe from the disproportionate assets.
Corporate Liability in Bribe Giving to Public Servant
7. Under proposed new Section 9 of the Act (Clause 3 of Bill) it will be an offence for the
commercial organization if person associated with it bribes a public servant intending to obtain or
retain business for such organization; or to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of business
for it. But it shall be a defence for the commercial organization to prove that it had in place adequate
procedure designed to prevent person associated with it from undertaking such conduct of bribe
giving. The proposed new Section10 under Clause 3 of the Bill provides for punishment to any
Director, Manager, Secretary or any other officer of the commercial organization if it is proved that
the offence is committed with consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part
of that person for punishment of three years extendable to seven years of imprisonment with fine. But
if it is proved that the offence is committed without his/her knowledge or he/she has exercised all due
diligence to prevent commissioning of such offence the commercial organization may be liable to fine
proposed under new Section 9 coupled with proviso to proposed new Section 10 (1) of the Act under
Clause 3 of the Bill.
Enhanced Punishment for Habitual Commission of All Offences including New Offences Relating
to Bribe taking
8. The act of bribe giving is included in the offence in the PC Act which was earlier confined
to Section 8, 9 and 12 of the Act in restricted way. Furthermore punishment was two years extendable
to seven years of imprisonment with fine which has been proposed to three years extendable to ten
years of imprisonment with fine through Clause 7 of the Bill.
Protection to Honest Public Servant
9. The safeguard of prior sanction for prosecution provided under Section 19 of the Act to
protect public servant against malicious and vexatious prosecution for any bonafide omission or
commission in the discharge of official duty. The affording of such protection need to be based on
careful appraisal of the facts and the process of decision making involved. It is proposed to amend
the said Section for extending the same protection to public servant after they cease to hold public
office through Clause 10 of the Bill.

4
10. Section 6A of DSPE Act, 1946 also protects honest civil servant from harassment in
investigation/prosecution for things done in bonafide performance of public duty. It is proposed to
extend the protection of prior approval of the Central Government before conducting any inquiry/
investigation by Central Bureau of Investigation in respect of offences under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 to civil servant holding such senior policy level position even after they cease
to hold such position due to retirement, reversion, etc.
11. It is also proposed to amend Section 10 to provide inter-alia that no request can be made,
by a private person for the previous sanction of the appropriate Government or competent authority
unless such person has filed a complaint in a competent court; and the court has directed the
complainant to obtain the sanction for prosecution. In the case of a request from a private person,
the appropriate Government or competent authority shall not accord sanction without providing an
opportunity of being heard to the concerned public servant.
12. Any request for sanction for prosecution of a public servant will has to be decided by
appropriate Government/Competent Authority within three months extendable by one month where
consultation with Attorney General or Advocate General of State is necessary.
Confiscation of Proceeds of Corruption
13. The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 does not specifically provide for the confiscation of
the bribe and proceeds of bribery. It is now proposed through Clause 9 of the Bill to insert a new
Chapter, i.e., Chapter IV-A captioned ‘Punishment and Forfeiture of Property’ on the lines of the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944.
Other Consequential Amendments
14. Sub-Sections (2) and (3) of Section 20 of the PC Act have lost their relevance since bribe
giving has become an offence under the proposed new Section 8 of the Act and therefore are
proposed for deletion. Sub-Section (1) of Section 20 of the PC Act is proposed for amendment
to synchronize the said Section with new concept of ‘offer/acceptance of financial or other
advantage’ and ‘improper performance of relevant public function or duty’ taken from the UK
Bribery Act, 2010 in the case of prosecution of public servant accepting bribe. With insertion of
a new Chapter on Punishment and Forfeiture of Property in the PC Act, Schedule to the Criminal
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1944 and Section 5 of the PC Act, 1988 are proposed for suitable
modification.
15. Major Suggestions received and considered by the Committee on the Bill
A. Expansion of Description of Corruption
● The word ‘corruption’ and ‘corrupt practices’ need to be defined in the PC Act. The
corrupt practice inter-alia may include those policies of Government which are formulated
in the name of public good to give benefit to crony capitalists or vested interest groups.
● Inclusion of gross perversion of Constitution and democratic institutions amounting to
willful violation of oath of office, abuse of authority and making favoritism, obstruction
to justice and squandering of public money, within the definition of offence of corruption.
● Conflict of interest to be included in the definition of bribery.
● MPs, MLAs, although are public servant and have not been expressly included in the
definition Section of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Article 2(a) of UNCAC was
cited in this regard.

5
● Phases like ‘improper performance’ ‘relevant expectation’ ‘public function or activity’
‘test of what is expected’ are ambiguous and likely to be legally interpreted variedly.
● Consensual and harassed bribe givers need to be distinguished and should not be treated
on same footing as far as punishment concerned in the PC Act.
● Punishment in collusive bribery to be made double of other cases of bribery (Coercive
bribery).
● Burden of Proof on the accused in the case of collusive bribery.
● Immunity to bribe givers who is a victim of extortionary bribery on the line with plea
bargaining available to culprit in USA.
● Deletion of Section 24 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 would make laying of
traps difficult for catching bribe seekers/takers red handed. Retention of this Section is
suggested to provide protection to harassed bribe givers to approach investigating/
enforcement authorities for laying of traps.
● The Prevention of Corruption Act punishes public servant for abusing his official position
while performing his duty or otherwise whenever pecuniary advantage or valuable things
for himself or herself or any other person is accepted or sought. The condition of
obtaining pecuniary advantage or valuable thing by public servant for himself or any other
person in the discharge of his official duty which was removed from the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947 in 1964 through amendment is being brought back without any
proper explanation.
● Public servant who has received bribe under threat and subsequently report to investigating
agencies within reasonable time period may not be punishable under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988.
● Deletion of Section 11 of the Prevention Corruption Act about public servant obtaining
valuable things without consideration from persons concerned in proceeding or business
transacted by such public servant would also weaken the investigating procedure. There
is no need to differentiate between punishment proposed in the case of harassment
bribery or consensual bribery unless the bribe giver who is a victim approaches law
enforcement agencies and becomes a decoy in furtherance of cause of justice requiring
immunity against prosecution.
● Bribe given by the bribe giver in emergent compelling situation having no choice for the
bribe giver to save the life of another person particularly in hospital should be protected
when reported to police even though Section 24 of the Act has been proposed for deletion
under the Bill.
● Bribe given due to ignorance or illiteracy should not be subjected to equal punishment as
proposed for the bribe taker.
B. Confiscation and Forfeiture of Proceeds of Bribery
● For forfeiture of property of alleged corrupt public servant, prior approval of appropriate
Government may be transferred to the head of investigating agency.
● Deletion of Section 20 as proposed by the Bill about the presumption that illegal
gratification taken by the accused was taken as a motive or reward or without/insufficient
consideration will reduce the efficacy of anti-corruption measures, and should not be
deleted.

6
● Section 18G provides for offering of equivalent security in lieu of attachment of ill-gotten
property by the accused may force the accused to under value the attached property.
● Providing certain sum/interest from the attached property to the alleged public servant
for the maintenance of his/her family or meet litigation expenses as proposed under
Section 18H(1) will go against the spirit of the law.
● Section 18H(2) may be amended to the effect that immovable attached property may be
temporarily converted for public purpose like school, hospital, etc. The movable property
may be deposited in Government account.
● Investigating Officer (IO) of anti corruption agencies like CBI, Anti Corruption Bureau
(ACB) may be given power from the head of that investigating agency to attach the
property of the alleged accused public servant as has been given to officers of the
Enforcement Directorate under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act.
● In the Clause 6 of the Bill, regarding proposed Section 13(1)(b) the terms if the public
servants ‘intentionally enriches himself illicitly’ appears to have been taken from Article
20 of United Nations Convention Against Corruption which has been slightly tinkered
posing additional burden on the investigating agency.
● Provisions under Section13 (1)(d)(iii) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 has been
misused by investigating agencies and is exposed to potential misinterpretation leading to
prosecution of honest public servant. Therefore, the concerned Section needs to be
deleted in public interest.
● Forfeiture of property should not only of corrupt public servant but also of persons/
organization who indulge in bribe giving.
● Immediate implementation of The Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act, 1988 to give
more teeth to Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
● The Corrupt Public Servants (Forfeiture of Property) Bill as suggested in One Hundred
Sixty-sixth Report of Law Commission to be enacted to confiscate entire assets of
corrupt public servant not just proceeds of corruption.
● Mandatory declaration of business of spouse/children and relatives of the public servants
by the public servants by themselves to Government.
● There may be scope for harassing honest public servant by planting cash/valuables in the
office/residence of those officials of the rival party out of vengeance. Even the anti
corruption agencies might be used for such nefarious design by the rival party. Thus a
public servant who is not known as habitual bribe taker/demanding should not be
prosecuted without verification of assets of that person. Therefore, the focus might be
shifted from physically receiving/demanding bribe to physically acquiring/creating
disproportionate assets.
● Submission of asset declaration alongwith Income Tax Return (ITR) to Income Tax
Authorities annually by all tax payers including public servant.
● Public servants or their relatives as trustees of shrine, religious trust need to disclose the
same to the office in view of the fact that ‘Gupt Daan’  received by the trust lead to
increase of asset for the trust giving indirect benefit to the trustees. Suggestion has been
received to treat Gupt Daan  received more than Rs.1,000/- as bribe, therefore, need to
be discouraged and disclosed for the purpose of which CCTV , cameras may be placed
near the hundis to trap the bribe givers. Hundis of that trust may be opened in the
presence of Income Tax Authorities.

7
C. Sanction of Prosecution by Appropriate Government or Competent Authority
●  With sanction for prosecution of Government servants under Section 19 of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 sanction required under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 may be dispensed with or vice-versa.
● The Bill does not provide for action/punishment against sanctioning authority failing to
meet time line prescribed under Section 19 of proposed Bill for giving sanction of
prosecution.
● Special order spelling out reasons for denial for sanction for prosecution to be included
in Section 19 of the proposed Bill.
● Delay in grant of sanction of prosecution by appropriate Government or competent
authority beyond the maximum period of four months as proposed under Section 19 of
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 to be treated as ‘Deemed Sanction’.
● Material required to be placed before sanctioning authority need to be spelt out enabling
competent/sanctioning authority to grant/deny sanction of prosecution of allegedly corrupt
public servant in the speaking order for such grant or denial.
● Sanctioning authority meticulously examine issues and material placed before it before
giving sanction for prosecution so that prosecution is not hit in future by issues relating
to sanction not being proper or without a speaking order.
● Sanctioning authorities should not be summoned by the Court rather material/document
placed before him for sanctioning prosecution may be produced before the Court.
● Immunity and security to sanctioning authorities may be provided in the Act to exercise
their discretion appropriately when request received from Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI).
● Legislative backup to time limit prescribed by Supreme Court in Vineet Narain case for
granting sanction of prosecution by appropriate Government or Competent authority is
indeed a welcome measure.
● In accordance with Section 4(1) of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 the CVC
has superintendence over CBI in relation to offences under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988. Therefore the Central Government cannot usurp function of the CVC through
Section 6A of Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946.
● Further vire of Section 6A of Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 is now under
consideration of five Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court. It is suggested to keep
amendment to that section in abeyance till final verdict of Supreme Court in such cases
comes.
● Prior approval of Central Government under Section 6A of Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946 for conducting any inquiry or investigation by Central Bureau of
Investigation against civil servant holding senior policy level position even after they cease
to hold such position due to reversion or retirement or other reasons need to be removed.
● Transferring power of sanction for investigation by Central Bureau of Investigation to
Central Vigilance Commission from Central Government
● Delegation of sanction of prosecution to Empowered Committee comprising the Central
Vigilance Commission and Departmental Secretary to Government. In the case of sanction
against Secretary to Government, the Empowered Committee would comprise Cabinet

8
Secretary and Central Vigilance Commission. Similar arrangement may also be made at
State level. In case of refusal of sanction of prosecution reasons may be recorded and
placed before the respective legislature.
● Prior sanction need not be taken in the cases of trap and disproportionate asset.
● Retiring as well as serving public servant should be treated at par regarding sanction of
prosecution.
D. Corporate Liability in Corruption
● Providing commercial organization to put in place adequate procedure to prevent persons
of that organization to enter into corrupt practice can be used as an escape route under
the proposed Bill.
● Commercial organization found to have been indulging in the act of bribe giving may be
black listed and banned in addition to fine and imprisonment to the person concerned
associated with it.
E. Other Related Suggestions
● Special Judges designated under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (Section 4) to try
corruption cases on day-to-day basis should give primary attention for disposal of cases
in time bound manner. Fixing of time limit for each stages of trial, guidelines by higher
courts to preclude unwarranted adjournments and avoidable delays for expeditious trial of
such cases were suggested for expeditions trial of corruption related cases.
● Expeditious trial of corruption cases leading to confiscation of proceeds of bribery within
a period of three to six months as prolong trial proceedings often results in acquittal.
● Conclusion of trial of corruption cases by Special courts within a period of six months.
● Children/spouse of sitting judges in courts often gets extraordinary relief from their
brother/sister judges. Although judges are public servants instances are very rare where
people from judiciary have been prosecuted under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
● Compounding of offence under the PC Act, 1988 by the State on deposit of bribe money.
Section 320 of CRPC, 1973 was cited in that context.
● The proposed Bill exempt applicability of the Probation of Offender’s Act, 1958 and
Section 360 of Code of Criminal Procedure to all offences publishable under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 which was now applicable to offences under Section13 of that
Act.
● Designating a particular officer as in the case of UK who will apply his or her mind to
material for grant/rejection of sanction of prosecution and responsible for consequences
for malicious and vexatious prosecution based on sanction given by that authority.
● Investigation of corruption cases by subject matter experts rather than by career police
officials for increase in conviction rate as has been in practice in Hong Kong. Till then
officials of anti corruption agency found indulging in fabrication and tampering of
evidence against corrupt public servants and harassment to honest public servants might
be punished appropriately.
● Plea bargaining results in better conviction although with lesser punishment which is
prevalent in the US and UK. Introduction of ‘pre-trial inquiry’ along with ‘plea bargaining’

9
in corruption cases under the PC Amendment Act would increase in conviction rate of
cases and reduce huge expenses incurred on such cases.
● NGOs having substantially financed by Government to be tried under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988.
● Whistle blowers who provides information to and cooperate with Anti Corruption agencies
in the trap case may be rewarded with fifty per cent of value of the bribe demanded by
the public servant.
● While the Whistle blower Protection Law is under consideration of Parliament and meets
the obligation under Article 33 of UNCAC regarding whistle blowers, deletion of Section
24 of the Act giving immunity to bribe giver in harassment/coercive bribery is justified.
● Whistle blowers who report the act of corruption in any organization involving other
parties need to be protected. Pending legislation in this regard may be enacted to give
more teeth to the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Deliberations in the light of suggestions received together with Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee
Definition of ‘Corruption’ in the Prevention of Corruption Act
16. The word ‘corruption’ has not been defined in the Prevention of Corruption Act, rather acts
of bribery which constitute corruption have been defined separately in other Sections of the Act with
detailed explanations and illustrations. Those provisions of the Act comprehensively cover all aspects
of bribery stipulated under United Nation Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC) and the UK Bribery
Act, 2010
17. Many of the stake holders, who submitted their views, whether in writing or through personal
deposition, strongly felt that the word ‘corruption’ needs to be defined in the Act. A few Members
of the Committee also felt the same. It was felt that the words like ‘corruption’ or ‘corrupt practices’
be defined in the proposed Bill. Similarly many stakeholders felt that the phrases used in the Bill like
‘improper performance’, ‘relevant expectation’, ‘public function or the activity’ are ambiguous and the
absence of a precise definition of these expressions leaves a lot of scope judicial interpretation. They
felt that courts should not be given much scope to interpret the law, rather the law itself should be
drafted in such a way leaving a very minimal scope for interpretation.
18. When the clarification on these issues was sought from the administrative Ministry and the
Legislative Department, the Committee was apprised that the word ‘corruption’ had neither been
defined in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, nor in the Bill. The Chapter 3 of the PC Act, 1988,
provides for the offences and the penalties under the Act and while doing so, the expressions like
‘gratification other than legal remuneration’, ‘taking gratification by corrupt or illegal means’ ‘gratification
for exercise of personal influence’, ‘obtaining valuable thing without consideration’, etc. have been
used and described. The present Bill, while substituting the Sections- 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the PC
Act, provides for an elaborate description of the offences relating to public servant being bribed
{Section 7(1)}: it also describes the phrases ‘public function or activity’, ‘public function or activity
performed improperly’, ‘relevant expectation’ ‘position of trust’, etc. {Section 7(2)}, offence relating
to bribing of a public servant i.e. bribe giving (Sections 8 and 9) and holding person in charge of
commercial organization to be guilty of offence {Section 10} with a view to extensively cover the
offence relating to bribe under Clause 3 of the Bill. Even the United Nations Convention Against
Corruption (UNCAC) to which India is an original signatories does not define the word ‘corruption’
in the definition clause rather corrupt practices, offence related to bribery has been defined in many
clauses separately. The attempt of Government to explain the description of bribery by including the

10
‘act of bribe giving’ within its purview may reduce the scope of supply side of bribery to contain
and curb corruption. The Government felt that the Bill now adequately covers the offence and hold
a view that if a close definition is provided, it may provide scope for the offenders to take advantage
thereof.
19. The Committee acknowledges the effort made in the proposed Bill to provide for an
enlarged description of the offence both in regard to bribe giving and bribe taking. The
Committee also takes note of the concerns raised by the stake holders and some Members of
the Committee. The Committee desires that the Government should look into these concerns
of stakeholders and Members of the Committee for inclusion of definition of ‘Corruption’ and
‘Corrupt Practices’ and see what further can be done so as to achieve the objective of the Bill.
Bribe Giving—An Offence
20. The proposed amendment to the Prevention of Corruption Act prescribes equal enhanced
punishment to both bribe takers (public servants), bribe givers and intermediaries. The minimum
punishment now would be three years extendable to seven years of imprisonment with fine. The
immunity given to bribe giver under Section 24 of the PC Act, 1988, when reported the matter to
investigating agencies/court after the commission of crime by the bribe giver, is proposed to be done
away with. Many suggestions have been received for not treating the bribe givers in the case of
coercive corruption on the same footing with the bribe givers in consensual bribery and pleaded for
giving protection to them especially in the case of coercive bribery. Another suggestion was received
for reducing quantum of punishment to the bribe givers in the case of coercive bribery as compared
to bribe takers in view of the fact that the bribe is paid to get the service or the job for which he/
she has legitimate right in normal course of law to receive from the State. Even the investigating
agencies of some States have suggested to retain Section 24 of the PC Act so that bribe givers could
feel free to cooperate with Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB) for laying of traps to catch alleged corrupt
public servants for furtherance of cause of justice. The DOPT in their response to aforesaid
suggestions of State Governments as well as other stakeholders have submitted that the bribe giver
in the consensual bribery who is also equally beneficiary of the act of corruption, may resort to the
route of protection given under Section 24 to escape the liability, if protection were offered to the
bribe givers in coercive bribery. It would be difficult to curb corruption without checking the supply
side of corruption in both coercive as well as consensual bribery.
21. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee noted the apprehension raised by
various stakeholders that the line between the coercive bribery and the consensual bribery is
very thin. They cited umpteen number of instances where a coercive bribery case may be
turned into a case of consensual bribery so as to implicate the bribe giver under this Act.
22. It has inter-alia  been suggested that bribe given in compelling emergent situation
particularly in the case of hospitalization, protection may be provided to the bribe givers as he
is compelled to pay bribe to save the life of an individual. The Committee observes that the
person who reports the matter of corruption to the Anti Corruption Agencies prior to offering
bribe to the public servant has clear intention of not paying bribe and getting benefit out of
it. He/She is rather cooperating with Anti Corruption Agencies to help the State to curb the
demand of bribe by the public servant and also be a part of laying of traps etc. Such type of
individuals are although victim of bribe takers but help the State to curb corruption, therefore,
they need to be protected by the State. The Committee observes that the individuals who
report the matter to State after payment of bribery in normal circumstances need not be
protected whereas person who pays bribe in compelling emergent situation, the court may take
decision based upon facts and circumstances of the case which could be laid down in the Rules
by Government.

11
23. The Committee considers the above reference to be treated as illustration. The Committee
very strongly feels that coercive bribery occurring at any level need to be curbed. The
Committee accordingly suggests Government to consider for making necessary relevant provisions
in the respective laws, rules, regulations, instructions and guidelines to ensure that the
chances of coercive bribery are reduced to minimum.
24. The Committee understands that coercive bribery mostly takes place at the lower level
of administrative apparatus where services are delivered to the common man. It is reported
that bribe is demanded from the common man in the case of delivery of ration card, passport,
birth /death/ caste certificate, registration of property, plan approval for building, etc. The
Committee feels that ‘The Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services
and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011’, which is pending consideration of Parliament
needs to be enacted at the earliest which would address the concern of common man who are
forced to be bribe giver to get services from the State in time for which, he is otherwise
entitled to. In that law, the officer who is incharge of delivery of service would be liable in
the case of failure of delivery of service within time limit pr escribed by the S tate and would
be punishable with fine which could be extended to Rs.50,000/-. The Committee hopes that petty
corruption cases occurring at lower level of administrative apparatus of the State will be
reduced to considerable extent with the liability imposed on public servant in that law.
25. The Committee feels that the State Governments may also be urged to put in place
preventive measures such as putting Notice Board of ‘No To Bribery’ with telephone and email
address of Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) of the Department concerned and Vigilance Commission
at the point of delivery of service of lower administrative apparatus to create adequate
awareness amongst common man as well as help to inculcate the value of honesty amongst
the bribe givers in the case of coercive bribery.
26. Protection has been suggested to the whistleblowers in the case of disclosure of
corruption in public office where he is not a party under ‘The Whistle Blowers Protection Bill,
2011’ which is pending consideration of Parliament, may be enacted without any further delay
to encourage honest individual to report crime of corruption to the State or Lokpal/Lokayukta
for appropriate action and help to curb corruption in public offices.
Attachment and Forfeiture of Property in Disproportionate Asset case
27. The Committee understands that possession of assets disproportionate to known lawful
source of income of the public servant is a criminal misconduct under Section 13 of the PC Act,
1988. Under that Section, particularly (Section 13(1) (d) (iii), intention of the public servant was
not required in disproportionate assets cases which has been reportedly misused by the investigating
agencies. The proposed amendment to that Section has introduced the phrase ‘intentionally
enriching the public servant illicitly during the period of his/her office’ which is taken from
Article 20 of UNCAC. That amendment has introduced element of intention in the disproportionate
asset cases which would pose additional burden upon the anti-corruption agencies to prove in the
court of law. The Committee in this context, observes that the inability of the public servant to
reasonably explain the source of disproportionate asset in relation to his/her lawful income
should be sufficient ground for prosecution rather than questioning the intention of the public
servant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the element of ‘intention’ in the proposed
Section 13 of the PC Act may removed. The Committee appreciates insertion of a separate
chapter on ‘Attachment and Forfeiture of Property’ in the PC Act and endorses it.
Corporate Liability to Prevent Bribery
28. It was pointed out to the Committee by the Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT)

12
that the intersection where the corporate entity interacts with the public servants provides a fertile
ground for breeding corruption. The proposed Sections 8 and 9 of the PC Act under Clause 3 of the
Bill is based on broad contours of Section 7 of the UK Bribery Act, 2010, to provide for liability of
commercial entity for its failure to prevent act of bribe giving to public servant by any person (its
employee or agent or subsidiary) associated with it.
29. The Committee understands that an entity whether incorporated in India or incorporated
outside but having business in India, partnership firm, association of persons, formed to carry
business or trade, and provide services including charitable service would now be liable to
prevent corruption by any individual associated with it with exercise of due diligence and also
putting in place adequate procedure preventing such individuals associated with it to indulge
in act of bribe giving. The punishment provided to person associated with corporate entity
indulged in bribe giving to public servant is same as prescribed to any other bribe giver as well
as takers i.e. minimum of three years extendable to seven years of imprisonment with fine.
The same quantum of punishment is also extendable under the proposed Section 10 of PC Act
to the incharge of commercial entity i.e. Director, Manager, Secretary etc., when it is proved
that such offence of bribe giving to public servant is committed by any person associated with
it with consent/connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of incharge of that
entity to prevent such conduct of the individual associated with it. However, commercial entity
is punishable with fine as proposed under proposed Section 9(1) of the PC Act.
30. The Committee notices differentiation in punishment to commercial entity and persons
associated with it. Punishment is prescribed for persons associated with the commercial entity
who indulge in act of bribe giving to public servant and delinquent incharge of that entity
under the Bill in proposed Section 10(1) and (2) of PC Act, respectively. While the punishment
prescribed for commercial organization is a civil liability (fine only) under proposed Section 9
(i) and punishment prescribed under Section 10(1) and (2) is imprisonment of three years
extendable to seven years with fine which is similar to punishment prescribed for other bribe
givers and by bribe takers (public servant) under the clause 3 of the Bill. The punishment for
‘vicarious liability’ to the commercial organization is fine whereas to incharge of that organization
is imprisonment with fine. The Committee desires that the punishment prescribed for commercial
organization should be in addition to the punishment prescribed to individual/associated with
it and in-charge of the commercial organization.
Previous Sanction of Competent Authority for prosecution of Public Servant
31. Previous sanction of appropriate Government or competent authority for prosecution exists in
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 as well as the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
32. Previous sanction is a condition precedent for taking cognizance of offences in relation to
crime of corruption punishable under Sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 of the said Act by the Court under
Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Previous sanction of Central Government and
State Government in the case of serving Central and State Government employees, respectively, is
required for the court. For other category of public servants (MP/MLA), previous sanction of the
appropriate authority competent to remove that person from the public office is required.
33. Section 197 of The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 also provides for previous sanction of
appropriate Government or competent authority for any other cases of offence committed by a Judge/
Magistrate/Public Servant while discharging his/her duty.
34. Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 even requires prior permission
of Central Government before launching investigation against senior officers of union Government at
policy making level (Joint Secretary and above) by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).

13
35. The Committee notes the scope of prior sanction of appropriate authority in aforesaid
three separate laws. Previous sanction of appropriate Government or competent authority is to
be sought under Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 for corruption related
cases whereas previous sanction of appropriate authority is to be sought for any sort of offences
committed by public servants while discharging their official duty under Section 197 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Amendment proposed to Section 19 of The Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 through Clause 10 of the Bill is to extend the protection of previous sanction already
available to serving public servant to honest public servants after their retirement or demitting
public office in order to protect them from frivolous, vexatious even malicious prosecution. In
the corruption cases referred to Lok Pal, prior sanction of appropriate Government or competent
authority is dispensed with. In nut-shell in prima facie  crime unrelated to official duty no prior
sanction of prosecution is required whereas corruption related cases even related to official duty
no prior-sanction of appropriate authority is required while the case is monitored by the Lok Pal.
Cases not monitored by Lok Pal prior sanction for serving as well retired public servants would
remain with the appropriate Government/Competent Authority.
36. The Committee is in agreement with the provisions of the Bill extending the protection
to the honest public servant who ceased to be Government servant for the bonafide omission/
commission during their term in office.
37. The definition of ‘public servant’ under Section 2(c) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 inter-alia includes serving Government servant only. Similarly, the protection of
sanction for prosecution by appropriate Government is available to serving Government servant
only under Section 19 of the Act which is now proposed to be extended to retired Government
servants under the Bill. The proposed amendment to Section 19 of the Act requires consequential
changes in the definition of ‘public servant’ as mentioned in the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The Committee desires that necessary amendment/clarification in Section 2 of the PC Act may
be made to give effect to proposed amendment to Section 19 to extend protection of sanction
for prosecution to the retired Government servant in addition to serving Government servant.
Punishment for Habitual Commission of Offence under PC Act
38. The Committee would point out that the minimum punishment for habitual offenders
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 is five years of imprisonment under the Lokpal
and Lokayukta Act, 2013 and three years of imprisonment in the proposed Bill but the
maximum punishment in both legislation is ten years of imprisonment. While the enhancing
punishment for habitual offenders under the Bill, the Ministry of Personnel enhanced the
minimum punishment from two years to three years of imprisonment which may result in
inconsistency with the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act, 2013. The Committee would like the
Ministry to synchronize the minimum punishment for habitual offenders under the Prevention
of Corruption Act and the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act, 2013 by enhancing it from three years
to five years of imprisonment extendable to ten years in the proposed legislation to remove
existing incongruity in the law.
Expeditious Trial of Corruption Cases
39. Section 4 of the Prevention Corruption Act, 1988 provides that corruption cases to be
tried on day to day basis by special judges. Experience show that corruption cases are hardly
tried on expeditious basis and thereby leading to poor conviction rate. Fixing of a time limit
for each stages of trial, guidelines by higher courts to preclude unwarranted adjournments and
avoidable delays for expeditious trial of such cases were suggested for expeditions trial of
corruption related cases. The Committee recommends that the time line for trial of corruption
cases be prescribed as provided for in Lokpal and Lakayukta referred cases.

14
14
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee acknowledges the effort made in the proposed Bill to provide for an
enlarged description of the offence both in regard to bribe giving and bribe taking. The
Committee also takes note of the concerns raised by the stake holders and some Members of
the Committee. The Committee desires that the Government should look into these concerns
of stakeholders and Members of the Committee for inclusion of definition of ‘Corruption’ and
‘Corrupt Practices’ and see what further can be done so as to achieve the objective of the Bill.
 (Para 19)
Bribe Giving—An Offence
2. In the course of its deliberations, the Committee noted the apprehension raised by
various stakeholders that the line between the coercive bribery and the consensual bribery is
very thin. They cited umpteen number of instances where a coercive bribery case may be
turned into a case of consensual bribery so as to implicate the bribe giver under this Act.
(Para 21)
3. It has inter-alia  been suggested that bribe given in compelling emergent situation
particularly in the case of hospitalization, protection may be provided to the bribe givers as he
is compelled to pay bribe to save the life of an individual. The Committee observes that the
person who reports the matter of corruption to the Anti Corruption Agencies prior to offering
bribe to the public servant has clear intention of not paying bribe and getting benefit out of
it. He/She is rather cooperating with Anti Corruption Agencies to help the State to curb the
demand of bribe by the public servant and also be a part of laying of traps etc. Such type of
individuals are although victim of bribe takers but help the State to curb corruption, therefore,
they need to be protected by the State. The Committee observes that the individuals who
report the matter to State after payment of bribery in normal circumstances need not be
protected whereas person who pays bribe in compelling emergent situation, the court may take
decision based upon facts and circumstances of the case which could be laid down in the Rules
by Government. (Para 22)
4. The Committee considers the above reference to be treated as illustration. The Committee
very strongly feels that coercive bribery occurring at any level need to be curbed. The
Committee accordingly suggests Government to consider for making necessary relevant provisions
in the respective laws, rules, regulations, instructions and guidelines to ensure that the
chances of coercive bribery are reduced to minimum. (Para 23)
5. The Committee understands that coercive bribery mostly takes place at the lower level
of administrative apparatus where services are delivered to the common man. It is reported
that bribe is demanded from the common man in the case of delivery of ration card, passport,
birth /death/ caste certificate, registration of property, plan approval for building, etc. The
Committee feels that ‘The Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services
and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011’, which is pending consideration of Parliament
needs to be enacted at the earliest which would address the concern of common man who are
forced to be bribe giver to get services from the State in time for which, he is otherwise
entitled to. In that law, the officer who is incharge of delivery of service would be liable in
the case of failure of delivery of service within time limit prescribed by the State and would

15
be punishable with fine which could be extended to Rs. 50,000/-. The Committee hopes that
petty corruption cases occurring at lower level of administrative apparatus of the State will be
reduced to considerable extent with the liability imposed on public servant in that law.
(Para 24)
6. The Committee feels that the State Governments may also be urged to put in place
preventive measures such as putting Notice Board of ‘No To Bribery’ with telephone and email
address of Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) of the Department concerned and Vigilance Commission
at the point of delivery of service of lower administrative apparatus to create adequate
awareness amongst common man as well as help to inculcate the value of honesty amongst
the bribe givers in the case of coercive bribery. (Para 25)
7. Protection has been suggested to the whistleblowers in the case of disclosure of
corruption in public office where he is not a party under ‘The whistle Blowers Protection
Bill, 2011’ which is pending consideration of Parliament, may be enacted without any further
delay to encourage honest individual to report crime of corruption to the State or Lokpal/
Lokayukta for appropriate action and help to curb corruption in public offices.  (Para 26)
Attachment and Forfeiture of Property in Disproportionate Asset case
8. The Committee understands that possession of assets disproportionate to known lawful
source of income of the public servant is a criminal misconduct under Section 13 of the PC
Act, 1988. Under that Section, particularly (Section 13(1) (d) (iii), intention of the public
servant was not required in disproportionate assets cases which has been reportedly misused
by the investigating agencies. The proposed amendment to that Section has introduced the
phrase ‘intentionally enriching the public servant illicitly during the period of his/her office’
which is taken from Article 20 of UNCAC. That amendment has introduced element of
intention in the disproportionate asset cases which would pose additional burden upon the anti-
corruption agencies to prove in the court of law. The Committee in this context, observes that
the inability of the public servant to reasonably explain the source of disproportionate asset
in relation to his/her lawful income should be sufficient ground for prosecution rather than
questioning the intention of the public servant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the element of ‘intention’ in the proposed Section 13 of the PC Act may removed. The
committee appreciates insertion of a separate chapter on ‘Attachment and Forfeiture of
Property’ in the PC Act and endorses it. (Para 27)
Corporate Liability to Prevent Bribery
9. The Committee understands that an entity whether incorporated in India or incorporated
outside but having business in India, partnership firm, association of persons, formed to carry
business or trade, and provide services including charitable service would now be liable to
prevent corruption by any individual associated with it with exercise of due diligence and also
putting in place adequate procedure preventing such individuals associated with it to indulge
in act of bribe giving. The punishment provided to person associated with corporate entity
indulged in bribe giving to public servant is same as prescribed to any other bribe giver as well
as takers i.e. minimum of three years extendable to seven years of imprisonment with fine.
The same quantum of punishment is also extendable under the proposed Section 10 of PC Act
to the incharge of commercial entity i.e. Director, Manager, Secretary etc., when it is proved
that such offence of bribe giving to public servant is committed by any person associated with
it with consent/connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of incharge of that

16
entity to prevent such conduct of the individual associated with it. However, commercial entity
is punishable with fine as proposed under proposed Section 9(1) of the PC Act.  (Para 29)
10. The Committee notices differentiation in punishment to commercial entity and persons
associated with it. Punishment is prescribed for persons associated with the commercial entity
who indulge in act of bribe giving to public servant and delinquent incharge of that entity
under the Bill in proposed Section 10(1) and (2) of PC Act, respectively. While the punishment
prescribed for commercial organization is a civil liability (fine only) under proposed Section 9
(i) and punishment prescribed under Section 10(1) and (2) is imprisonment of three years
extendable to seven years with fine which is similar to punishment prescribed for other bribe
givers and by bribe takers (public servant) under the clause 3 of the Bill. The punishment for
‘vicarious liability’ to the commercial organization is fine whereas to incharge of that organization
is imprisonment with fine. The Committee desires that the punishment prescribed for commercial
organization should be in addition to the punishment prescribed to individual/associated with
it and in-charge of the commercial organization. (Para 30)
Previous Sanction of Competent Authority for Prosecution of Public Servant
11. The Committee notes the scope of prior sanction of appropriate authority in aforesaid
three separate laws. Previous sanction of appropriate Government or competent authority is to
be sought under Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 for corruption related
cases whereas previous sanction of appropriate authority is to be sought for any sort of
offences committed by public servants while discharging their official duty under Section 197
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Amendment proposed to Section 19 of The Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 through Clause 10 of the Bill is to extend the protection of previous
sanction already available to serving public servant to honest public servants after their
retirement or demitting public office in order to protect them from frivolous, vexatious even
malicious prosecution. In the corruption cases referred to Lok Pal, prior sanction of appropriate
Government or competent authority is dispensed with. In nut-shell in prima facie  crime
unrelated to official duty no prior sanction of prosecution is required whereas corruption
related cases even related to official duty no prior-sanction of appropriate authority is required
while the case is monitored by the Lok Pal. Cases not monitored by Lok Pal prior sanction
for serving as well retired public servants would remain with the appropriate Government/
Competent Authority. (Para 35)
11. The Committee is in agreement with the provisions of the Bill extending the protection
to the honest public servant who ceased to be Government servant for the bonafide omission/
commission during their term in office. (Para 36)
12. The definition of ‘public servant’ under Section 2(c) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 inter-alia includes serving Government servant only. Similarly, the protection of
sanction for prosecution by appropriate Government is available to serving Government servant
only under Section 19 of the Act which is now proposed to be extended to retired Government
servants under the Bill. The proposed amendment to Section 19 of the Act requires consequential
changes in the definition of ‘public servant’ as mentioned in the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The Committee desires that necessary amendment/clarification in Section 2 of the PC Act may
be made to give effect to proposed amendment to Section 19 to extend protection of sanction
for prosecution to the retired Government servant in addition to serving Government servant.
(Para 37)
Punishment for Habitual Commission of Offence under PC Act
13. The Committee would point out that the minimum punishment for habitual offenders

17
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 is five years of imprisonment under the Lokpal
and Lakayukta Act, 2013 and three years of imprisonment in the proposed Bill but the
maximum punishment in both legislation is ten years of imprisonment. While the enhancing
punishment for habitual offenders under the Bill, the Ministry of Personnel enhanced the
minimum punishment from two years to three years of imprisonment which may result in
inconsistency with the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. The Committee would like the
Ministry to synchronize the minimum punishment for habitual offenders under the Prevention
of Corruption Act and the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act, 2013 by enhancing it from three years
to five years of imprisonment extendable to ten years in the proposed legislation to remove
existing incongruity in the law. (Para 38)
Expeditious Trial of Corruption Cases
14. Section 4 of the Prevention Corruption Act, 1988 provides that corruption cases to be
tried on day to day basis by special judges. Experience show that corruption cases are hardly
tried on expeditious basis and thereby leading to poor conviction rate. Fixing of a time limit
for each stages of trial, guidelines by higher courts to preclude unwarranted adjournments and
avoidable delays for expeditious trial of such cases were suggested for expeditions trial of
corruption related cases. The Committee recommends that the time line for trial of corruption
cases be prescribed as provided for in Lokpal and Lakayukta referred cases. (Para 39)

MINUTES

21
I
FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 13 th September, 2013 in Committee Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Parimal Nathwani
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri T. R. Baalu
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri Arjun Meghwal
11. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
12. Shri S. Semmalai
13. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
14. Shrimati Meena Singh
15. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
16. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
I. Representatives of Department of Personnel and Training (Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions)
1. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Secretary
2. Shri Jai P. Prakash, Additional Secretary (S&V)
3. Ms. Deepti Umashanker, Joint Secretary (S&V-2)

22
II. Representatives of Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice)
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri Udaya Kumar, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel
4. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. The Chairman extended a hearty welcome to the Members of the Committee on their being
nominated to the Committee and hoped that the Committee would be immensely benefited from their
wide experience while transacting its business during its current tenure. He then welcomed all of them
to the first sitting of the newly constituted Committee. Thereafter, he appraised the Members of the
Subjects/Bills pending with the Committee
3. Before the presentation of Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, the Committee
reviewed the status of the pending subjects/Bills. The Committee then decided to undertake a visit to
Chennai, Mumbai and Jaipur from 3
rd to 10 th October, 2013 in connection with the Bills and subjects
being examined the Committee. The Committee, accordingly, authorized the Chairman to seek necessary
permission of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for undertaking the said study visit.
4. * * *
The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013
5.0 The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, the representatives
of the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) and other officers of these Departments
to the meeting of the Committee and requested them to make a presentation, inter-alia, clarifying the
various provisions in the Bill.
5.1 Initiating his presentation on the Bill, the Secretary gave the background for bringing the Bill.
He stated that initially, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 was enacted to tackle corruption . This
Act was amended twice through the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 and Anti-Corruption Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1964 (based on Santhanam Committee recommendations). In 1988, the Prevention
of Corruption Act was enacted in order to incorporate all provisions in one place and make the anti-
corruption laws more effective, by widening the coverage and by strengthening some provisions of
the earlier Act.
5.2 The Secretary further informed that in May 2011, India ratified the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption (UNCAC), which is the sole global, legally binding anti-corruption instrument. With
the ratification of the Convention, the obligations under the Convention have become binding on India
with effect from June, 2011, i.e., one month from the date of ratification and it is required to conform
to the requirements of the Convention.
5.3 He further informed the Committee that the present Bill seeks to provide a clear and
unambiguous definition for the term ‘corruption’ providing for criminalisation of bribe giving, bribe
receiving by a public servant, either directly or indirectly and Corporate responsibility in bribe giving.
It also seeks to provide for the protection of honest public servants, lays down clear criteria and
procedure for sanction of prosecution and confiscation of proceeds of corruption.
5.4 Highlighting the salient features of the proposed amendments, the Secretary stated that offering
of bribe has been made an offence in the proposed Bill. At present, Section 12 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 (PC Act) seeks to cover the act of bribe-giving only indirectly through the
‘abetment’ route, while Section 24 provides that a statement made by a bribe-giver in any proceeding
against a public servant under Sections 7 to 11, 13 and 15 of the Act shall not subject him to
*** Relates to some other matter.

23
prosecution under section 12. Therefore, a new definition of the offence of giving bribe, based on
section 1 of the UK Bribery Act is being inserted in the Act and the provisions of the UNCAC.
5.5 The Secretary further clarified that the proposed new amendment (Clause 8) would criminalise
the offering, promising or giving of financial or other advantage to another person with the intention
of inducing a public servant to perform improperly, a relevant public function or activity and would
also criminalise the offer, promise or giving of a financial or other advantage to a public servant, with
the knowledge that the acceptance of such advantage itself constitutes improper performance of a
relevant public function.
5.6 He also informed the Committee that the existing definition of the offence under section 7 of
the Prevention of Corruption Act is also proposed to be modified on the lines of Section 2 of the UK
Bribery Act in order to bring it in line with international practice. The new provision would make it
an offence for any public servant to request, agree to receive or accept or attempt to obtain from
any person, any financial or other advantage.
5.7 The Secretary also stated that Sections 9 and 10 are to be added to the Prevention of
Corruption Act to make corporate entities responsible, for acts of bribery committed by employees/
associates of a corporate. Under the proposed new Sections, it will be an offence for a commercial
organisation if a person associated with it bribes a public servant, intending to obtain or retain business
for such organisation or to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of business for it. Further,
he added that it shall be a defence for the concerned commercial organisation to prove that it had in
place, adequate procedures designed to prevent persons associated with it, from undertaking such
conduct.
5.8 The Secretary also added that it is proposed to amend Section 19 of the PC Act, for extending
the protection of prior sanction to public servants, after they cease to hold office.
5.9 Some queries were raised by Members regarding the various provisions of the Bill, and the
same were clarified by the Secretary.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.

XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 3 rd January, 2014 in Committee Room No ‘D’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
4. Shri T.R. Baalu
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri N.V .S. Chitthan
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Arjun Meghwal
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
II. LIST OF WITNESSES
Central Bureau of Investigation
1. Shri Ranjit Sinha, Director
2. Shri Javeed Ahmad, Joint Director
3. Shri Prabodh Kumar, Joint Director
4. Shri Ashok Tewari, Joint Director
5. Sanjay Kumar Singh, DIG
Directorate of Enforcement
1. Dr. Rajan Katoch, Director
2. Shri Balesh Kumar, Special Director
3. Dr. Shamsuddin, Addl. Director
24

Central Vigilance Commission
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar, Central Vigilance Commissioner
2. Shri K D Tripathi, Secretary
3. Shri Salim Haque, Addl. Secretary
4. Shri K. Subramaniam, Director
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension (Department of Personnel and
Training)
1. Shri Jai P. Prakash, Add. Secy.
2. Ms. Deepti Umashankar, Joint Secy.
2. The Chairman welcomed Shri Ranjit Sinha, Director, Central Bureau of Investigation,
Shri Rajan Katoch, Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Shri Pradeep Kumar, Central Viglance
Commissioner, Central Viglance Commission and Shri Jai P. Prakash, Additional Secretary, Department
of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and other senior
officers of all the Departments. Thereafter, he requested Shri Ranjit Sinha to offer his views on the
provisions of the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013, and desired that other witnesses
may follow.
3. Shri Ranjit Sinha welcomed the spirit and the objective of the Bill and opined that India must
align itself with the international best practices and meet the obligation under the United Nations
Convention against Corruption which it has signed. He opined that the proposed Bill which has been
drafted on the lines of the UK Bribery Act, 2010 has slight deviation from the UK Act as it has
restricted its jurisdiction to only public servants. As a result, the culpability of the middlemen involved
in corruption with or without the connivance of the public servants has not been addressed in its
entirety in the proposed amendment Bill. He said that words like “relevant expectations” and “improper
function” have been defined very broadly, which can be interpreted differently by different persons.
Therefore, these word needs to be defined clearly so that the scope of miscarriage of justice is
reduced to the minimum and the intent of the legislation is not nullified either by the investigating
agency or by the court of law.
4. He also opined that the proposed Bill has omitted Section 11 of the existing Prevention of
Corruption Act, i.e., offence by public servant by taking illegal gratification or obtaining valuable
things. He stated the experience of the Department that such instances of obtaining valuable things by
a public servant has been on the rise especially with the opening of the economy under liberalized
regime in the country. Therefore, he suggested that either spirit of Section 11 of the original Act or
similar provisions may be incorporated in the proposed amendment version of the Bill. He felt that the
word “adequate procedure” to deal with the offence committed by commercial organizations by
offering, promising or giving a financial or other advantage to a public servant is not clear and
suggested some guidelines to be followed by commercial organizations should be framed and should
be put in place in the proposed amendment version of legislation.
5. The witness pointed out that the Bill proposes major changes in Section 13 of the present
Prevention of Corruption Act that deals with the criminal misconduct by a public servant. He felt that
the use of the words “intentionally enriches” in this provision appear to be flawed as it is impossible
to prove that a person has enriched himself unintentionally as nobody enriches himself unintentionally.
He further opined that the present Act provides immunity to a person who does not want to become
a party to corrupt act by providing him immunity under Section 24. In the proposed amendment Bill,
the element of immunity has been taken away by omitting this Section, which would create very
ambiguous situation for the CBI to get a complainant and to lay a trap to nab the offender and
also discourage the right-thinking citizens from cooperating with the law-enforcement agencies. He,
therefore, urged for the restoration of immunity aspect in the amendment proposal possibly by
amending Section 8 in the amendment version.

26
6. The Bill is extended to public servants even after they cease to be public servants or after they
cease to hold sensitive policy level positions. The protection under 6A of Delhi Special Police
Establishment (DSPE) Act, i.e., “permission before enquiry against JS level officers and above” and
under Section 19 of the principal version of the Prevention of Corruption Act, i.e., “need for sanction
for prosecution against a public servant before the Court takes cognizance” is now being extended to
public servant even after they cease to be public servant or they cease to hold policy level position.
He suggested that there should be some time limit of 90 days or so. Finally, he also opined that elected
representatives may be brought within the ambit of the definition of public servant, thereby giving
statutory status to the Supreme Court judgments which already held that the elected representatives
come within the purview of definition of the ‘public servant’.
7. Shri Rajan Katoch, Director ED welcomed the proposed amendments and anticipates strengthening
the anti-corruption legal framework in the country by such amendments. He opined that the proposals
on amendment of the substantive provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act would help in
targeting offences better and enable the provisions of the Act to be more comprehensive and well
defined. He pointed out that there are 156 offences and 28 Acts listed as scheduled offences in the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 and one of these 28 Acts is the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988. Paragraph 8 of the schedule of the PMLA lists sections 7, 8, 9, 10 and 13 of
the principal version of Prevention of Corruption Act as the scheduled offences under the PMLA,
which restricts the jurisdiction of ED would be only in cases of offences registered under these
sections.
8. The witness stated that the limited experience of ED is that the PMLA has proved to be an
effective weapon against the corrupt and those laundering the proceeds of corruption. He felt that the
introduction of Chapter IV-A through the proposed Amendment Bill would enable attachment of
proceeds of crime to be initiated by the relevant police authorities of both the Central and the State
Governments within the Act. Shri Katoch further explained before the Committee that ED has
registered 411 cases under the PMLA and 55 provisional attachment orders involving a value of
Rs.1991 crore have been made by ED. He further stated that 42 orders have been confirmed by the
adjudicating authority, which is a quasi-judicial body. However on the whole, ED Director welcomed
the proposed amendment legislation as it would, in his opinion, strengthen the anti-corruption legal
framework in the country.
9. Shri Pradeep Kumar, CVC opined that the  Commission broadly support the provisions that have
been brought about in the proposed amendment version of the Bill. He opined that the proposed legislation
has enlarged the scope and simplified the provisions in the context of present national and international
scenario of anti-corruption efforts. The witness assigned the non-inclusion of active bribery as one of
the deficiencies of the principal Act. He further submitted before the Committee that CVC support the
draft Section 8, 9 and 10. However he pointed out that fines in this Bill has not been defined and he
is afraid of the fact that due to the missing definition of fine, the corporate sector may get away by
paying very small fine in the absence of proper guidance or methodology for determining the extent of
fines. At this point, he referred to the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (USFCPA) wherein specific
guidelines have been laid down about fines and for habitual offender the quantum of fine goes up. He
therefore urged before the Committee that some guidelines should be framed so that adequate fines could
be defined within the framework of Act so that people cannot get away by paying small fine after doing
very serious offence. He also pointed out that quantum of punishment in terms of number of years for
habitual offenders varies between PC Act and Lokpal Act which needs to be reconciled in order to
remove the element of incongruity in these Act. He also submitted before the Committee that new chapter
on forfeiture of properties is based on CrPC, 1944 which should be studied in depth to make the process
of forfeiture more smoother. CVC is also of the opinion that if anybody comes to CVC just to inform
that he has been asked pay a bribe and request to lay a trap to nab the offender there should be sufficient
provision for not prosecuting informer in such cases.

27
10. Expressing his views on the permission of prior sanction under Section 6A and Section 19 to
prosecute retired public servants, the witness suggested that some protection is required for public
servant when they are doing certain duties. CVC further pointed out that in a recent Supreme Court
Judgement it was observed that 6A sanction is not required for senior officers which necessarily limit
the application of Section 6A which needs reframing and the same could be considered by the
Committee. He also pointed out that a provision for definite time frame for disposal of corruption
cases by special courts need to be incorporated in the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill.
11. Some members of the Committee put further questions to clarify certain issues in connection
with Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill which were satisfactorily answered by all the three
witnesses, viz. Director, CBI, CVC and Director ED.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
15. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

28
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 16 th January, 2014 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Ram Jethmalani
2. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Arjun Meghwal
7. Shri Pinaki Misra
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubhu
11. Shri S. Semmalai
12. Shrimati Meena Singh
13. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
14. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
15. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013
A. NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. Foundation for Democratic Reforms (FDR) and Lok Satta, Hyderabad
1. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan
2. Shri Siddharth Panwar, Secretary, Lok Satta Delhi
3. Mr. Hemant Chandak, Lok Satta Delhi
4. Shri Rajesh Jogani, General Secretary, Lok Satta Maharashtra
5. Shri Bhavik Kothari, Lok Satta Maharashtra
28

29
6. Shri Chitranshu Mathur, Lok Satta, Mumbai
7. Shri Udit Khanna, Lok Satta, Thane
8. Shri Shunmuga Anandam, Lok Satta, Tamil Nadu
9. Shri Vignesh Nandha Kumar, Lok Satta, Tamil Nadu
10. Ms. Ankita Verma
II. Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India (BPNI); Member Prime Ministers’ Council
on India’s Nutrition Challenges; Alliance against Conflict of Interests (AACI), New
Delhi
1. Dr. Arun Gupta, Convener, AACI;
2. Dr. J.P. Dadhich, National Coordinator, BPNI; and
3. Shri P. K. Sudhir, Coordinator, BPNI.
III. Soceity for Justice (Regd.), Patiala, Punjab:
1. Er. Amar Singh, President; and
2. Prof. P. C. Sachdeva General Secretary.
IV. Residents and Shopkeepers Welfare Soceity (Regd.), Krishna Market Pahar Ganj,
New Delhi
Shri Gurdip Singh, President.
V. Shri Rajinder Kumar Goyal, Kapurthala, Punjab
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pernsions:
Department of Personnel and Training:
1. Ms. Deepti Umashankar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri V .M. Rathnam, Deputy Secretary
** *
The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013
2 Chairman welcomed Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan of Foundation for Democratice Reforms and
Lok Satta, Hyderabad; Dr. Arun Gupta, Convener, AACI; Er. Amar Singh, President of Society for
Justice, Punjab; Shri Gurdip Singh, President of Residents & Shopkeepers Welfare Society, New Delhi
and Ms. Deepti Umashankar, Joint Secretary, Department Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions and other senior officers present to this meeting of the Committee.
After concluding his opening speech, Chairman requested Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan to offer his views
on various provisions of the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 earlier referred to the
Committee for examination and report and desired that other witnesses may follow thereafter.
3. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, after welcoming the spirit and objective of the Bill, referred to clause
5 of the Bill and mentioned that said clause is about procedure and power of the judge and under the
said clause a special judge can exercise all powers of function of a District Judge as permitted under
Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944. He, however, mentioned that enormous amount of delay
by courts in dealing with corruption cases is a serious problem which should be considered seriously
by Committee by imposing a time limit to dispose of various cases and suitable provision should be
suggested for inclusion in the Bill for framing time limit for disposal of corruption cases by courts.
*** Relates to some other matter.

30
He further added that a suitable provision should be suggested by which a High Court of a State is
empowered to give guidelines to Judges for avoiding delays so that needless adjournments while
dealing with serious corruption cases could be avoided as far as possible.
4. Dr. Narayan pointed out that India has the lowest ratio of magistrates to population in the
world which needed to be increased. He, therefore, suggested that more serious attention should be
given to the fact that number of judges should be increased in order to have quick disposal of
corruption cases. He mentioned that gross perversion of constitutional and democratic process, abuse
of authority, obstruction of justice and squandering of public money should also be recognised as acts
of corruption. Dr. Narayan further continued that there should be separate norms for crime investigation
and other forms of policing. He emphasized that separate crime investigation wings in various States
of the country should function outside the influence of political authorities having independent
prosecutors who are appointed from panel of judges. Such independence from political authority will
actually help to deal with corruption cases in a more transparent manner as what he observed. While
pointing out that India has lowest rate of conviction in corruption cases and only six percent cases
end up in conviction in other criminal cases, Dr. Narayan opined that the country require not single
law but greater number of robust corruption laws for restoring public faith in various institutions. He
urged that in order to do real justice for abolition of corruption, India need to recognise the prevalence
of ubiquitous corruption in dealing with basic services, leading to humiliation and indignity of citizens
in monumental, systematic and organised form, is necessary.
5. While referring to the repeal of Section 24 of the Principal Act, Dr. Narayan demanded for
immunity from prosecution for the bribe giver in case of extortionary corruption. So, he emphasized
that immunity for prosecution for the bribe giver is essential and urged the Committee for looking into
the matter seriously. He referred to another form of the corruption i.e. collusive corruption where both
bribe giver and bribe taker have colluded to defraud the exchequer. Dr. Narayan also pointed out to
the concept of mandatory sentencing in corruption cases meaning that court will not have any
discretion in the quantum of sentences in corruption cases. The objective is to instill fear in the mind
of the corrupt so that others may feel afraid of any corrupt activity in view of extremely serious
quantum of punishment in corruption matters.
6. Dr. Narayan further referred to proposed Section 9(3)(b) in the Bill and pointed out that NGOs
and voluntary organisations involved in corruption cases are not clearly covered by any provisions of
the Bill which require, in his opinion, an explicit provision in the Bill. He, therefore, urged the
Committee to look into the matter. While referring to proposed Sections 12 and 13 of the Bill, Dr.
Narayan mentioned that there should be suitable provision in the Bill wherein a corrupt public servant
must also be forced to make good the loss to the exchequer. He opined that such provision is covered
by Section 39 of the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act but should not be interpreted only for cases referred
to the Lokpal but in other cases of corruption falling outside ambit of the Lokpal should also be
included under such provisions. He, therefore, request the Committee to ensure such changes in the
Bill.
7. The procedure of seizure and confiscation of properties which has been elaborated in the Bill
by adding a new Chapter IV-A, replacing the 1944 Ordinance was referred to by Dr. Narayan for which
he urged the Committee to look into the 166
th Report of the Law Commission which has appended
a Bill for the ‘Corrupt Public Servants (Forfeiture of Property) Bill’ which was modeled on Smugglers
and Foreign Exchange Manipulators, Act (SFEMA) and Supreme Court while upholding its validity
observed that a similar law should be enacted regarding forfeiture of properties of public servants. He,
therefore, urged the Committee to recommend that in future a separate Bill should be suggested for
drafting, dealing entirely with the procedure for confiscation of properties of corrupt public servants.
He further averred that there should be no need for prior sanction for prosecution of corrupt public
servants particularly in traps cases and in disproportionate assets cases. He further argued that power

31
of sanction should not rest with the Government but should be with Central Vigilance Commission and
Secretary to the Government and in States with the Lokayukta or Vigilance Commissioner of the State
or Chief Secretary of the State.
8. While continuing his deposition about various provisions of the Bill, the witness drew the
attention of the Committee to Section 2(c) (viii) wherein he felt that definition of public servants does
not explicitly covered a private entity discharging a public function. He, therefore, opined that if a
private company functions as a public entity then all the serving people in the private company should
be regarded as public servants and the said Section requires modification keeping the above in light.
Dr. Narayan also mentioned before the Committee that with increasing computerisation and technological
development the scope of corrupt activities to happen is constantly reducing. He also highlighted that
there is a constant dearth of inflow of best judicial talent at the subordinate judiciary level. In this
connection, he pointed out that Gram Nyalayas Act should be implemented with letter and spirit so
that the inflow of best judicial talent could be increased at the lowest level. What India require as per
his opinion is the progressive prevalence of friendly honest climate in the country for surviving
business which is not possible if the quantum of corruption is on the increase.
9. After this elaborate discussion by Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, other witnesses who deposed
before the Committee mentioned about the issue of conflict of interest versus business interest in the
matters of corruption, review of Clause 7(d) of the Bill and Clause 8 which require total change. The
issue of passive corruption was also discussed.
10. Some members of the Committee put a number of queries on the Bill to the witnesses which
were satisfactorily replied by them.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
1 1 . ***
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
16. The Committee then adjourned at 2.53 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matters.

32
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 5 th February, 2014 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
4. Shri N.S.V . Chithan
5. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
6. Shri Arjun Meghwal
7. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
8. Shri S.S. Ramasubhu
9. Shri S. Semmalai
10. Shri S.D. Shariq
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. The Committee then considered the
draft Sixty-ninth Report on the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and adopted the
same.
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to both Houses of Parliament on the
6
th February, 2014. It also authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
to present the Report to Rajya Sabha and Shri S. Semmalai and in his absence, Shri S.D. Shariq to
lay the same in Lok Sabha.
4. The meeting adjourned at 10.16 
A.M.
32

33
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-A
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
19 Aug., 2013
Bill No. LIII of 2013
THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act,  1988
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Corruption
(Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 5, sub-section ( 6) shall
be omitted.
3. For sections 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
7. (1) Any person, being, or expecting to be, a public
servant who,—
(a) requests any person for, or obtains or agrees to
receive or accepts or attempts to obtain from any person,
any financial or other advantage, intending that, in
consequence, a relevant public function or activity would
be performed improperly either by himself or by another
public servant; or
(b) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive or
accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or other
advantage from any person and the request, agreement,
35
Short title and
commencement.
49 of 1988.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections 7,
8, 9 and 10.
Amendment
of section 5.
Offence
relating to
public servant
being bribed.

36
acceptance or attempt itself constitutes the improper
performance of a relevant public function or activity; or
(c) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive or
accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or other
advantage as a reward for the improper performance
(whether by himself or by another public servant) of a
relevant public function or activity; or
(d) performs, or induces another public servant to
perform, improperly a relevant public function or activity
in anticipation of or in consequence of requesting, agreeing
to receive or accepting a financial or other advantage
from any person,
shall be punishable, with imprisonment which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—It shall be immaterial whether—
(a) such person being, or expecting to be, a
public servant requests or obtains or agrees to
receive or accepts, or attempts to obtain (or is to
request, agree to receive, or accept) the advantage
directly or through a third party;
(b) the financial or other advantage is, or is
to be, for the benefit of such person being or
expecting to be, a public servant or another person.
Explanation 2.—It shall be immaterial, whether such
person being, or expecting to be, a public servant knows
or believes that the performance of the public function or
activity is improper or whether the public servant who is
induced to perform improperly a relevant public function
or activity knows or believes that the performance of the
public function or activity is improper.
Explanation 3.—”Expecting to be a public servants”
If a person not expecting to be in office agrees to receive
or accepts or attempts to obtain from any person, any
other financial or other advantage by deceiving such other
person into a belief that he is about to be in office, and
that he will then serve him, he may be guilty of cheating,
but he is not guilty of the offence defined in this section.
Explanation 4.—Where a public servant induces a
person erroneously to believe that his influence with the
Government has obtained a title or other benefit for that
person and thus induces that person to give the public
servant, any financial or other advantage as a reward for
this service, the public servant has committed an offence
under this section.

37
(2) For the purposes of this Act,—
(a) a function or activity is a public function or
activity, if—
(i) the function or activity is of a public
nature;
(ii) the function or activity is performed in
the course of a person’s employment as a public
servant;
(iii) the person performing the function or
activity is expected to perform it impartially and in
good faith; and
(iv) the person performing the function or
activity is in a position of trust by virtue of
performing it;
(b) a public function or activity is performed
improperly, if—
(i) it is performed in breach of a relevant
expectation; and
(ii) there is a failure to perform the function
or activity and that failure is itself a breach of a
relevant expectation;
(c) “relevant expectation”,—
(i) in relation to a public function or activity
performed, means the performing of the public
function or activity impartially or in good faith, as
the case may be;
(ii) in relation to a public function or activity
performed in a position of trust (by virtue of
performing such function or activity), means any
expectation as to the manner in which, or the
reasons for which, the function or activity will be
performed that arises from the position of such
trust;
(d) anything that a public servant does, or omits to
do, arising from or in connection with that person’s past
performance of a public function or activity shall be
treated as being done, or omitted, by that person in the
performance of that function or activity;
(e) the test of what is expected is a test of what
a reasonable person in India would expect in relation to
the performance of the type of public function or activity
concerned.

38
8. Any person who—
(a) offers, promises or gives a financial or other
advantage to another person, and intends such financial
or other advantage—
(i) to induce a public servant to perform
improperly a public function or activity; or
(ii) to reward such public servant for the
improper performance of such public function or
activity; or
(b) offers, promises or gives a financial or other
advantage to a public servant and knows or believes that
the acceptance of such financial or other advantage by
the public servant would itself constitute the improper
performance of a relevant public function or activity,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less
than three years but which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine:
Provided that when the offence under this section has
been committed by a commercial organisation, such commercial
organisations shall be punishable with fine.
Explanation .—It shall be immaterial whether the person to
whom the financial or other advantage is offered, promised or given
is the same person as the person who is to perform, or has performed,
the public function or activity concerned, and, it shall also be immaterial
whether such financial or other advantage is offered, promised or
given by the person directly or through a third party.
9. ( 1) A commercial organisation shall be guilty of an offence
and shall be punishable with fine, if any person associated with the
commercial organisation offers, promises or gives a financial or other
advantage to a public servant intending—
(a) to obtain or retain business for such commercial
organisation; and
(b) to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of
business for such commercial organisation:
Provided that it shall be a defence for the commercial organisation
to prove that it had in place adequate procedures designed to prevent
persons associated with it from undertaking such conduct.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person offers, promises
or gives a financial or other advantage to a public servant if, and only
if, such person is, or would be, guilty of an offence under section 8,
whether or not the person has been prosecuted for such an offence.
(3) For the purposes of section 8 and this section,—
Offence
relating to
bribing of a
public
servant.
Offence
relating to
bribing a
public servant
by a
commercial
organisation.

39
(a) “commercial organisation” means—
(i) a body which is incorporated in India and
which carries on a business, whether in India or outside
India;
(ii) any other body which is incorporated outside
India and which carries on a business, or part of a
business, in any part of India;
(iii) a partnership firm or any association of persons
formed in India and which carries on a business (whether
in India or outside India); or
(iv) any other partnership or association of persons
which is formed outside India and which carries on a
business, or part of a business, in any part of India;
(b) “business” includes a trade or profession or providing
service including charitable service;
(c) a person is said to be associated with the commercial
organisation if, disregarding any offer, promise or giving a
financial or other advantage which constitutes offence under
sub-section ( 1), such person is a person who performs services
for or on behalf of the commercial organisation.
Explanation 1.—The capacity in which the person performs
services for or on behalf of the commercial organisation shall not
matter irrespective of whether such person is employee or agent or
subsidiary of such commercial organisation.
Explanation 2.—Whether or not the person is a person who
performs services for or on behalf of the commercial organisation is
to be determined by reference to all the relevant circumstances and
not merely by reference to the nature of the relationship between such
person and the commercial organisation.
Explanation 3.—If the person is an employee of the commercial
organisation, it shall be presumed unless the contrary is proved that
such person is a person who performs services for or on behalf of
the commercial organisation.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, the offence under section 8 and this section shall be
cognizable.
10. ( 1) Where a commercial organisation has been guilty of an
offence under section 9, every person who at the time the offence
was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
commercial organisation for the conduct of the business of the
commercial organisation shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence
and shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be
liable to fine:
Person in
charge of
commercial
organisation
to be guilty of
offence.
2 of 1974.

40
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where
an offence under section 9 has been committed by a commercial
organisation and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the
part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
commercial organisation, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly under this
section.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “director”, in
relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.’.
4. Section 11 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
5. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“12. Whoever abets any offence punishable under this
Act, whether or not that offence is committed in consequence
of that abetment, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall be not less than three years but which may
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.”.
6. For sub-section ( 1) of section 13 of the principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(1) A public servant is said to commit the offence of
criminal misconduct,—
(a) if he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriates
or otherwise converts for his own use any property
entrusted to him or under his control as a public servant
or allows any other person so to do; or
(b) if he intentionally enriches himself illicitly during
the period of his office and, he or any person on his
behalf, is in possession or has, at any time during the
period of his office, been in possession for which the
public servant cannot satisfactorily account, of pecuniary
resources or property disproportionate to his known
sources of income.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “known sources
of income” means income received from any lawful source.’.
7. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
Omission of
section 11.
Substitution of
new section
for section 12.
Punishment
for abetment
of offences
defined in the
Act.
Amendment
of section 13.
Substitution of
new section
for section 14.

41
“14. Whoever convicted of an offence under this Act
subsequently commits an offence punishable under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be
not less than three years but which may extend to ten years and
shall also be liable to fine.”.
8. In section 15, for the words, brackets and letters “clause ( c)
or clause ( d)”, the word, brackets and letter “clause ( a)” shall be
substituted.
9. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘CHAPTER IV A
A
TTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY
18A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “date of termination of criminal proceedings” means—
(a) where such proceedings are taken to the
Supreme Court in appeal, whether on the certificate of a
High Court or otherwise, the date on which the Supreme
Court passes its final orders in such appeal; or
(b) where such proceedings are taken to the High
Court and orders disposing of the proceedings are passed
thereon and—
(i) no application for a certificate for leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court is made to the High
Court, the day immediately following the expiry of
ninety days from the date on which the High Court
passes its final orders;
(ii) an application for a certificate for leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court has been refused by
the High Court, the day immediately following the
expiry of sixty days from the date of the refusal of
the certificate;
(iii) a certificate for leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court has been granted by the High Court,
but no appeal is lodged in the Supreme Court, the
day immediately following the expiry of thirty days
from the date of the order granting the certificate;
or
(c) where such proceedings are not taken to the
High Court, the day immediately following the expiry of
sixty days from the date of the last judgment or order of
a special Judge in the proceedings;
(2) “property” means any property or assets of every
description, whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or
Punishment
for habitual
offender.
Amendment
of section 15.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IVA.
Definitions.

42
immovable, tangible or intangible and includes deeds and
instruments evidencing title to, or interest in such property or
assets.
18B. ( 1) Where any police officer authorised to investigate any
offence under section 17 has reason to believe that any person has
committed any offence under this Act and such person has procured
money or other property by means of such offence, the Investigating
Officer may, with the prior approval of the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be, at any stage, whether or not
any court has taken cognizance, move an application before the special
Judge appointed under section 3 for attachment of the said money or
property or if such money or property cannot, for any reason, be
attached, other property of the said person of value as nearly as may
be equivalent to that of the aforesaid money or other property.
(2) An application under sub-section ( 1) shall be accompanied
by one or more affidavits, stating the grounds on which the belief that
the said person has committed any offence under this Act is founded
and the amount of money or value of other property believed to have
been procured by means of the offence.
(3) The application shall also furnish—
(a) any information available as to the location for the
time being of any such money or other property, and shall, if
necessary, give particulars, including the estimated value, of
other property of the said person;
(b) the names and addresses of any other persons believed
to have or to be likely to claim, any interest or title in the
property of the said person.
18C. ( 1) Upon receipt of any application under section 18B, the
special Judge shall, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing, he
is of the opinion that there exists no prima facie grounds for believing
that the person in respect of whom the application is made has
committed any offence under this Act or that such person has procured
thereby any money or other property, pass without delay an ad interim
order attaching the money or other property alleged to have been so
procured, or if it transpires that such money or other property is not
available for attachment, such other property of such person of
equivalent value as the special Judge may think fit:
Provided that the special Judge may, if he thinks fit, before
passing such order, and before refusing to pass such order, examine
the person or persons making the affidavit accompanying the application.
(2) At the same time as he passes an order under sub-
section (1), the special Judge shall issue to the person whose money
or other property is being attached, a notice accompanied by copies
of the order, the application, affidavits and of the evidence, if any,
recorded, calling upon him to show cause why the order should not
be made absolute.
Application
for
attachment.
Ad interim
attachment.

43
(3) The special Judge shall also issue notices, accompanied by
copies of the documents accompanying the notice under sub-
section ( 2), to all persons represented to him as having or being likely
to claim, any interest or title in the property of the person to whom
notice is issued under the said sub-section calling upon each such
person to appear on the same date as specified in the notice under the
said sub-section and make objection if he so desires to the attachment
of the property or any portion thereof on the ground that he has an
interest in such property or portion thereof.
(4) Any person claiming an interest in the attached property or
any portion thereof may, notwithstanding that no notice has been
served upon him under this section, make an objection as aforesaid to
the special Judge at any time before an order is passed under sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 3), as the case may be, of section 18D.
18D. ( 1) If no cause is shown and no objections are made
under section 18C on or before the specified date in the notice issued
under sub-section ( 2) of section 18C, the special Judge shall forthwith
pass an order making the ad interim order of attachment absolute.
(2) If cause is shown or any objections are made under
section 18C, the special Judge shall proceed to inquire the same and
in so doing, as regards the examination of the parties and in all other
respects he shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, follow the
procedure and exercise all the powers of a court in hearing a suit
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and any person making an
objection under section 18C shall be required to adduce evidence to
show that on the date of the attachment he had some interest in the
propoerty attached.
(3) After inquiry under sub-section ( 2), the special Judge shall
pass an order either making the ad interim order of attachment
absolute or varying it by releasing a portion of the property from
attachment or withdrawing the order:
Provided that the special Judge shall not—
(a) release from attachment any interest which he is
satisifed that the person believed to have committed an offence
under this Act, has in the property, unless he is also satisfied
that there will remain under attachment an amount of the said
person’s property of value not less than that of the property
believed to have been procured by the said person by means of
the offence; or
(b) withdraw the order of attachment unless he is satisfied
that the said person has not by means of the offence procured
any money or other property.
18E. ( 1) Where the assets available for attachment of a person
believed to have committed any offence under this Act are found to
be less than the amount or value which he is believed to have
procured by means of such offence, and where the special Judge is
Inquiry of
objections to
attachment.
Attachment
of property
of mala fide
transferees.
5 of 1908.

44
satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that there is reasonable cause for
believing that the said person has, after the date on which the offence
is alleged to have been committed, transferred any of his property
otherwise than in good faith and for consideration, the special Judge
may by notice require any transferee of such property (whether or not
he received the property directly from the said person) to appear on
a date to be specified in the notice and show cause why so much of
the transferee’s property as is equivalent to the proper value of
property transferred should not be attached.
(2) Where the said transferee does not appear and show cause
on the date specified in the notice under sub-section ( 1), or where
after inquiry in the manner provided in sub-section ( 2) of section 18D,
the special Judge is satisfied that the transfer of the property to the
said transferee was not in good faith and for consideration, the special
Judge shall order the attachment of so much of the said transferee’s
property as is, in the opinion of the special Judge equivalent to the
proper value of the property, transferred.
18F. An order of attachment of property under this Chapter
shall be carried into effect, so far as may be practicable, in the
manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the
attachment of property in execution of a decree.
18G. Any person whose property has been or is about to be
attached under this Chapter may, at any time, apply to the special
Judge to be permitted to give security in lieu of such attachment and
where the security offered and given is in the opinion of the special
Judge, satisfactory and sufficient, he may withdraw or, as the case
may be, refrain from passing the order of attachment.
18H. ( 1) The special Judge may, on the application of any
person interested in any property attached under this Chapter and after
giving the officer or any other person authorised in this behalf by the
State Government or, as the case may be, the Central Government, an
opportunity of being heard, make such orders as the special Judge
considers just and reasonable for—
(a) providing from such attached property, as the applicant
claims, an interest in, such sums as may be reasonably necessary
for the maintenance of the applicant and of his family, and for
the expenses connected with the defence of the applicant where
criminal proceedings have been instituted against him in any
court for the offence;
(b) safeguarding, so far as may be practicable, the interests
of any business affected by the attachment, and in particular,
the interests of any partners in such business.
(2) Where it appears to the special Judge to be just and
convenient, he may, by order appoint a receiver to manage any
property attached under this Chapter in accordance with such
instructions as the special Judge may, from time to time, think fit to
give and where a receiver is so appointed, the provisions of rules 2,
Execution of
orders of
attachment. 5 of 1908.
Security in
lieu of
attachment.
Administration
of
attachment.

45
3, 4 and 5 of Order XL of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 shall be applicable.
18-I. An order of attachment of property under this Act shall,
unless it is withdrawn earlier in accordance with the provisions of this
Act, continue in force—
(a) where no court has taken cognizance of the alleged
offence at the time when the order is applied for, one year from
the date of the order under sub-section ( 1) of section 18C or
sub-section ( 2) of section 18E, as the case may be, unless
cognizance of such offence is, in the meantime taken by the
court, or unless the special Judge on application by the
Investigating Officer showing reasons for non-completion of the
investigation and if the Judge is satisfied that reasonable grounds
exist, extends further period of attachment not exceeding six
months;
(b) where a court has taken cognizance of the alleged
offence whether before or after the time when the order of
attachment of property is made by the court, until orders are
passed by the special Judge in accordance with the provisions
of this Act, upon the termination of the criminal proceedings in
respect of the disposal of such property.
18J. ( 1) The State Government or, as the case may be, the
Central Government or any person who has shown cause under
section 18C or section 18E or has made an objection under
section 18C or has made an application under section 18G or
section 18H, if aggrieved by any order of the special Judge under any
of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, may appeal to the High
Court within thirty days from the date on which the order appealed
against was passed.
(2) Upon any appeal under sub-section ( 1), the High Court may,
after giving such parties as it thinks proper an opportunity of being
heard, pass such orders as it thinks fit.
(3) Until an appeal under sub-section ( 1) is finally disposed of
by the High Court, no court shall, otherwise than in accordance with
the provisions of section 18G or section 18L, pass any order in
respect of the attachment of the property to which the appeal relates.
18K. ( 1) Where before judgment is pronounced in any criminal
trial for any offence under this Act, it is represented to the court that
an order of attachment of property has been passed under this Chapter
in connection with such offence, the court shall, if it is convicting an
accused, record a finding as to the amount of money or value of other
property procured by the accused by means of the offence.
(2) In any appeal or revisional proceedings against such
conviction, the appellate or revisional court shall unless it sets aside
the conviction, either confirm such finding or modify it in such
manner as it thinks proper.
5 of 1908.
Duration of
attachment.
Appeals.
Court to
evaluate
property
procured by
offence.

46
(3) In any appeal or revisional proceedings against an order of
acquittal passed in a trial, such as, is referred to in sub-section ( 1),
the appellate or revisional court, if it convicts the accused, shall record
a finding, such as is referred to in that sub-section.
(4) Where the accused is convicted of any offence under this
Act and where it appears that the offence has caused loss to more
than one Government or authority or corporation or Government
company referred to in sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( c) of section 2, the
court shall, in the concerned finding referred to in the foregoing sub-
sections, indicate the amount of loss sustained by each such
Government or authority or corporation or Government company, as
the case may be.
(5) Where the accused is convicted in the same trial of one or
more offences specified under this Act, the court shall, in the concerned
finding referred to in the foregoing sub-sections, indicate separately
the amounts procured by means of the two classes of offences.
18L. ( 1) Upon the termination of any criminal proceedings for
any offence under this Act in respect of which any order of attachment
of property has been made under this Chapter or security given to in
lieu thereof, the officer or any other person authorised by the State
Government or, as the case may be, the Central Government in this
behalf shall, without delay inform the special Judge, and shall where
criminal proceedings have been taken in any court, furnish the special
Judge with a copy of the judgment or order of the trying court and
with copies of the judgment or orders, if any, of the appellate or
revisional court thereon.
(2) Where it is reported by the officer or any other person
referred to in sub-section ( 1) to the special Judge that cognizance of
the alleged offence has not been taken or where the final judgment or
order of the court is one of acquittal, the special Judge shall forthwith
withdraw any orders of attachment of property made in connection
with the offence, or where security has been given in lieu of such
attachment, order such security to be returned.
(3) Where the final judgment or order of the court is one of
conviction, the special Judge shall order that from the property of the
convicted person attached under this Chapter or out of the security
given in lieu of such attachment, there shall be forfeited to the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, such
amount or value as is found in the final judgment or order of the court
in pursuance of section 18K, to have been procured by the convicted
person by means of the offence, together with the costs of attachment
as determined by the special Judge and where the final judgment or
order of the court has imposed or upheld a sentence of fine on the
said person (whether alone or in conjunction with any other
punishment), the special Judge may order, without prejudice to any
other mode of recovery, that the said fine shall be recovered from the
residue of the said attached property or the security given in lieu of
attachment.
Disposal of
attached
property
upon
termination
of criminal
proceedings.

47
(4) Where the amounts ordered to be forfeited or recovered
under sub-section ( 3) exceed the value of the property of the convicted
person attached, and where the property of any transferee of the
convicted person has been attached under section 18E, the special
Judge shall order that the balance of the amount ordered to be
forfeited under sub-section ( 3) together with the costs of attachment
of the transferee’s property as determined by the special Judge shall
be forfeited to the Government from the attached property of the
transferee or out of the security given in lieu of such attachment, and
the special Judge may order without prejudice to any other mode of
recovery that any fine referred to in sub-section ( 3) or any portion
thereof not recovered under that sub-section shall be recovered from
the attached property of the transferee or out of the security given in
lieu of such attachment.
(5) If any property remains under attachment in respect of any
offence under this Act or any security given to in lieu of such
attachment remains with the special Judge after his orders under sub-
sections ( 3) and ( 4) have been carried into effect, the order of
attachment in respect of such property remaining shall be forthwith
withdrawn or, as the case may be, the remainder of the security shall
be returned, under the orders of the special Judge.
(6) Every sum ordered to be forfeited under this section in
connection with any offence under this Act shall, after deduction of
the costs of attachment as determined by the special Judge, be
credited to the Government or authority or corporation or Government
company referred to in sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( c) of section 2 of
the Act, to which the offence has caused loss, or where there is more
than one such Government or authority or corporation or Government
company, as the case may be, the sum shall after such deduction as
aforesaid, be distributed among them in proportion to the loss sustained
by each.
18M. Save as provided in section 18J and notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law,—
(a) no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintainable
in any court—
(i) in respect of any property ordered to be forfeited
under section 18L, or which has been taken in recovery
of fine in pursuance of an order under that section; or
(ii) while any other property is attached under this
Chapter, in respect of such other property,
by any person upon whom a notice has been served under
section 18C or section 18E or who has made an objection under sub-
section ( 4) of section 18C; and
(b) no court shall, in any legal proceeding or otherwise,
pass any decree or order, other than a final decree to a suit by
a person not being a person referred to in clause ( a), which
shall have the effect of nullifying or affecting in any way any
Bar to other
proceedings.

48
subsisting order of attachment of property under this Chapter,
or the right of the special Judge to hold security in lieu of any
such order of attachment.
18N. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be
done in pursuance of this Chapter.’.
10. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for the words and figures “sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and
15”, the words and figures “sections 7, 13 and 15” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in clause ( a), for the words “who is employed”, the
words “who is employed, or as the case may be, was at the
time of commission of the alleged offence employed” shall be
substituted;
(iii) in clause ( b), for the words “who is employed”, the
words “who is employed, or as the case may be, was at the
time of commission of the alleged offence employed” shall be
substituted;
(iv) after clause ( c), the following provisos shall be
inserted, namely:—
Provided that no request can be made, by a person
other than a police officer or an officer of an investigation
agency or other law enforcement authority, to the
appropriate Government or competent authority, as the
case may be, for the previous sanction of such
Government or authority for taking cognizance by the
court of any of the offences specified in this sub-section,
unless—
(i) such person has filed a complaint in a competent
court about the alleged offences for which the public
servant is sought to be prosecuted; and
(ii) the court has not dismissed the complaint under
section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and
directed the complainant to obtain the sanction for
prosecution against the public servant for further
proceeding:
Provided further that in the case of request from the
person other than a police officer or an officer of an investigating
agency or other law enforcement authority, the appropriate
Government or competent authority shall not accord sanction to
prosecute a public servant without providing an opportunity of
being heard to the concerned public servant:
Provided also that the appropriate Government or the
competent authority, as the case may be, shall convey its
decision under this sub-section within a period of three months,
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Amendment
of section 19.
2 of 1974.

49
which may, for reasons to be recorded in writing by the
appropriate Government or the competent authority, that the
consultation with the Attorney General or the Advocate General,
as the case may be, is required, be extended by a further period
of one month.”.
11. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“20. Where, in any trial of an offence punishable under
section 7, it is proved that an accused person has accepted or
obtained or has agreed to receive or attempted to obtain for
himself, or for any other person, any financial or other advantage
from any person, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is
proved, that he accepted or obtained or agreed to accept or
attempted to obtain that financial or other advantage, as the case
may be, intending that, in consequence, a relevant public function
or activity would be performed improperly either by himself or
by another public servant.”.
12. Section 24 shall be omitted.
13. In the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944, in the
Schedule,—
(i) paragraph 4A shall be omitted;
(ii) in paragraph 5, for the words, figures and letter
“items 2, 3, 4 and 4A”, the words and figures “items 2, 3 and
4” shall be substituted.
14. In the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946, in
section 6A, in sub-section ( 1), after the words “where such allegation
relates to”, the words “the persons who are or have been” shall be
inserted.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 20.
Presumption
where public
servant
accepts
financial or
other
advantage or
any valuable
thing.
Omission of
section 24.
Amendment
of Ordinance.
38 of 1944.
Amendment
of Act 25 of
1946.

50
50
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 provides for prevention
of corruption and for matters connected therewith. The ratification by
India of the United Nations Convention Against Corruption, the
international practice on treatment of the offence of bribery and
corruption and judicial pronouncements have necessitated a review of
the existing provisions of the Act and the need to amend it so as to
fill in gaps in description and coverage of the offence of bribery so
as to bring it in line with the current international practice and also to
meet more effectively, the country’s obligations under the aforesaid
Convention. Hence, the present Bill.
2. The salient features of the Bill, inter alia, are as follows:—
(a) section 7 of the Act at present covers the offence of
public servant taking gratification other than legal remuneration
in respect of an official act. The definition of offence is
proposed to be substituted by a new comprehensive definition
which covers all aspects of passive bribery, including the
solicitation and acceptance of bribe through intermediaries and
also acts of public servants acting outside their competence;
(b) the Act at present does not contain any provisions
directly dealing with active domestic bribery, that is, the offence
of giving bribe. Section 12 of the Act which provides for
punishment for abetment of offences defined in section 7 or
section 11, covers the offence indirectly. Section 24 provides
that a statement made by a bribegiver in any proceeding against
a public servant for an offence under sections 7 to 11, 13 and
15 of the Act shall not subject him to prosecution under
section 12. Experience has shown that in a vast majority of
cases, the bribe-giver goes scot free by taking resort to the
provisions of section 24 and it becomes increasingly difficult to
tackle consensual bribery. The aforesaid Convention enjoins that
the promise, offering or giving, to a public official, directly or
indirectly, of an undue advantage, for the official himself or
herself or another person or entity, in order that the official act
or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her official
duties, be made a criminal offence. Accordingly, it is proposed
to substitute a new section 8 to meet the said obligation;
(c) as the proposed new definitions of bribery, both as
regards the solicitation and acceptance of undue advantage and
as regards the promise, offering or giving, to a public official,
directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage, are found to be
comprehensive enough to cover all offences presently provided
in section 8 which covers taking gratification, in order, by

51
corrupt or illegal means, to influence public servant; section 9
which covers taking gratification, for exercise of personal
influence with public servant; section 10 which provides for
punishment for abetment by public servant of offences defined
in section 8 or section 9; and section 11 which provides for
public servant obtaining valuable thing without consideration
from person concerned in proceeding or business transacted by
such public servant; and also the offences presently defined in
clauses ( a), ( b) and ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 13 of the
Act which covers criminal misconduct by a public servant, it is
proposed to omit the said sections;
(d) it is proposed to substitute section 9 to provide
punishment for the offence relating to bribing a public servant
by a commercial organisation. A commercial organisation will be
guilty of this offence if any person associated with it offers,
promises or gives a financial or other advantage to a public
servant intending to obtain or retain business or some advantage
in the conduct of business for the commercial organisation. The
proposed section 10 provides for punishment of persons in
charge of a commercial organisation which has been guilty of
the offence under the proposed section 9;
(e) section 12 at present provides for punishment for
abetment of offences defined in section 7 or section 11. It is
proposed to substitute section 12 of the Act to provide
punishment for abetment of all offences under the Act;
(f) it is proposed to substitute sub-section ( 1) of
section 13 with a new subsection so as to omit the existing
clauses ( a), ( b) and ( d) of sub-section ( 1) as mentioned above;
to incorporate the element of intentional enrichment in the existing
clause ( e) relating to possession of disproportionate assets by a
public servant; and to modify the definition of “known sources
of income” as contained in Explanation, to mean income received
from any lawful source, that is, by doing away with the
requirement of intimation in accordance with any law, rules or
orders applicable to a public servant;
(g) section 14 at present provides for habitual commission
of offences under sections 8, 9 and 12. It is proposed to
substitute section 14 of the Act to provide punishment for
habitual commission of all offences under the Act;
(h) the Prevention of Corruption Act, at present, does not
specifically provide for the confiscation of bribe and the proceeds
of bribery. A Bill, namely, the Prevention of Corruption
(Amendment) Bill, 2008, to amend the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, providing, inter alia , for insertion of a new
Chapter IV A in the Prevention of Corruption Act for the
attachment and forfeiture of property of corrupt public servants
on the lines of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944,
was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008 and
was passed by the Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2008. However,

52
the said Bill lapsed due to dissolution of the Fourteenth Lok
Sabha. It is proposed to insert similar provisions on the lines of
the 2008 Bill in the Prevention of Corruption Act;
(i) the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2008
had proposed an amendment to section 19 of the Act on the
lines of section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
for extending protection of prior sanction of the Government or
competent authority after retirement or demittance of office by
a public servant so as to provide a safeguard to a public servant
from vexatious prosectuion for any bona fide omission or
commission in the discharge of his official duties. The said Bill
having lapsed, this protection is, at present, not available for a
person who has ceased to be a public servant. Section 19 is,
therefore, proposed to be amended to provide the said protection
to the persons who ceased to be public servants on the lines of
the said Bill. Further, in the light of a recent judgment of the
Supreme Court, the question of amending section 19 of the Act
to lay down clear criteria and procedure for sanction of
prosecution, including the stage at which sanction can be sought,
timelines within which order has to be passed, was also examined
by the Central Government and it is proposed to incorporate
appropriate provisions in section 19 of the Act;
(j) section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment
Act, 1946 contains a protection of prior approval of the Central
Government in respect of officers working at policy making
levels in the Central Government before any inquiry or
investigation is conducted against them by the Delhi Special
Police Establishment. The basic principle behind the protection
under section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and
section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946,
being the same, namely, protection of honest civil servants from
harassment by way of investigation or prosecution for things
done in bona fide performance of public duty, it is felt that the
protection under both these provisions should be available to
public servants even after they cease to be public servants or
after they cease to hold sensitive policy level positions, as the
case may be. Accordingly, it is proposed to amend section 6A
of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 for extending
the protection of prior approval of the Central Government
before conducting any inquiry or investigation in respect of
offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, to civil
servants holding such senior policy level positions even after
they cease to hold such positions due to reversion or retirement
or other reasons.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; V . NARAYANASAMY
The 24th July, 2013.

53
53
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE P REVENTION  OF C ORRUPTION  A CT, 1988
(49 OF 1988)
* *** *
5. ( 1)* * * * *
(6) A special Judge, while trying an offence punishable under
this Act, shall exercise all the powers and functions exercisable by
a District Judge under the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944.
* *** *
CHAPTER III
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
7. Whoever, being, or expecting to be a public servant, accepts
or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain from any person,
for himself or for any other person, any gratification whatever, other
than legal remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing
to do any official act or for showing or forbearing to show, in the
exercise of his official functions, favour or disfavour to any person or
for rendering or attempting to render any service or disservice to any
person, with the Central Government or any State Government or
Parliament or the Legislature of any State or with any local authority,
corporation or Government company referrred to in clause ( c) of
section 2, or with any public servant, whether named or otherwise,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall be not less than six
months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanations.—(a) “Expecting to be a public servant”. If
a person not expecting to be in office obtains a gratification by
deceiving others into a belief that he is about to be in office,
and that he will then serve them, he may be guilty of cheating,
but he is not guilty of the offence defined in this section.
(b) “Gratification”. The word “gratification” is not restricted
to pecuniary gratifications or to gratifications estimable in money.
(c) “Legal remuneration”. The words “legal remuneration”
are not restricted to remuneration which a public servant can
lawfully demand, but include all remuneration which he is
permitted by the Government or the organisation, which he
serves, to accept.
Ord. 38 of
1944.
Procedure and
powers of
special Judge.
Public servant
taking
gratification
other than
legal
remuneration
in respect of
an official
act.

54
(d) “A motive or reward for doing”. A person who
receives a gratification as a motive or reward for doing what he
does not intend or is not in a position to do, or has not done,
comes within this expression.
(e) Where a public servant induces a person erroneously
to believe that his influence with the Government has obtained
a title for that person and thus induces that person to give the
public servant, money or any other gratification as a reward for
this service, the public servant has committed an offence under
this section.
8. Whoever accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts
to obtain, from any person, for himself or for any other person, any
gratification whatever as a motive or reward for inducing, by corrupt
or illegal means, any public servant, whether named or otherwise, to
do or to forbear to do any official act, or in the exercise of the official
functions of such public servant to show favour or disfavour to any
person, or to render or attempt to render any service or disservice to
any person with the Central Government or any State Government or
Parliament or the Legislature of any State or with any local authority,
corporation or Government company referred to in clause ( c) of
section 2, or with any public servant, whether named or otherwise,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be not
less than six months but which may extend to five years and shall also
be liable to fine.
9. Whoever accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts
to obtain, from any person, for himself or for any other person, any
gratification whatever, as a motive or reward for inducing, by the
exercise of personal influence, any public servant whether named or
otherwise to do or to forbear to do any official act, or in the exercise
of the official functions of such public servant to show favour or
disfavour to any person, or to render or attempt to render any service
or disservice to any person with the Central Government or any State
Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State or with any
local authority, corporation or Government company referred to in
clause ( c) of section 2, or with any public servant, whether named or
otherwise, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall be not less than six months but which may extend to five years
and shall also be liable to fine.
10. Whoever, being a public servant, in respect of whom either
of the offences defined in section 8 or section 9 is committed, abets
the offence, whether or not that offence is committed in consequence
of that abetment, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall be not less than six months but which may extend to five
years and shall also be liable to fine.
Taking
gratification,
in order, by
corrupt or
illegal means,
to influence
public
servant.
Taking
gratification,
for exercise or
personal
influence with
public servant.
Punishment
for abetment
by public
servant of
offences
defined in
section 8 or 9.

55
11. Whoever, being a public servant, accepts or obtains or
agrees to accept or attempts to obtain for himself, or for any other
person, any valuable thing without consideration, or for a consideration
which he knows to be inadequate, from any person whom he knows
to have been, or to be, or to be likely to be concerned in any
proceeding or business transacted or about to be transacted by such
public servant, or having any connection with the official functions of
himself or of any public servant to whom he is subordinate, or from
any person whom he knows to be interested in or related to the
person so concerned, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall be not less than six months but which may extend
to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
12. Whoever abets any offence punishable under section 7 or
section 11 whether or not that offence is committed in consequence
of that abetment, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall be not less than six months but which may extend to five
years and shall also be liable to fine.
13. (1) A public servant is said to commit the offence of
criminal misconduct,—
(a) if he habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept
or attempts to obtain from any person for himself or for any
other person any gratification other than legal remuneration as
a motive or reward such as is mentioned in section 7; or
(b) if he habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept
or attempts to obtain for himself or for any other person, any
valuable thing without consideration or for a consideration which
he knows to be inadequate from any person whom he knows
to have been, or to be, or to be likely to be concerned in any
proceeding or business transacted or about to be transacted by
him, or having any connection with the official functions of
himself or of any public servant to whom he is subordinate, or
from any person whom he knows to be interested in or related
to the person so concerned; or
(c) if he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriates or
otherwise converts for his own use any property entrusted to
him or under his control as a public servant or allows any other
person so to do; or
(d) if he,—
(i) by corrupt or illegal means, obtains for himself
or for any other person  any valuable thing or pecuniary
advantage; or
(ii) by abusing his position as a public servant,
obtains for himself or for any other person any valuable
thing or pecuniary advantage; or
Public servant
obtaining
valuable thing,
without
consideration
from person
concerned in
proceeding or
business
transacted by
such public
servant.
Punishment for
abetment of
offences
defined in
section 7 or 11.
Criminal
misconduct by
a public
servant.

56
(iii) while holding office as a public servant, obtains
for any person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage
without any public interest; or
(e) if he or any person on his behalf, is in possession or
has, at any time during the period of his office, been in
possession for which the public servant cannot satisfactorily
account, of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate to
his known sources of income.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “known sources
of income” means income received from any lawful source and such
receipt has been intimated in accordance with the provisions of any
law, rules or orders for the time being applicable to a public servant.
** * * *
14. Whoever habitually commits,—
(a) an offence punishable under section 8 or section 9;
or
(b) an offence punishable under section 12,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be not
less than two years but which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine.
15. Whoever attempts to commit an offence referred to in
clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and with fine.
** * * *
CHAPTER V
S
ANCTION FOR PROSECUTION AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
19. (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
under sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 alleged to have been committed
by a public servant, except with the previous sanction,—
(a) in the case of a person who is employed in connection
with the affairs of the Union and is not removable from his
office save by or with the sanction of the Central Government,
of that Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is employed in connection
with the affairs of a State and is not removable from his office
save by or with the sanction of the State Government, of that
Government;
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority
competent to remove him from his office.
** * * *
Habitual
committing
of offence
under sections
8, 9 and 12.
Punishment
for attempt.
Previous
sanction
necessary for
prosecution.

57
20. (1) Where, in any trial of an offence punishable under
section 7 or section 11 or clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1)
of section 13 it is proved that an accused person has accepted or
obtained or has agreed to accept or attempted to obtain for himself,
or for any other person, any gratification (other than legal remuneration)
or any valuable thing from any person, it shall be presumed, unless the
contrary is proved, that he accepted or obtained or agreed to accept
or attempted to obtain that gratification or that valuable thing, as the
case may be, as a motive or reward such as is mentioned in
section 7 or, as the case may be, without consideration or for a
consideration which he knows to be inadequate.
(2) Where in any trial of an offence punishable under section 12
or under clause ( b) of  section 14, it is proved that any gratification
(other than legal remuneration) or any valuable thing has been given
or offered to be given or attempted to be given by an accused person,
it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he gave or
offered to give or attempted to give that gratification or that valuable
thing, as the case may be, as a motive or reward such as is mentioned
in section 7, or, as the case may be, without consideration or for a
consideration which he knows to be inadequate.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and
(2), the court may decline to draw the presumption referred to in
either of the said sub-sections, if the gratification or thing aforesaid is,
in its opinion, so trivial that no interference of corruption may fairly
be drawn.
* *** *
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time
being in force, a statement made by a person in any proceeding
against a public servant for an offence under sections 7 to 11 or under
section 13 or section 15, that he offered or agreed to offer any
gratification (other than legal remuneration) or any valuable thing to
the public servant, shall not subject such person to a prosecution
under section 12.
* *** *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE C RIMINAL L AW A MENDMENT O RDINANCE, 1944
(ORD. 38 OF 1944)
* *** *
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
Offences in connection with which property is liable to be attached
* *** *
Statement by
bribe-giver
not to subject
him to
prosecution.
Presumption
where public
servant accepts
gratification
other than legal
remuneration.

58
4A. An offence punishable under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
** * * *
5. Any conspiracy to commit or any attempt to commit or any
abetment of any of the offences specified in items 2, 3 and 4.
** * * *
EXTRACT FROM THE D ELHI S PECIAL POLICE E STABLISHMENT A CT, 1946
(25 OF 1946)
** * * *
6A. (1) The Delhi Special Police Establishment shall not conduct
any inquiry or investigation into any offence alleged to have been
committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 except with
the previous approval of the Central Government where such allegation
relates to—
(a) the employees of the Central Government of the level
of Joint Secretary and above; and
(b) such officers as are appointed by the Central
Government in corporations established by or under any Central
Act, Government companies, societies and local authorities owned
or controlled by that Government.
** * * *
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
Approval of
Central
Government
to conduct
inquiry or
investigation.

59
59
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions and Minister of State in the Prime Minister’ s Office )

60
ANNEXURE-B
Comments of D/o Personnel and Training on the views/suggestions contained in
Memoranda submitted by States Government/Individuals/Organisations/Experts on the Bill.
Memo Name of the Comments/Suggestions Comments of DOPT
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
1. Amit Kumar Maihan,
A-45, Gandhi Vihar, Delhi-
110009
Requirement of Sanction in respect of
Retired employees
Anomaly needs to be corrected soonest possible
in order to provide equal protection of law to
both serving as well as retired employees.
After having extended the protection to retired
employees the PC may incorporate the
provision whereby sanction under Cr PC may
be dispensed with once the sanction under
PC Act has been obtained or vice versa . The
provision will take care of the proposition
where accused is charged only under PC Act
or want of evidence charges under Cr PC
can only be sustained.
Applicability of Sanction towards employees
of PSUs and other subsidiaries government
enterprises
When employees of PSU and government
enterprises can be charged under provisions
of PC, Act then they are equally entitled for
protection provided under the same act.
Therefore clear explanation or provision needs
The suggestion already stands covered by the proposed
amendment of section 19 of the PC Act.
However, the suggestion that PC Act may incorporate a
provision whereby sanction under CrPC may be dispensed
with once the sanction under PC Act has been obtained or
vice versa , is not acceptable. The sanction under section
19 is meant for only offences under the PC Act allegedly
committed by a public servant. Sanction under section 197
CrPC is required in respect of any offence alleged to have
been committed by a Judge or a Magistrate or a Public
Servant while acting or purporting to act in the discharge
of his official duty. The scope of the two sections being
totally different, it is not possible to provide that if sanction
under one Act has been obtained, sanction under the other
Act is not necessary.
The definition of “public servant” under the PC Act is very
wide, so as to, include employees of PSU’s, etc. Accordingly,
the protection under section 19 is available to all public
servants covered under that definition. The protection under
section 197 CrPC, on the other hand, is clearly restricted

61
to be enacted in this regard whereby
ambiguity of such nature should be eradicated
soonest possible.
Contents/Ingredients of Sanction
Clear and unambiguous provision needs to be
enacted defining thereby what constitute a
request for valid sanction. The requirement
of material to be placed before sanctioning
authority must be spelt out. Investigation
agency cannot be allowed or burdened to
place all material before sanction authority
which is supposed to be placed before courts.
Therefore, in order to have clear cut position
provision needs to be inserted about the
ingredients of the Sanction seeking request.
Stage up to which Sanction can be obtained
Provision needs to be inserted whereby it
must be made clear that sanction in any case
needs to be obtained prior to launching the
court proceedings. In case sanction is not
obtained prior to that stage then Act must be
by the express provisions of the said section 197 itself by
making it applicable only to persons who are or were
Judges or Magistrates or public servants not removable
from their office save by or with the sanction of the
Government. In other words, the protection under CrPC is
only in respect of offences allegedly committed by a Judge
or a Magistrate or a public servant not removable from his
office save by or with the sanction of the Government,
while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his
official duty. No such pre-condition or restriction is
prescribed under section 19 of the PC Act. Therefore, the
suggestion to amend the provisions of the CrPC are not
acceptable. Further, the proposed amendment in CrPC is
beyond the scope of the present Bill.
It is neither practicable nor desirable to include provisions
in the Act so as to define what constitutes a request for
prosecution and what material is to be placed before the
sanctioning authority, as the same may vary from case to
case. What material is sufficient to enable the sanctioning
authority to come to a conclusion that, prima facie, an
offence under the Act has been committed, justifying grant
of a sanction for the prosecution of a public servant in
connection with such offence, would also vary from case
to case, depending upon the facts and circumstances of
each case. Therefore, the suggestion is not acceptable.
The suggestion is not acceptable. Under section 19, there
is a bar on the Court, not to take cognizance of an offence
under the Act except with the previous sanction. It is
abundantly clear that the sanction has to precede the taking
of cognizance of the offence by the Court.

62
12 3 4
explain consequences of the same. Cases are
there wherein Superior Court has held that
question about sanction can be raised even at
appellate stage. The Act needs to make clear
mention about the same as up to what stage
such issues can be raised and their net effect
on trial or proceedings.
Process of Granting Sanction has become
Mechanical
The authority granting sanction, be afforded
immunity and security in order to enable
them exercising their discretion appropriately.
Sanctioning authorities hardly have courage
to refuse when received request from CBI or
such agencies.
Comments to amend Section 8 of the Bill
i. “The section 8 to be deleted”.
ii. The proposed section 8 is produced
as under:
“Any person who provides
information and cooperates with the
Anti-corruption Agency that public
servant-
a) demands, promises financial or
other advantages for improperly
performing a public function or
activity.
However, in the case of private complaints, the proposed
amendment in the present Bill has provided the stage at
which the sanction can be applied for and the conditions
to be satisfied.
The suggestion is based on mere apprehension that
sanctioning authorities may not have courage to refuse
sanction on the basis of request made by CBI. The allegation
is totally unfounded. There are, at the Central Government
level, elaborate administrative instructions on the subject,
laying down a process of consultation with CVC and also
a process for resolving disagreements between CVC and
the competent authority, before such requests are decided
by the concerned Government Department/authority.
The suggestion to delete the proposed new Section 8
(Supply side of Corruption) is not acceptable as it will go
against the requirement of the UNCAC. Article 15(a) of the
UNCAC requires criminalisation of the “promise, offering
or giving, to a public official, directly or indirectly, of an
undue advantage, for the official himself or herself or
another person or entity, in order that the official act or
refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her official
duties”. In view of this, there is a clear need to define
offences on the supply side of the corruption. The proposed
insertion of new Section 8 is intended to fill up the existing
2. Er. Amar Singh, President,
Society for Justice (Regd.)
39, Industrial Area, Under
Bridge Road, Rajpura-
PB-140401

63
b) Desirous of reward for improper
performance of public function
or activity.
Shall be rewarded with 50% of
the amount or the value of the
other advantage demanded or
desired by the public servant.
The amount shall be liable for
payment on filing on the charge
sheet against the public servant.
Explanation – It shall be
immaterial whether the public
servant demanding or desirous
for financial or other advantages
promised or is the same person
as the person who is to perform,
or has performed, the public
function or activity concerned,
and, it shall also be immaterial
whether such financial or other
advantage is demanded or desired
by the person directly or through
a third party.
Comments to amend Section 9 and 10 of
the Bill
These two sections will become irrelevant on
acceptance of the amendment to section 8
for adopting. The commercial organization
will be considered as the person reporting
the matter to the Anti-Corruption Agency and
will be entitled for the reward. However
not awarding punishment to commercial
gap in the PC Act. The suggestion is, therefore, not
acceptable.
As regards the proposed alternative Section 8, which aims
at rewarding a complainant for making a complaint against
a corrupt public servant, the same is an aspect of Whistle
Blower Protection, which is the subject matter of a different
Bill, namely, Whistle Blowers Protection Bill, 2011. Thus,
the suggestion is not germane to the provisions of the
present Bill.
The suggestion appears to be based on a misunderstanding
of the main purpose behind the proposed insertion of new
Sections 9 & 10. The proposed new Sections 9 & 10 are
intended to provide for corporate liability in respect of
offences of bribery (bribe giving) committed by persons
associated with such corporate entity. The Stakeholder
himself says that not awarding punishment to commercial

64
12 3 4
organization is improper and against equity, justice and fair
play.
Hence, the recommendation is to delete the section 9 and
10.
Comments to amend Section 19 of the Bill
The proviso is silent if the application for prosecution is
not disposed of with the time given. Does it mean that the
investigating officer is to wait for unlimited time? This will
not be in the interest of investigations followed by process
of justice, the matter is to be finally closed with in four
months in all circumstances, if the application is not
disposed of with in the time, it may be considered that it
is the deemed sanctioned and cannot be challenged therefore.
Hence the an1endment to the proviso is proposed as
under:
“Provided also that the appropriate Government or the
competent authority, as the case may be, shall convey
its decision under this sub-section within a period of
three months, which may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing by the appropriate Government or the competent
authority, that the consultation with the Attorney General
or the Advocate General, as the case may be, is required,
be extended by a further period of one month. If the
application is not disposed of with in four months, it
will be deemed to have been sanctioned and shall not be
a matter of further challenge and shall be considered
final”.
organisation is improper and against equity,
justice and fair play. That being so the
suggestion of the stakeholder, to delete
proposed sections 9 and 10, is not acceptable.
The present Section 19 does not contain any
time limit within which request for sanction
of prosecution has to be decided. The
Supreme Court had, in Vineet Narain’s case,
laid down a time limit of three months which
can be extended by one month where
consultation with Attorney General IAdvocate
General is required. The proposed amendment
has placed this time limit as laid down by the
Supreme Court on statutory footing.
Accordingly, the Bill incorporates an
amendment to insert a proviso under Section
19 to the effect that the appropriate
Government or the competent authority, as
the case may be, shall convey its decision on
the request for sanction for prosecution within
a period of three months, which may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing by the
appropriate Government or the competent
authority, that the consultation with the
Attorney General or the Advocate General, as
the case may be, is required, be extended by
a further period of one month. However, the
suggestion to insert a clause for deeming the
grant of sanction on expiry of the said period
as proposed by the stakeholder is not

65
Additional Provision for Maintenance of Procedures,
Policies and Records.
The following sub-section after section 7 (d) is proposed:
(e) takes liberty not to maintain proper records, temper
with record, breach the procedure, deviate or change
policy without authority and any such deeds amounting to
creating the circumstances favourable for demanding
gratification through financial or other advantages from
any person.
A statutory time limit of 3 months (90 days) for grant of
sanction for prosecution be kindly provided as a statutory
provision thereby giving legislative concurrence to the
Judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Vineet Narain
Vs. Union of India, (1998) 1 SCC 266 para 58(1) 15 @ P/270.
Statutory time limit of prosecution of public servant by
private citizen (common man) of 4 months (120 days)
may also be given statutory recognition. It is submitted
that Parliament may kindly give statutory recognition to
the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in (2012)
3 SCC 64.
The proposed amendment of S. 19 PC Act, 1988 is indeed
a welcome measure.
Proposed Amendment of Section 6-A, DSPE Act, 1946:
The constitutional validity of Sec. 6A, DSPE Act, 1946 is
presently being considered by a 5-Judge Constitution Bench
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in (2005) 1 Supreme 849.
acceptable as it may create practical
difficulties.
The suggestion made by the Stakeholder is
already covered in the provisions of proposed
Section 7. Any failure to maintain proper
records, tampering with records, breach of
procedures, deviation or change of policy
without authority, etc. will all be fully covered
under the expression “improper performance”
of a relevant public function.
The suggestions made by the stakeholder have
already been taken care of by the proposed
amendment of section 19. In fact, the
stakeholder has welcomed the proposed
amendment of section 19 in this regard.
The vires of Section 6A of DSPE Act was
challenged in Dr. Subramanian Swamy v.
Director CBI, (2005) 2 SCC 317. The Hon’ble
3. D.K. Singh, CBI/PP
C/o Shri Dinesh Kumar
Sharma, Ld. Special Judge
(CBI Cases) Saket Court,
Room No. 501, New Delhi

66
12 3 4
As such, it is desirable to keep this
amendment process in abeyance till the Final
verdict of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
The Committee on Civil, Services reforms
(Hota Committee) recommended the deletion
of Sec. 13(1)( d)(iii) PC Act, 1988 in order to
give protection to officer involved in
commercial decision. This will equally be
applicable to officers engaged in policy decision
making. In this view of the matter, it is
submitted that this will equally be applicable
to officers engaged in policy decision making.
Section 4(1) of the CVC alone has power of
superintendence over DSPE in so far as it
relates to offences under PC Act, 1988.
It follows, therefore, that Central Government
cannot usurp the function of CVC by
incorporation of Section 6A, DSPE Act, 1946.
My own honest and simple opinion is that
Section 6(A), DSPE Act, 1946 is constitutionally
invalid.
The proposed amendment of Section 6A,
DSPE Act, 1946 giving extended coverage to
erstwhile public servants is in extreme bad
taste and without decorum in as much as it
militates against the fundamental and basic
concept of the rule of law:
No one is above the law.
Court found that divergent opinions had been taken by the
Court in Vineet Narain’ s case and in K. Veeraswamy v.
Union of India, (1991) 3 SCC 655, as to whether prior
permission could be prescribed as a mandatory precondition
for investigation, and referred the issue to a larger bench,
where it is still pending. However, no stay was granted
against section 6A and, as on date, section 6A of the
DSPE Act stands as the law in force.
The suggestion made by the stakeholder is based on his
own personal opinion on the Constitutional validity of section
6A.
The rationale behind Section 6A of the DSPE Act is to
provide a screening mechanism to filter out frivolous or
motivated investigations that could be initiated against senior
officers at policy making levels with a view to protecting
them from harassment and to enable them to take decisions
without fear. Further, it may be mentioned that Section 6A
was inserted in the PC Act through the CVC Act, 2003, on
the basis of a recommendation made by the Joint
Parliamentary Committee in its report on the CVC Bill
itself. Therefore, the question of Central Government
usurping any of the powers of the CVC under the CVC
Act does not arise.

67
In State of West Bengal Vs. Shyamdas
Banerjee (2008) 9 SCC 45, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held that:–
“It is no doubt true that the policy under
section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1947 is that there should not be
unnecessary harassment of a public
servant. But if the accused ceased to be
a public servant and loses his protective
cover under section 6 of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1947 or Section 197
CrPC and is open to prosecution without
sanction having to be obtained, it would
also necessarily mean that the Special
Judge would cease to have jurisdiction
over an accused who is a retired public
servant.”
The sum and substance of this important
Supreme Court decision is that the Special
Judge does not have power and jurisdiction
to hold trial in respect of an accused person
who has ceased to be a public servant.
Accordingly, it is prayed that Expl. 2 to
Section 2(c) PC Act, 1988 and Expl. 2 to
Sec. 21 Indian Penal Code be amended by
substituting the words:-
“every person who is in actual possession of
the situation of a public servant.”
With the words:–
“every person who is or was in actual
The judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, referred to
by the stakeholder, was rendered in the context of the
West Bengal Special Courts Act, 1949 and the definition of
“public servant” within the scope of the old Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947, which included the definition of
“public servant” within the meaning of Section 21 IPC. As
the West Bengal Special Courts Act, 1949 had adopted the
definition of “public servant” as defined in the 1947 PC
Act for purposes of jurisdiction of the Special Courts, the
Supreme Court has, following its decision in A.R. Antulay’s
case [(1984) 2 SCC 193, in which it had been held that
a M.L.A. is not a public servant within the meaning of
Section 21 IPC], held that
“Since the respondent No.1 ceased to be a Member
of the State Legislature at a point of time when
cognizance was taken by the Special Judge 4th
Court, Calcutta, such cognizance and the proceedings
taken on the basis thereof must be held to have
been vitiated.”
The Court has clearly distinguished between the definitions
of “public servant” as contained in the 1947 PC Act
(which borrowed the definition of section 21 IPC) and the
one contained in the PC Act, 1988 and has given its
judgment on the basis of the application of the definition
in the old Act (by virtue of the provisions of the West
Bengal Special Court Act) to the proceedings in question.
It is also pertinent to note here that in terms of section 4
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure or in
any other law for the time being in force, the offences
punishable under the Act shall be tried by Special Judges
only. Therefore, there appears to be no need to amend the
Explanation 2 to section 2(c) of the PC Act, 1988 as
suggested by the stakeholder. Further, amendment of section

68
12 3 4
possession of the situation of a public servant.”
Incorporation of Chapter IV A PC Act, 1988-Attachment
and Forfeiture of Property.
This Chapter proposes to bodily lift provisions out of the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944 and implant
the same in the PC Act, 1988 with some modifications.
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944 needs to
be scrapped, and its provisions done away with, because
it has now become a relic of antiquity and has long since
served its utility and purpose.
It may be worthwhile to re-call that in the 166
th Law
Commission Report – 15 th Law Commission of India under
the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice BR Jeevan Reddy an
observation regarding forfeiture and confiscation of property
has been made as follows:–
“merely sending the corrupt holders of public office of
jail is  no remedy. It does not really hurt them. Unless their
ill gotten assets are forfeited to the state, the canker of
corruption cannot be really tacked.”
The Law Commission of India had even submitted a draft
of the proposed legislation. It is submitted that the
committee may please take the same into consideration.
The Bihar Special Courts, Act, 2009 is also a good piece
of legislation on the point which may also please be
considered. In this, justice is not only done but also seen
to be done by example.
21 of the Indian Penal Code is beyond the
scope of the present Bill.
The suggestion to scrap the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1944 is beyond the
scope of the present Bill, as the relevant
provisions of the present Bill are only aimed
at introducing self-contained provisions for
attachment and forfeiture of property, in the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
The Law Commission of India had, in its
166th Report, submitted to Government in
February, 1999, recommended enactment of
a separate law called “The Corrupt Public
Servants (Forfeiture of Property Act),
providing for the forfeiture of property
acquired by holders of public office through
corrupt means. The recommendation of the
Law Commission was examined at that time,
in consultation with Ministry of Law and
after obtaining opinion of some legal
luminaries, it was felt that no new law needs
to be enacted for the purpose and the question
of incorporating suitable provisions in the PC
Act should be examined seriously. On the re-
examination of the issue in consultation with
the Ministry of Law and the CBI, it was
decided that the provisions of the Criminal
Law (Amendment) Ordinance 1944, with some
modifications could be considered for
incorporation in the Prevention of Corruption
Act as separate chapter. A Group of Ministers
(GoM) to consider issues relating to

69
amendment of Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, set up in the year 2006 under the
chairmanship of the then minister of Home
Affairs, also considered this issue and
recommended the insertion of a new chapter
on confiscation of ill gotten property of
corrupt public servants on the lines of the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance 1944
with suitable modifications. Thus, the proposed
insertion of a new chapter on attachment
and· forfeiture of property formed part of the
Prevention of Corruption (Amendment)
Bill, 2008 which was introduced in Parliament
in December, 2008 and was also passed by
the Lok Sabha. The said Bill lapsed due to
dissolution of the 14th Lok Sabha. The present
Bill seeks to introduce the same provisions in
the Act.
The basic intent behind insertion of
this chapter is to ensure that the tainted
property is not alienated during the period of
trial of an accused public servant. At the
same time, it is also necessary to ensure that
the property is not confiscated before the
public servant is held guilty of the offence he
allegedly committed under the Act.
It may further be mentioned that
offences under the Prevention of Corruption
Act are also predicate offences under the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, as reported
by the Select Committee of Rajya Sabha and
presently pending in Rajya Sabha, also contains
It is humbly prayed that the proposed legislation, which is
a re-mix version of the Criminal Law (Amendment)
Ordinance, 1944, needs re-think in the larger interest of
justice.
The proposed law refers to adopting attachment procedure
in CPC, 1908 for execution of decree. This is at once
bleak and dismal and will guarantee inordinate delay.
The Supreme Court in (1983) SCC (Cri.) 11, has held that
the Special Judge can pass order of confiscation, U/S 452
Cr.PC 1973.
If the Committee really has a will to make attachment and
confiscation proceedings effective, attachment and
confiscation must be administered vigorously and rigorously
during investigation, as also trial, and upon completion
thereof after pronouncement of Judgement.

70
12 3 4
provisions for attachment/confiscation of
property acquired by corrupt means, even
while prosecution is pending.
Hence, the suggestions are not found to be
acceptable.
India has ratified the UNCAC on 9th May,
2011. Therefore, it has become necessary to
ensure that our anti-corruption laws are fully
in compliance with the obligations under the
Convention. Even though our domestic laws
are found to be substantially compliant with
most of the mandatory provisions of the UN
Convention, the existing laws have been found
to be deficient in relation to –
(a) the requirement relating to
criminalization of bribery of
foreign public officials;
(b) the requirement relating to
criminalization of private sector
bribery; and
(c) the requirement relating to
criminalization of bribe-giving
(supply side of bribery).
In regard to the bribery of foreign public
officials, the Prevention of Bribery of Foreign
Public Officials and Officials of Public
international Organizations Bill, 2011” was
introduced in Lok Sabha in March, 2011 and
Consolidated, Composite and Complete
Law on Corruption:
The statement of Objects and Reasons reveals
that the proposed legislation is the effect of
ratification by India of the United Nations
Convention Against Corruption, the
international practice on treatment of the
offence of bribery and Corruption, and judicial
pronouncements.
The proposed an1endments far exceed the
original Act and attempts to completely
overhaul the same.
If the desired objective is to have a complete
and composite consolidated law on corruption,
it may please be considered that Parliament
may given to the nation a brand new
legislation Prevention of Corruption Act, 2014
[! Or (?)].

71
is presently pending before the Lok Sabha. In regard to
private sector bribery, a draft Bill for amending the Indian
Penal Code has been circulated amongst State Governments
by the Ministry of Home Affairs, seeking their views in the
matter. The present Bill seeks , inter alia , to address the
supply side of bribery and to fill in some gaps in the
existing legislation so as to bring it in line with international
practice on treatment of the offence of bribery. Therefore,
there is no need for enactment of a brand new legislation.

72
Comments of DOPT on the Suggestions Received by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee of the Rajya Sabha Examining ‘The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013’
Memo Name of the Comments/Suggestions Comments of DOPT
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
4. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan,
Foundation for Democratic
Reforms (FDR) and LOK
SATTA,
6-3-1187, 806, 8
th Floor,
Srinivasa Towers, Beside
ITC Kakatiya Hotel,
Begumpet, Hyderabad
Sec 5 (of Principal Act) : Procedure and
powers of Special Judge [Clause 2 in the
proposed Bill]
a. A legal provision needs to be introduced
fixing a time limit for various stages of trial.
This could be done by amendments to the
CrPC.
b. Steps have to be taken to ensure that
judges declared as Special Judges under the
provisions of Prevention of Corruption Act
give primary attention to disposal of cases
under the Act. Only if there is inadequate
work under the Act, should the Special Judges
be entrusted with other responsibilities.
c. It has to be ensured that the proceedings
of courts trying cases under the Prevention
of corruption Act are held on a day-to-day
basis, and no deviation is permitted.
d. The Supreme Court and the High Courts
may lay down· guidelines to preclude
unwarranted adjournments and avoidable
delays.
Section 4(4) of the Prevention of Corruption Act already
contains a provision that “Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
1974), a Special Judge shall, as far as practicable, hold the
trial of an offence on a day-to-day basis.
It may also be mentioned in this context that, in its
questionnaire on the present Bill [forwarded by Rajya Sabha
Secretariat vide their O.M. dated 11.09.2013], the Hon’ble
Standing Committee has, inter alia , made the following
suggestion in Question No.20 of the questionnaire, namely:–
“Even though Section 4(4) of the principal Act
says that cases under Prevention of Corruption Act
have to be tried on day by day basis by Special Judges,
it is not adhered to uniformly. The reasons may be
many. One of the reasons is that the courts constituted
for trial of cases under Prevention of Corruption Act
have got number of cases and so it is not possible to
post the cases day by day. So some provision is to be
made. If cases is adjourned, reasons to be assigned.
The recent Civil Procedure Code (Amendment)
Act 1999 has suggested that witnesses could be
examined by junior lawyer so that unnecessary

73
adjournments and the time consumed for examination
of witnesses would be avoided. By introducing such
amendments in the Prevention of Corruption Act it will
have a salutary effect. The time consumed for
examination of witnesses could be curtailed.
What is the reaction of the Ministry in regard to the
suitable amendment of Section 4(4) of the principal Act
in view of the above observation of the Committee?”.
The above suggestion of the Hon’ble Standing Committee
was considered by this Department and this Department
has, in its response to the said suggestion indicated as
follows:
“As the issue raised by the Hon’ble Committee
raises an important question of law, the Ministry of
Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) is being
requested to give its advice in the ‘matter. In principle,
DoPT does not have any objection to any amendment
in section 4(4) of the Act, which is aimed at avoiding
delay and ensuring expeditious conclusion of trials.”.
The definition of the offence of bribery in the proposed
new section 7, particularly, the expression “improper
performance of a relevant public function” is wide enough
to cover all the cases cited by the stake holder.
Section 7 (Public servant taking
gratification other than legal remuneration
in respect of an official Act.)
[Offences relating to public servant being
bribed in the proposed Bill]
Corruption Offences should also include:
● Gross perversion of the constitution
and democratic institutions amounting
to wilful violation of oath of office.

74
12 3 4
● Abuse of authority unduly favouring
or harming someone.
● Obstruction of justice.
● Squandering public money.
Offence of Collusive Bribery:
Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption
Act needs to be amended to provide for a
special offence of ‘collusive bribery’; An
offence could be classified as ‘collusive
bribery’ if the outcome or intended outcome
of the transaction leads to a loss to the state,
public or public interest. The punishment for
all such cases of collusive bribery should be
double that of other cases of bribery.
Burden of proof on the accused· in such
cases:
In all such cases if it is established that the
interest of the state or public has suffered
because of an act of a public servant, then
the court shall presume that the public servant
and the beneficiary of the decision committed
an offence of’ collusive bribery’.
As the definition of the offences under the proposed new
section 7 (bribe-taking) and the proposed new section 8
(bribe-giving), would adequately cover all cases of collusive
bribery too, there is no need for a separate offence of
collusive bribery. As the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker are
both punishable separately under the proposed new
provisions, there is no need for a higher punishment for
such collusive bribery.
The suggestion that in all cases if it is established that the
interest of the state or public has suffered because of an
act of a public servant, then the court shall presume that
the public servant and the beneficiary of the decision
committed an offence of collusive bribery, is not acceptable.
The question whether public interest has suffered on
account of a particular decision can be subjective and may
vary according to any changes in the circumstances after
such decision is taken. If a decision is taken bona fide  by
a public servant, simply because at a later stage it turns
out (upon hindsight) that there is loss to the state on
account of that decision, no criminal liability Can be
presumed on the part of the public servant for taking such
a decision, unless it can be shown that the decision involved

75
wrong motive and thus an improper performance of a
public function/duty. As any decision taken bona fide by a
public servant can be called into question at a later point
of time on the ground that it is not in public interest or
that it has caused loss to the State/public, no public
servant will then be willing to take decisions. This will not
be in the interest of effective administration.
As the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker are both punishable
separately under the proposed new provisions of section 7
and section 8, there is no need for a higher punishment for
such collusive bribery.
As regards the suggestion for prescription of mandatory
prison sentence of 5 years in all cases and 15 years in
serious cases, it may be pointed out that at present, the
minimum punishment for an offence under section 7 is
only six months and the maximum punishment is five
years imprisonment. Under the proposed new sections 7
and 8 as per the present Bill, the person convicted for an
offence under any of these two sections (the bribe taker
as well as the bribe giver) can be punished with
imprisonment which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable
to fine. Further, under the proposed new section 14,
“whoever convicted of an offence under this Act
subsequently commits an offence punishable under this
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall be not less than three years but which may
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.”. Thus,
in the case of habitual commission of offences under the
Act, a maximum punishment of imprisonment upto ten
Stricter punishments:
The Punishment for all such cases of collusive
bribery should be double that of other cases
of bribery.
Mandatary Sentencing:
A definite, long-term prison sentence is
required to address serious offence,
particularly those committed by higher
officials, whether elected or appointed. Hence,
it is recommended that conviction should
entail a mandatory prison sentence of 5 years.
All over the world, stiff prison sentences
and confiscation of assets are employed in
such offences.
In cases of (i) involving large financial sums
for serious economic offences, particularly
those involving higher officials, (ii) Collusive
corruption, and (iii) breach of fiduciary
responsibility and betrayal of public trust
resulting in grave loss to the public exchequer,
the minimum prison sentence should be 15
years. For instance, in the USA, former
Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich in federal

76
12 3 4
corruption conviction was sentenced to 14
years. Dr. Arun Sharma and Dr. Kiran Sharma
were sentenced to 15 years in a massive
health care fraud, and their properties were
confiscated.
Proposed new Sec. 9 [Offences Relating
To Bribing A Public Servant by A
Commercial Organisation as in the
proposed Bill]
Non-Governmental agencies, which receive
substantial funding, should be covered under
the Prevention of Corruption Act., Norms
should be laid down that any institution or
body that has received more than 50% of its
annual operating costs, or a sum equal to or
greater than Rs. 1 crore during any of the
preceding 3 years should be deemed to have
obtained ‘Substantial funding’ for that period
and purpose of such funding.
years has been prescribed. It is considered that the proposed
enhancements in the punishments are adequate. As regards
confiscation of ill-gotten property of corrupt public servants,
the present Bill seeks to incorporate a separate chapter on
attachment and forfeiture of property.
Under the proposed new section 9 which seeks to
define offences relating to bribing a public servant by a
commercial organisation, a commercial organisation has
been defined as follows:-
(a) “commercial organisation” means—
(i) a body which is incorporated in India and
which carries on a business, whether in India or
outside India;
(ii) any other body which is incorporated outside
India and which carries on a business, or part
of a business, in any part of India;
(iii) a partnership firm or any association of
persons formed in India and which carries on a
business (whether in India or outside India); or
(iv) any other partnership or association of
persons which is formed outside India and which
carries on a business, or part of a business, in
any part of India;

77Sec. 13 (Criminal misconduct by a public
servant)
In addition to the penalty in criminal cases,
the law should provide that public servants
who cause loss to the state or citizens by
their corrupt acts should be made liable to
make good the loss caused and, in addition,
be liable for damages. This could be done by
inserting a chapter in the Prevention of
Corruption Act.
For the purposes of the section, “business” has been
defined as under:–
(b) “business” includes a trade or profession or
providing service including charitable service;
Thus, any organisation which carries on a business
(including the carrying on of a trade or profession or
providing service including charitable service) is fully
covered by the definition of ‘commercial organisation’.
Therefore, Non-Governmental Organisations whether they
receive any funding from the government or not, are also
covered under the definition of ‘commercial organisation’
and will be equally liable for offences under section 9, if
they are engaged in any business including the providing of
service including charitable service.
Corrupt practices are already subject to penalties under
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 which include
imprisonment, fine and forfeiture of property acquired
through corrupt· means. Any property that a public
servant cannot account for having acquired through
legitimate means is also subject to process and is liable
to be forfeited. Further, the proposed amendments in the
Act would make not only the public servant who is
guilty of corruption but also the person who induces the
public servant to perform improperly a relevant public
function, to both imprisonment and also fine. Also, the
Bill now provides for corporate liability for acts of
bribery committed by persons associated with a
commercial entity and the commercial entity is also
liable to be punished with fine. The quantum of the fine
to be imposed on both the bribe giver and the bribe

78
12 3 4
taker will be determined by the court, having regard to
the severity of the offence.
The suggestion is, therefore, not acceptable.
The Law Commission of India had, in its 166th Report,
submitted to Government in February, 1999, recommended
enactment of a separate law called “The Corrupt Public
Servants (Forfeiture of Property) Act”, providing for the
forfeiture of property acquired by holders of public office
through corrupt means. The recommendation of the Law
Commission was examined at that time, in consultation
with Ministry of Law and after obtaining opinion of some
legal luminaries, it was felt that no new law needs to be
enacted for the purpose and the question of incorporating
suitable provisions in the PC Act should be examined
seriously. On the re-examination of the issue in consultation
with the Ministry of Law and the CBI, it was decided that
the provisions of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance
1944, with some modifications could be considered for
incorporation in the Prevention of Corruption Act as separate
chapter. A Group of Ministers (GoM) to consider issues
relating to amendment of Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, set up in the year 2006 under the chairmanship
of the then minister of Home Affairs, also considered this
issue and recommended the insertion of a new chapter on
confiscation of ill gotten property of corrupt public servants
on the lines of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance
1944 with suitable modifications. Thus, the proposed
insertion of a new chapter on attachment and forfeiture of
property formed part of the Prevention of Corruption
Proposed insertion of chapter IV A
(Attachment and Forfeiture of Property)
The Corrupt Public Servants (Forfeiture of
Property) Bill as suggested by the 166
th Law
Commission should be enacted without further
delay. In particular, the provisions for
attachment, forfeiture and confiscation of
corrupt proceedings should ensure that:
● Wealth/assets of corrupt public
servants, not just the proceeds
transacted in the corruption offences
are covered.
● The assets/wealth of persons related
to or associated with the corrupt public
servant and benefiting from his
offences should be covered.
● Hurdles to seizure and confiscation of
ill-gotten wealth in the form of ill-
defined “prior approval” provisions.
from the Central and State
Government are not placed.

79
(Amendment) Bill, 2008 which was introduced in Parliament
in December, 2008 and was also passed by the Lok Sabha.
The said Bill lapsed due to dissolution of the 14th Lok
Sabha. The present Bill seeks to introduce the same
provisions in the Act.
The basic intent behind insertion of this chapter is to
ensure that the tainted property is not alienated during the
period of trial of an accused public servant. At the same
time, it is also necessary to ensure that the property is not
confiscated before the public servant is held guilty of the
offence he allegedly committed under the Act.
It may further be mentioned that offences under the
Prevention of Corruption Act are also predicate offences
under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, as reported by the
Select Committee of Rajya Sabha and presently pending in
Rajya Sabha, also contains provisions for attachment/
confiscation of property acquired by corrupt means, even
while prosecution is pending.
Hence, the suggestions are not found to be acceptable.
Clause 45 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill contains
provisions already regarding income of public servants not
declared by the public servant. The clause reads as follows:
“45. If any public servant wilfully or for reasons which
are not justifiable, fails to-
(a) to declare his assets; or
(b) gives misleading information in respect of such
assets and is found to be in possession of assets not
disclosed or in respect of which misleading information
was furnished,
● Any income of public servants that is
not declared/intimated as being from
lawful sources should be considered
as illegal.

80
12 3 4
Immediate implementation of the Bcnami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 is
necessary.
Sec. 19 (Previous sanction necessary for
prosecution)
Sanction for Prosecution:
a. Prior sanction should not be necessary for
prosecuting a public servant who has been
trapped red-handed or in cases of possessing
assets disproportionate to the known sources
of income.
then, such assets shall, unless otherwise proved, be
presumed to belong to the public servant and shall be
presumed to be assets acquired by corrupt means:
Provided that the competent authority may condone or
exempt the public servant from furnishing information in
respect of assets not exceeding such minimum value as
may be prescribed.”
As regards the suggestion to immediately implement the
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, it may be
pointed out that the said Act prohibits benami transactions
and even provides for Government acquisition of property
held benami. During the process of formulating the rules
for implementing certain provisions of the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, it was found that
owing to infirmities in the legislation, formulation of the
rules would not be possible without a comprehensive
legislation by repealing the Act. Accordingly, the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011, to replace the existing
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, was introduced
in Parliament on 18.08.2011. The Bill is presently pending
in Lok Sabha.
Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
prohibits the taking of cognisance by the court of an
offence alleged to have been committed by a public servant
under section 7 (public servant taking gratification other
than legal remuneration in respect of an official act),

81
section 10 [Punishment for abetment by public servant of
offences defined in section 8 or 9], section 11 (Public
servant obtaining valuable thing, without consideration from
person concerned in proceeding or business transacted by
such public servant), section 13 (Criminal Misconduct –
which includes indulgence in corrupt or illegal means and
obtaining pecuniary or other benefits for self or any other
person by abuse of official position, without public interest
and possession of assets disproportionate to known sources
of income) and section 15 (punishment for attempt).
The Parliament has thus mandated that, notwithstanding
the fact that certain aspects of illegal or corrupt means
having been established through investigation, there should
be prior sanction of the Central/State Government or the
authority competent to remove the public servant, through
a speaking sanction order as to whether a prima facie  case
is made out against the public servant. The underlying
intent of the provision of section 19 is to prevent vexatious
and mala fide  driven prosecutions to harass an honest
public servant who may have taken certain decisions in the
course of performance of his duty. The reason for such
protection is that the appropriate government/competent
authority is better placed to appreciate the procedural
nuances of the decision making process in any transaction
which are regulated by administrative and financial principles
enshrined in the executive instructions of an organisation,
which the investigating agency may perhaps not be able to
appreciate. It may further be pointed out in this context
that, even though there is a presumption under section 20
of the Act, where a public servant accepted gratification
other than legal remuneration, that he accepted such
gratification as a motive or reward for the offence, the law
has made the prior sanction of the government/competent
authority still necessary for prosecution of the public servant.
Therefore, the suggestion to dispense with the prior sanction

82
12 3 4
b. The Prevention of Corruption Act should
be amended to ensure that sanctioning
authorities are not summoned and instead the
documents can be obtained and produced
before the courts by the appropriate authority.
in trap cases and in cases relating to alleged possession of
assets disproportionate to known sources of income is not
acceptable.
The legal position as upheld by various courts including
the apex court, is that if the sanction is accorded by the
competent sanctioning authority by a speaking order and it
contains the facts constituting the offence and the grounds
of satisfaction, there is no requirement for the prosecution
to summon the sanctioning/signing/authenticating authority
for their personal evidence to prove the validity of the
sanction. If at all necessary, the same can be corroborated
by producing the original sanction and by examining the
person conversant with the signature of the sanctioning
authority/signing/authenticated authority. There is thus no
requirement for the prosecution to insist on personal
evidence of sanctioning/signing/authenticating authority for
proving the validity of sanction as the same can be proved
adequately otherwise. However, if the prosecution sanction
is challenged by the defence on the grounds of competence
of the sanctioning authority or non-application of mind and
if a  prima-facie  case for doubting the validity of the
sanction is made out by the accused, the trial court would
be within its powers, under the provisions of section 311
of the Cr.P.C., to summon the sanctioning/signing/
authenticating authority. Further, under section 311 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, the Court has the power to
summon any person as a witness, if his evidence appears
to it as essential to the just decision of the case. Having
regard to this, the suggestion to amend the Act for ensuring
that the sanctioning authority is not summoned may create
practical difficulties.

83
c. The Presiding Officer of a House of
Legislature should be designated as the
sanctioning authority for MPs and MLAs
respectively.
d. The requirement of prior sanction for
prosecution now applicable to serving public
servants should also apply to retired public
servants for acts performed while in service.
e. In all cases where the Government of
India is empowered to grant sanction for
prosecution, this power should be delegated
to an Empowered Committee comprising the
Central Vigilance Commissioner and the
Departmental Secretary to Government. In
case of a difference of opinion between the
two, the matter could be resolved by placing
it before the full Central Vigilance Commission.
In case, sanction is required against a
Secretary to Government, then the
Empowered Committee would comprise of
The suggested amendment goes beyond the scope of the
aims and objects of the present Bill. The Supreme Court
has, in the case of P.V . Narasima Rao [(1998) 4 SCC
626], pointed out that the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 had not prescribed an authority to grant sanction
for prosecution in the case of MPs/MLAs and had hoped
that the Parliament would address itself to the task of·
removing this lacuna. The question of amending section 19
to provide for a competent authority for sanctioning of
prosecution of MPs and MLAs was considered by the
Government on a number of occasions. A Group of
Ministers (GoM) to consider the issues relating to
amendments to the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988,
setup in the year 2006, had considered this issue at its
meeting held on 24.01.2008 under the chairmanship of the
then Home Minister, and recommended that having regard
to the complexities involved, it may require more time as
there may be a need to engage in wider consultations.
The suggestion stands already taken care of by the proposed
amendment of Section 19, which will now cover both
serving and retired public servants.
The decision to accord or deny sanction of prosecution is
an administrative act which is vested in the Central or
State Government or the authority competent to remove
the public servant from his office. At the Central Government
level, there are elaborate administrative instructions on
consulting the Central Vigilance Commission by the Central
Government/Competent Authority before passing final orders
on such requests. Therefore, the setting up of a Committee
(with CVC and the Department Secretary as Members)
will serve no purpose. As regards, the time limit for
deciding requests for sanction of prosecution, the proposed
amendment in the present Bill has put the time limit of

84
12 3 4
Cabinet Secretary and the Central Vigilance
Commissioner. Similar arrangements may also
be made at the State level. In all cases the
order granting sanction for prosecution or
otherwise shall be issued within two months.
In case of refusal, the reasons for refusal
should be placed before the respective
legislature annually.
Sec. 24 (Statement by bribe-giver not to
subject him to prosecution)
When corruption is rampant, we need reliable
evidence to act decisively against public
servants. Most corruption in India is
extortionary where a citizen or corporate is
fleeced by an unscrupulous official simply to
do what was originally due to them or what
they are entitled to. In such a scenario, it is
important to give immunity to bribe givers
who are victims of extortion in order to be
able to prosecute corrupt officials. Even in
countries like the US, plea bargaining is a
very common occurrence whereby a culprit
gets immunity by cooperating with the
officials.
Sec. 6A of DSPE Act 1946 (Approval of
Central Government to conduct inquiry
or investigation)
Permission to take up investigations under
the present statutory arrangement should be
three months, which is extendable by one month for
reasons to be recorded in writing where consultation with
the Attorney General or the Advocate General, as the case
may be, is required. As the consideration of requests for
granting sanction for prosecution of public servants requires
consideration of voluminous, material requiring application
of mind by the appropriate Government/Competent Authority
and also consultation with CVC, etc., where necessary, the
fixing of a time limit of two months is not practicable.
Since, the intentional offering, promising or giving of a
bribe is sought to be separately defined as an offence, the
protection to the bribe giver under section 24 should not
be available in the proposed scheme of things. It is felt
that any provision relating to plea bargaining to the bribe
giver would dilute the rigour of the offence of bribe-
giving.
The suggestion to confer powers on CVC to grant
approval under section 6A of the DSPE Act for investigation

85
given by the Central Vigilance Commissioner
in consultation with the concerned Secretary.
In case of investigation against a Secretary
to Government, the permission should be
given by a Committee comprising the Cabinet
Secretary and the Central Vigilance
Commissioner. This would require an
amendment to the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act. In the interim the powers
of the Union Government may be delegated
to the Central Vigilance Commissioner, to be
exercised in the manner stated above. A time
limit of 30 days may be prescribed for
processing this permission.
Appropriate provision must be made in the
case of states.
(i) In every public related office,
provision should be made for
formation and function of public –
public servant Anti-corruption
Committee. This committee
should be empowered to examine
the corruption related issues of that
office. It will examine the work
done by the public servant in
question, his attendance and
absenteeism and recommend for
suitable action.
(ii) Special court must be constituted
to try the corruption cases. Trial
should be conducted on daily basis
and deliver justice within three months.
is not acceptable. The prior approval under section 6 A of
the DSPE Act is to be accorded by the Central Government
upon careful consideration of the matter with a view to
protecting senior public servants working at policy making
levels at the Central Government against vexatious/harassing
investigations. The act of according or denying such
approval for investigation has, therefore, been vested in the
Central Government. The suggestion to confer this power
on the CVC is, therefore, not acceptable.
(i) There is already an existing vigilance mechanism in
each Ministry/Department/organisation, which monitors
the vigilance work. The monitoring of attendance and
absenteeism in public offices is beyond the scope of
the present Bill.
(ii) In terms of section 4(1) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988, notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure or in
any other law for the time being in force, the offences
Dr. T.V . Govindhan, MBBS,
MS (Member of Senior
citizen bureau),
No. 78, Sekaran Street,
Krishnapuram, Ambattur,
Chennai – 600053 (Tamil
Nadu)
5.

86
12 3 4
(iii) Collective punishment i.e. ,
punishment not only to the person
caught but also to the superiors or
subordinates, as well as colleagues.
(iv) Suitable rules to be formed to
facilitate the public servants to
handover the bribe givers to the
police.
(v) And such diligent public servants
to be enthused by rewarding them
with Promotions in the job,
increments, extension of service
even after retirement and interest
free loans.
punishable under the Act shall be tried by Special
Judges only. Further, section 4(4) already provides
that a Special Judge shall, as far as practicable hold
the trial of an offence on day-to-day basis. Thus, the
suggestions made by the stakeholder are already
covered by the existing provisions of the Act.
(iii) Collective punishment i.e., punishment not only to the
person caught but also to the superiors and
subordinates, as well as colleagues, is not possible
unless there is evidence to show that the superiors,
subordinates or colleagues were involved in the
commission/abetment of the offence, either directly
or indirectly. Where there is evidence of such
involvement, the existing provisions of the Act are
adequate to take care of persons so involved in the
commission/abetment of the offence.
(iv) It is the duty of every public servant to report to the
appropriate law enforcement agency if any person
who gives or offers a bribe and thus commits a
criminal offence. It is an offence under the general
criminal law (IPC) to conceal any design to commit
an offence punishable with imprisonment. No separate
provisions are, therefore, necessary in the PC Act to
facilitate the handing over of the bribe giver.
(v) The rewarding of diligent public servants with
promotions, increments, extension of service, etc. is
beyond the scope of the Prevention of Corruption
Act.

87
(vi) In case of the death or injury
caused to the public servants who
hands over the bribe givers to the
police, his family to be supported
suitably.
(vii) Granting sanction against the
public servant to investigate or
to prosecute the corrupt public
servant. Time limits must be fixed
on granting sanction or otherwise.
If the sanction is not granted, the
reason should be recorded and
proceedings should be available for
Public Scrutiny. There should be
provision for the public to challenge
the denial of sanction in the Court
of law.
(viii) Provision for sting operations by
Students and Senior Citizens.
V olunteering Students and Senior
Citizens are to be permitted to form
Anti-corruption associations and get them
registered under the registrar with the
police. They will work to locate the
bribe givers and takers and inform the
investigative officers and follow the
action taken till the end.
For their services the students may
be rewarded with exemption in the
service commission examinations.
(vi) Extension of support to families of public servants in
the event of death or injury caused to the public
servants who hand over bribe givers to police, is
beyond the scope of the Prevention of Corruption
Act. Such support to families of public servants who
die while in harness is covered under extant service
rules, instructions and other welfare schemes.
(vii) The proposed amendment of section 19 already takes
care of the suggestion to fix time limit for grant, or
refusal of sanction to prosecute a public servant. It
also provides for extension of the time limit for
reasons to be recorded in writing, that too in cases
wherein the advice of the Attorney General or Advocate
General, as the case may be, is deemed necessary. As
regards the question of enabling public to challenge
the denial of sanction in a court of law, even now the
Constitutional Courts have the power under their writ
jurisdiction to go into such decisions.
(viii) The suggestion is beyond the scope of the Act.
Involvement of students and senior citizens or, for
that matter, any citizen as informer or to carry out
sting operations, etc. are matters falling within the
general criminal law and are outside the scope of the
Prevention of Corruption Act. Similarly, the suggestions
regarding exemption from service commission
examinations, enhancement of pensions, supporting in
elections, etc. are beyond the scope of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988.

88
12 3 4
For the senior citizens enhancement
of pension to be considered. If such
senior citizen/students desire to contest
elections they may be supported by the
government financially.
The public may be permitted and
encouraged to honour the investigating
officers and prosecuting officers, who
efficiently do their job.
Section 7 (1)(a)
In line 2 the words “any financial or
other advantage” may be replaced as “any
cash or kind” and last line “improperly either
by himself or by another public servant or
by any other person”
Section 7 (1)(c)
Last line may be worded as “(whether by
himself or by any other public servant or
through any other-person) of a relevant
function or activity or”
Shri K.L. Katyal, Ex Deputy
Secretary, G-3, Rattan
Park, Najafgarh Road, New
Delhi–110015.
6.
The expression “financial or other advantage” is of a very
wide amplitude, covering all kinds of advantages, both
pecuniary and non-pecuniary. Therefore, there is no need
to include the words “any cash or kind” as suggested by
the stakeholder. Further, in terms of Explanation 2, below
section 2(c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, “Wherever
the words “public servant” occur, they shall be understood
of every person who is an actual possession of the situation
of a public servant, whatever legal defect there may be in
his right to hold that situation”. In view of this, there is
no need to insert the words “or by any other person” in
the last line of proposed section 7(1)(a) as suggested by
the stakeholder.
As already mentioned in the response to the suggested
amendment to the provisions of section7(1)(a), in terms of
Explanation 2., below section 2(c) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, “Wherever the words “public servant”
occur, they shall be understood of every person who is an

89
Section (7)(d) (Explanation 3)
Line No. 2 may be read as: “attempts to
obtain from or through any person or public
servants”.
Section 8 (b) –  the fine for imposition may
be quantified.
In Section 13 sub-section (1)(b)  the last
two lines may be worded as “pecuniary
resources or assets or movable/immovable
property disproportionate to his known
sources of income”.
actual possession of the situation of a public servant,
whatever legal defect there may be in his right to hold that
situation”. In view of this, there is no need to insert the
words “or through any other person” in the last line of
proposed section 7(1)(c) as suggested by the stakeholder.
The suggestion to substitute the words “attempts to obtain
from or through any person” in place of the expression
“attempts to obtain from any person” in the second line of
the Explanation is not acceptable. The explanation speaks
about deceiving any person (into a belief that the deceiver
is about to be in office) and receiving, accepting or
attempting to obtain any financial or other advantage from
the person so deceived. The suggested addition would,
therefore, confuse the clear meaning of the explanation.
The fine which can be imposed on a bribe-giver is to be
determined by the Court depending upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. In a case of petty bribery, the
court may impose a nominal fine, whereas in a case
involving big ticket bribery, particularly, in a case involving
a big commercial organisation, the court may impose a
heavy fine on the bribe giver, amounting to crores of
rupees. The suggestion to quantify the fine under this
section is, therefore, not acceptable.
The expression “pecuniary resources or property
disproportionate to his known sources of income” is wide
enough to cover all sorts of assets or movable/immovable
property. Therefore, the addition of the words “assets or
movable/immovable” in the section is not necessary.

90
12 3 4
Chapter (IV A) 18C(2)
Last line may be amended suitably “to
show cause within a fortnight why the order
should not be made absolute”.
Section 20 of the Principle Act (Page 11
of the Amendment).
The third line may be read as “to obtain
for himself, or for any other public servants
or for any other person, any financial or
other advantage from”
The time to be given to the accused public servant to
show cause as to why the ad interim order of attachment
should not be made absolute has to be decided by the
Special Judge, having regard to the facts al1d circumstances
of each case. The prescription of a time limit of “within
a fortnight” as suggested by the stake-holder may, therefore,
not be practicable.
The expression “to obtain for himself, or for any other
person, any financial or other advantage from any person”
is wide enough to cover any financial or other advantage
which has been obtained or attempted to be obtained from
any person for the public servant himself or for any other
person, including another public servant. Therefore, the
proposed addition of the words “or for any other public
servant” in the section, as proposed by the stakeholder, is
not necessary.

91
Comments of DOPT on the Memoranda Nos. 7 to 13 received by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee of the Rajya Sabha Examining ‘The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013”
Memo Name of the Comments/Suggestions Comments of DOPT
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
7. Government of Tamil Nadu Comments about the Provisions of this
Act
The term such as “financial or other
advantage”, “relevant expectation” in the Act
are very abstract and vague. Therefore it
requires reconsideration.
(a) It is better to retain the term
“illegal gratification” instead of
“Financial or other advantage”. Or,
otherwise the words “other
advantage” should be substituted
with “Undue or unjust advantage”
or “Unjust advantage”.
(b) To avoid vagueness in the term
“relevant expectation” the words
“as prescribed under law” should
be added. Also 7(2)(c), (d) and
(e) shall be omitted.
The expression ‘illegal gratification’ has not been used in
the new definition of the offence in section 7. The same
has been done in consonance with the UNCAC  which
requires criminalization of the offer/acceptance of  an “undue
advantage” covering both pecuniary and non-pecuniary
advantages. The use of the expression “financial or other
advantage” in the clause would cover all kinds of
gratifications. The new definition has adopted the concept
of offer or acceptance of a “financial or other advantage”
as an inducement or reward for the “improper performance”
of a public function, which has been modeled on the
definition as contained in the UK Bribery Act. The UK
Bribery Act has, for this purpose, defined improper
performance of a relevant function as performance
of such function in breach of a relevant expectation
(section 4) and also provides a very simple definition of an
expectation test - what is expected is a test of what a
reasonable person would expect in relation to the
performance of the type of function or activity concerned
(section 5).
It is not possible to cover all relevant expectations by law.
Therefore, the addition of the words “as prescribed under
law” would make the meaning of the expression “relevant
expectation” very narrow. In view of this, the definition
uses a simple but effective test of what a reasonable

92
12 3 4
person in India would expect in relation to the performance
of the type of public function, based on the formulation in
the UK Bribery Act. The suggested changes are, therefore,
not necessary.
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011, as reported by the
Select Committee of Rajya Sabha (Bill already passed by
Lok Sabha and presently pending in Rajya Sabha) contains
a provision (in Part III of the Schedule) for enhancement
of the minimum punishment in sub-section (2) of section
13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 from “one
year” to “four years” and the maximum punishment under
the said sub-section from “seven years” to “ten years”.
The suggestion made by the stakeholder thus stands
addressed by the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill.
The present Section 19 does not contain any time limit
within which request for sanction of prosecution has to be
decided. The Supreme Court had, in Vineet Narain’s case,
laid down a time limit of three months which can be
extended by  one month where consultation with Attorney
General/Advocate General is required. The proposed
amendment has placed this time limit as laid down by the
Supreme Court on a statutory footing. Accordingly, the
Bill incorporates an amendment to insert a proviso under
Section 19 to the effect that the appropriate Government
or the competent authority, as the case may be, shall
convey its decision on the request for sanction for
prosecution within a period of three months, which may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing by the appropriate
Government or the competent authority, that the consultation
with the Attorney General or the Advocate General, as the
case may be, is required, be extended by a further period
of one month. However, the suggestion to insert a clause
The minimum sentence for misconduct
under section 13(2) is left unchanged whereas
minimum sentence for offences under section
7, 8, 10 and 12 is enhanced from 6 months
to 3 years. A parity should be maintained in
prescribing the sentence. Therefore, section
13(2) shall also be amended in line with
section 7, 8, 10 and 12.
Regarding sanction for prosecution, three
months time is prescribed for Government
or appropriate authority to grant sanction for
prosecution. However, the act is silent about
the consequence, if such Government or
authority fails to accord sanction. Therefore,
a deeming clause is necessary under section
19 which shall say, “further provided that, in
case the appropriate Government or competent
authority fails to convey its decision under
section 19 within the period prescribed, it
shall be deemed to have granted sanction for
prosecution.”

93
Proposed changes in the Amendment Bill,
2013
Clause 7(1)(a)  request any person for,
or obtains or agrees to receive or accepts
or attempts to obtain from any person,
any undue or unjust advantage,
intending that, in consequence, a relevant
public function or activity would be
performed improperly either  by himself
or by another or by another public a,
servant; or
Section 13(2)  Any public servant who
commits, criminal misconduct shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall be not less than three years
but 11 which may extend to seven years
and shall also be liable to fine.
Section 19  also that the appropriate
Government or the competent authority
as the case may be shall convey its
decision under this sub-section within a
period of three months, witch may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing by the
for deeming the grant of sanction on expiry of the said
period as proposed by the stakeholder is not acceptable as
it may create practical difficulties.
The use of the expression “financial or other advantage” in
the clause would cover all kinds of gratifications. The new
definition has adopted the concept of offer or acceptance
of a “financial or other advantage” as an inducement or
reward for the “improper performance” of a public function.
Since the demand/acceptance of any financial or other
advantage as an inducement or reward for improper
performance of a public function, the linkage between the
advantage and the improper performance of public function
are already covered. It is therefore not necessary to provide
that the advantage should also be “undue” or “unjust”.
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011, as reported by the
Select Committee of Rajya Sabha (Bill already passed by
Lok Sabha and presently pending in Rajya Sabha) contains
a provision (in Part III of the Schedule) for enhancement
of the minimum punishment in sub-section (2) of section
13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 from “one
year” to “four years” and the maximum punishment under
the said sub-section from “seven years” to “ten years”.
The suggestion made by the stakeholder thus stands
addressed by the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill.
The present Section 19 does not contain any time limit
within which request for sanction of prosecution has to be
decided. The Supreme Court had, in Vineet Narain’s case,
laid down a time limit of three months which can be
extended by one month where consultation with Attorney
General /Advocate General is required. The proposed

94
12 3 4
appropriate Government or the competent
authority, that the consultation with the
Attorney General or the Advocate General,
as the case may be, required, be
extended by a further period of one
month.
In case if the appropriate Government
or competent authority fails to convey
decision under section 19(i) within the
period prescribed it shall be deemed
to have been granted sanction for
prosecution.
Expand the scope and definition of Bribery
(section 7) :–
The PC Act, 1988 provides that any
gratification (benefit) other than legal
remuneration is a bribe if taken with a
motive or reward for doing or forbearing
to do any official act or for showing
favour of disfavour to any person. The
proposed amendment in the section 7
covers all type of active and passive
bribery i.e. corruptly soliciting, receiving,
agreeing to receive, or giving, promising
or offering any gift, loan, fee, reward
or advantage  whatever, whether for the
benefit or himself or anyone else, as an
inducement to, reward for doing a public
function or activity improperly. It also
amendment has placed this time limit as laid down by the
Supreme Court on statutory footing. Accordingly, the Bill
incorporates an amendment to insert a proviso under
Section 19 to the effect that the appropriate Government
or the competent authority, as the case may be, shall
convey its decision on the request for sanction for
prosecution within a period of three months, which may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing by the appropriate
Government or the competent authority, that the consultation
with the Attorney General or the Advocate General, as the
case may be, is required, be extended by a further period
of one month. However, the suggestion to insert a clause
for deeming the grant of sanction on expiry of the said
period as proposed by the stakeholder is not acceptable as
it may create practical difficulties.
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.
8. Confederation of Indian
Industries

95
covers any acceptance or attempt for
the improper performance, whether by
himself or by another public servant.
Scope of the bribe is widened, as bribe
through intermediaries is now made an
offence and covered under proposed
section 7. The words “any financial or
activity” is used in place of
“gratification”, which is wider in meaning
and covers all forms of bribery. The
more request, acceptance or attempt
covered under the definition section 7. It
is also made clear in amendment that it
is immaterial that he receives the
advantage directly or through a third party
or intermediaries. It is further proposed
that the improper performance of the
public function is by himself or by
another public servant.
Enhancement in punishment for Bribery:–
The proposed amendment in the PC Act
provides for minimum punishment of 3 years,
which may extend to 7 years along with
fine. Presently there is a provision for
punishment of minimum of 6 months with
maximum of 5 years and fine.
Bribing of a Public Servant (Section 8):–
Presently taking the gratification for
himself or for any other person for inducing
by corrupt or illegal means any public servant
is covered under section 8 and offence of
taking the gratification for himself or for any
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.

96
12 3 4
other person for inducing by the exercise of
personal influence any public servant is
covered under Section 9. However, the
government tries to cover all type of
advantage, offering or giving, to induce a
public servant either directly or indirectly.
Here special reference is made that in case
such offence is committed by commercial
organizations, it shall be punishable with fine.
The scope of introducing bribery by
commercial organizations is introduced for
the first time.
Bribin
g of a Public Servant by a
commercial or ganization (Section 9 ):–
There is a proposal of insertion of a
new section 9, which covers the offence of
bribing of a public servant by a commercial
organization. As per proposed section if any
person associated with the commercial
organization tries or gives any advantage to
any public servant with intend to either obtain
or retain business or an advantage in the
conduct of business for such commercial
organization. It is immaterial in which capacity
that person is working for or associated with
the commercial organization.
The only defence available is that the
organization has placed the adequate
procedures to prevent persons associated with
it from such conduct.
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.

97
Punishment for person incharge of
commercial organization (Section 10):–
The proposed amendment provides for
punishment of 3 to 7 years for the every
person in-charge of and was responsible for
the conduct of business of the commercial
organization, if it is proved that the offence
committed was either with the connivance,
consent, attribution or neglection of on the
part of person in-charge namely any Director,
Manager, Secretary or other officer. Means
whoever is a part of the offence or with
whose consent or negligence the offence is
committed is guilty and subject to punishment.
The only available defence is that the offence
is committed without the knowledge of the
person in-charge and he has exercised all the
due diligence to prevent such offence.
This amendment is drafted to give criminal
colour to the concept of “Vicarious Liability”,
under the “respondent superior” doctrine, for
negligent acts or omissions by their employees
in ‘the course of employment. This
amendment seeks to criminalize “Bribe Giver”
by punishing any commercial organization
through its office bearers or representative,
However, commercial organization can take
adequate steps to prevent such happenings
by –
1. Drafting protocols to be followed
by each employee of the organization.
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.

98
12 3 4
2. Exercising due diligence to prevent
commissioning of such crimes.
3. Draft an anti Corruption Policy in
tune with the anti corruption laws and
regulations including the Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act, with mandatory
declaration that neither the organization
nor any of its agents, affiliates,
employees or other person acting on
its behalf, has or will offer, promise
or give anything of value, nor make
any bribe, rebate, payoff, influence,
payment to any government office or
political party in order to obtain or
retain business, gain any unfair
advantage or influence any act or
decision of a pubic servant.
Change in definition of criminal
Misconduct by public servant (Section 13):–
The concept of intentional enrichment is
introduced for the first time i.e. if any public
servant intentionally enriches himself illicitly
and he or anybody on his behalf had
disproportionate assets then the pecuniary
sources or known source of income (income
received from any lawful source) in that
eventuality such public servant is guilty of
criminal misconduct.
Punishment for habitual offenders has
been proposed to increase from minimum
of 3 years from 2 years (Section 14):–
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.

99
Insertion of New Clause IV A providing
for attachment and forfeiture of property
(Section 18 a to n)
In line with earlier proposed amendment
i.e. in  2008, Government once again tried to
enact a law for “Asset Recovery” as per the
United Nations Convention against Corruption,
as India agreed to asset recovery, which is
stated explicitly as a fundamental principle of
the convention. Moreover, the effective asset
recovery will support the efforts to redress
the effects of corruption at the same time
it will send a message to corrupt officials
that there will be no place to hide their illicit
assets.
Protection against prosecution after
retirement (Section 19):–
The proposed amendment in the
section 19  provides for prior of the
government or competent authority in case
of retired officials, which earlier was not
there, it will work as a safeguard against the
false prosecution against any bonafide
omission or  commission in the discharge of
his official duties.
While members of Transparency International,
India Rajasthan Chapter welcome and express
satisfaction that the proposed Amendment
Bill for Prevention of Corruption and
envisages comprehensive and radical changes
in the existing The Prevention or Corruption
Act, 1988. At the same time, we consider
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.
CII has supported the amendments. Therefore, no
comments are necessary.
These are general observations. Therefore, they do not call
for any comments from DoPT.
9. Transparency,
International India

100
12 3 4
that some changes are neither necessary nor
appropriate for providing measures to reduce
and eliminate corruption. The changes should
be pithy, precise and based on clear
objectives and sound logic leaving little
discretion to a judge or magistrate regarding
interpretation of law.
1. We feel that the new Section 7 is too
long and complex compared to the
existing Section and should be
reconsidered to make it more precise
leading to clear interpretation.
a. The use of phrase ‘improper
performance of public function’ or
activity in all sub sections gives an
impression that it is all right with the
law if bribe is solicited or accepted
or offered for proper performance of
public function or  activity. Besides,
a bona-fide mistake of a public
servant may be interpreted as
improper performance and may lead
to unwarranted punishment. Hence,
the word ‘improperly’ appearing in
sub section 2 clause (b) should be
deleted and the rest can be retained.
Similarly, this could be considered for
deletion in other clauses as well.
The length of the section is due to the need to incorporate
all essential definitions and also all ingredients of the offence
sought to be defined.
As regards the word “improper performance”, it is submitted
that the formulation of the proposed new section 7, as
contained in the present Bill, is different in respect of the
trigger to criminal action in bribery cases. Traditionally, the
trigger to a criminal proceeding in a bribery case has been
the “doing or omission to do” an act by a public servant.
It now bases the action against a public servant on
“improper performance”. Thus, under the new Bill, what
triggers the action in a case of alleged bribery is not so
much the act (or the omission to act) of the public servant
but the manner in which a relevant function is performed.
The proposed Bill, for this purpose, defines improper
performance of a relevant, function as performance of
such function in breach of a relevant expectation and also
provides a very simple definition of an expectation test –
what is expected is a test of what a reasonable person
would expect in relation to the performance of the type of
function or activity concerned. This marks not only a
paradigm shift in the approach to tackling bribery but also
a significant step forward in the evolution of the law.

101
Therefore, the suggestion to delete “improperly” is not
acceptable.
As regards the suggestion that the Bill gives an impression
that it is all right with the law if bribe is solicited or
accepted for proper performance of public function, it is
pointed out that the proposed new section 7 [clause (b)]
makes it an offence where a person who is a public
servant or expecting to be a public servant :–
“(b) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive
or accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or
other advantage from any person and the request,
agreement, acceptance or attempt itself constitutes
the improper performance of a relevant public
function or activity.”.
The proposed new section would thus cover all cases
where a public servant obtains/agrees to receive/accepts or
attempts to receive any thing of value (both pecuniary and
non-pecuniary) from any person and the acceptance of
such thing itself would amount to “improper performance”
of a relevant public function. As the acceptance of the
financial or other advantage would be sufficient to constitute
the offence in such cases, the contention that the Bill gives
an impression that it is okay with tl1e law if bribe is
solicited or accepted or offered for proper performance of
public duty or activity is not correct.
Whenever any person is faced with a demand for a bribe
by a public servant, such person has a duty to report the
same to the appropriate law enforcement agency. In case
the person who pays a bribe is offered protection on the
ground that he paid such bribe under compulsion, this will
dilute the very purpose of section 8, as most of the bribe
givers in cases of consensual bribery would claim that the
New Section 8  – The Section is a welcome
change as it seeks to punish bribe givers
directly. But, surprisingly, it does not
distinguish between consensual bribers and
harassed bribers and treats them on the same
footing. This necessary distinction should be
provided for.

102
12 3 4
New Section 9  – It envisages punishment of
persons associated with commercial
organization, who act as bribe givers and is
a welcome change. But, an escape route has
been provided for organization who have
adequate procedure in place to prevent persons
from such conduct.
Sections 8 & 9  of the existing act punish
those intermediaries who solicit or accept
bribe for inducing the public servant even
bribe was paid under compulsion from the public servant
and thus escape punishment. However, in case a person
who faces such a situation reports the matter to the Anti-
corruption agency concerned (ACB/CBI/police) and helps
the anti-corruption agency in setting up a trap to nab the
delinquent public servant, the investigation agency itself
will protect such complainant and not list him as an
accused in the case. Further, the quantum of punishment
in each case will be decided by the Court having regard to
the nature of the offence and the facts and circumstances
of the case. Where the court finds that the case was one
of harassment bribery, it may award a lesser sentence to
the bribe giver.
The section does not provide any escape route to commercial
organisations. It only provides an opportunity to a
commercial organisation to prove that it had adequate
procedures to prevent persons associated with it from
such conduct. The system a commercial organization has
to put in place for preventing corruption by persons
associated with such commercial organization will vary
from one commercial organization to another, depending
upon the size of the commercial organization, its sphere of
activity, the nature of the business being carried on by
such organization, etc. It is not possible to spell out the
details of the systems which may meet this requirement in
the Act itself. It will depend on the facts and circumstances
of each case as to whether a commercial organization has
adequate systems in place to prevent bribery by person
associated with it.
In the proposed new dispensation, a public servant who
seeks/takes a bribe is punishable under section 7. The
person who offers/gives the bribe to another person (who

103
without his knowledge or connivance. The
proposed bill does not punish such
intermediaries because it punishes such
intermediaries only when they are acting as
conspirators or abettors either with the bribe
giver. IT is an important lacuna of the
proposed bill.
Existing Section 11  of existing act is omitted
but it is not clear whether its provisions
have been incorporated in the new definition.
New Section 12  makes a welcome change
because it punishes a person abetting any of
the offences under this Act.
may or may not be a public servant) to induce a public
servant to perform improperly a public function is punishable
under section 8. The person who takes a bribe so as to
induce a public servant to improperly perform a public
function is also punishable under section 12 with the same
punishment as is applicable to the bribe giver and the
bribe-taker (public servant). Thus, the proposed new
provisions cover the bribe-giver, bribe-taker (public servant)
and the middleman to whom bribe is paid by the bribe
giver. In case a middleman accepts a bribe from some
person on the pretext of inducing a public servant to
perform a public function improperly, but there is actually
no link between such middleman and the public servant,
then, in that case, the middleman is not committing an
offence of bribery but an offence of cheating the bribe-
giver. Accordingly, it is felt that when such a middleman
who accepts a financial or other advantage from any
person on the pretext of inducing a public servant to
improperly perform a public function but where there is no
established link between such middleman and the public
servant, the case against such middleman would be one of
cheating and will fall under the general criminal law for the
offence of cheating. Nevertheless, the person who offered
the bribe to such middleman would be guilty of the offence
under section 8 of the PC Act. Thus, DoPT feels that
there is no lacuna in the proposed provisions. However,
DoPT is open to any recommendation which the
Hon’ble Standing Committee may make in this regard.
As the proposed new definition in section 7 comprehensively
covers the offence under section II, section II is proposed
to be deleted.
The stakeholder has welcomed the amendment. Hence, no
comments are required.

104
12 3 4
New Section 13  The change made in the
existing sub-section l(e) concerning
disproportionate assets are not appropriate
for two reasons: – (a) the phrase ‘if he
intentionally enriches himself illicitly during
the period of his office’ will make the task
of investigating agencies more difficult as
they will have to gather additional evidence
to prove the intention which will imply that
it would be necessary to establish misuse of
office when the wealth has been illicitly
acquired.
No changes have been made in the
punishment provided for in section 13 by its
sub-section (2), meaning thereby that it
remains as imprisonment – minimum one
year and maximum 7 years and with fine –
In the existing Act this offence is considered
more serious warranting severe punishment
– it needs to be revised.
Section 13 (1)(e) of the PC Act makes it an offence
(criminal misconduct) if any public servant or any person
on his behalf, is in possession or has, at any time during
the period of his office, been in possession for which the
public servant cannot satisfactorily account, of pecuniary
resources or property disproportionate to his known sources
of income. Under Article 20 of the UNCAC, it is necessary
for State Parties to establish as a criminal offence, when
committed intentionally,  illicit enrichment, that is, a
significant increase in the assets of a public official that he
or she cannot reasonably explain in relation to his or her
lawful income. Thus, the offence of illicit enrichment,
under the Convention, has to be intentional. The present
provisions do not contain this element of intention. It is
accordingly proposed to amend clause 13(1)(e) to provide
for incorporation of this element of intentional illicit
enrichment. The intentionality of the illicit enrichment
will have to be gathered from the inability of the
public servant to reasonably explain the disproportionate
assets in relation to his lawful income.  Therefore, the
apprehension that investigating agencies may have to gather
additional evidence to prove intention is not correct.
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011, as reported by the
Select Committee of Rajya Sabha contains a provision (in
Part III of the Schedule) for enhancement of the minimum
punishment in sub-section (2) of section 13 of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 from “one year” to
“four years” and the maximum punishment under the said
sub-section from “seven years” to “ten years”. The
suggestion made by the stakeholder thus stands addressed
by the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill.

105
New Section 14  It provides for enhance
punishment for subsequent offence and is a
welcome change.
Addition of New Chapter IV a title as
attachment and forfeiture of property  after
Chapter IV is a welcome change as it removes
the anomaly in the existing law.
Addition to Section 19 of the existing Act
are welcome as it provides protection from
vexatious prosecution to retired public servant.
However, the following deficiencies are
noticeable in the proposed Bill:
(a) The bill does not provide for action
or punishment against the Competent
Authority who fails to meet the
proposed time limits. What happens to
the pending sanctions in such cases?
Whether it should have been deemed
to have been granted? The bill is silent
on these important issues.
(b) The denial of sanction for
prosecution is a power given to the
Competent Authority which is not
justifiable in any court including the
Supreme Court it is often used for
shielding the corrupt. The anomaly
The stakeholder has welcomed the amendment. Hence, no
comments are required.
The stakeholder has welcomed the amendment. Hence, no
comments are required.
(a) The Bill already incorporates an amendment to
section 19 for inserting a proviso under Section 19 to
the effect that the appropriate Government or the
competent authority, as the case may be, shall convey
its decision on the request for sanction for prosecution
within a period of three months, which may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing by the appropriate
Government or the competent authority, that the
consultation with the Attorney General or the Advocate
General, as the case may be, is required, be extended
by a further period of one month. However, the
suggestion to insert a clause providing for consequences
of not deciding a request for grant of sanction within
the specified period (such as deemed sanction) is not
acceptable as it may create practical difficulties.
(b) The according or denial of sanction for prosecution of
a public servant is an administrative decision and, as
such, DoPT is of the view that even now the
Constitutional Courts have the power under their writ
jurisdiction to go into such decisions.

106
12 3 4
should have been rectified by making
it justifiable.
(c) The above provisions are necessary
to make competent authority issue a
speaking order spelling out reasons for
denial of sanction for prosecution.
d. The provision under Section 19 in
sub-section 1 the clause 2 of court
directing a complainant to obtain
sanction for prosecution against the
public servant is anomalous as it will
be difficult for a complainant to obtain
the same. The court after due enquiry
under Section 200 of CrPC. can itself
direct the Competent Authority to issue
sanction or deny the same by a
speaking order with a view to provide
for clarity and effectiveness of law.
Existing section 24  is proposed to be omitted
but it will make laying of traps difficult for
catching those soliciting or accepting bribe
red handed. While laying traps during
verification of demand or transaction of bribe,
often the complainant offer bribe to the
accused which is accepted by the later. In
(c) As regards the suggestion that the provision should
mandate the passing of  speaking orders, it is felt that
such a provision is not necessary. The decision
according or denying sanction for prosecution of a
public servant, being an administrative decision, it goes
without saying that such decision should be reasonable
and based on appreciation of the material placed before
the sanctioning authority. Therefore, it is not felt
necessary to expressly provide in the Act that the
order should be a speaking one.
(d) When a direction is issued to a complainant by the
Court to obtain the sanction of the competent authority,
it will automatically obligate the competent authority,
on being approached by such complainant, to pass
speaking orders either according or denying sanction.
Therefore, it is not necessary to provide for a direction
by the court to the competent authority to issue
sanction or deny the same. Further, any direction
from the Court to the competent authority, that too
after due enquiry under section 200 of CrPC may
affect the independence of the competent authority.
The suggestion is therefore not acceptable.
Since the intentional offering, promising or giving of a
bribe is sought to be separately defined as an offence, the
protection to the bribe giver under section 24 should not
be available in the proposed scheme of things. Whenever
any person is faced with a demand for a bribe by a public
servant in connection with some service to which such
person is otherwise legally entitled and such person is

107
the absence of protection of section 24, such
complaints would be now liable for
punishment under the proposed section 8. As
explained earlier this section should be
retained to provide protection to the harassed
bribers who approach the investigating
agencies for laying the traps.
Statement of Objects and Reasons
1. To bring the existing law in line with the
current international practice and to meet
more effectively the country’s obligations
under the United Nations Convention Against
Corruption in view of ratification of UNCAC
and the international practice on treatment of
the offence of bribery and corruption by
India and in view of certain judicial
pronouncements.
2. Section 7 of the existing law, the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 is
proposed to be substituted by a new
section 7 which will have a new
subjected to harassment bribery, such person has a duty to
report the same to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
In case the person who pays a bribe is offered protection
on the ground that he paid such bribe under compulsion,
this will dilute the very purpose of section 8, as most of
the bribe givers in cases of consensual bribery would
claim that the bribe was paid under compulsion from the
public servant and thus escape punishment. However, in
case a person who faces such a situation where he is
compelled to pay a bribe and he reports such demand for
bribe to the concerned Anti-corruption agency (ACB/CBI/
police) and helps the anti-corruption agency in setting up
a trap to nab the delinquent public servant, the investigation
agency itself will protect such complainant and not list him
as an accused in the case. DoPT accordingly feels that
there is no need to retain the provisions of section 24 of
the Act. However, DoPT is open to any recommendation
which may be made by the Hon’ble Committee in this
regard.
These are general observations on the Statement of Objects
and Reasons. Therefore, no comments are necessary.
These are general observations on the Statement of Objects
and Reasons. Therefore, no comments are necessary.
10. Anti Corruption Bureau,
Rajasthan, Jaipur

108
12 3 4
comprehensive definition of bribery covering
all aspects of passive bribery, including the
solicitation and acceptance of bribe through
intermediaries and also acts of public servants
acting outside their competence – it proposes
to cover offences defined in sections, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11 and 13(1)( d) of the existing Act.
3. Bribe giver is punished in the existing Act
indirectly for abetting offences under sections7
or 11 as per provisions of section 12 of the
Act. It is felt that consensual bribers go
scot-free because of the protection available
to the bribe givers under section 24 of the
existing Act. The bill proposes to insert a
new section 8 to directly deal with active
domestic bribery by making the promise,
offering or giving to a public official directly
or indirectly of an undue advantage, for the
official himself or herself or another person
or entity, in  order that the official act or
refrain from acting in the exercise of his or
her official duties, a criminal offence – section
24 is proposed to be omitted.
4. Since the new definitions of bribery
proposed in the new Act are comprehensive
enough to cover all offences of bribery
included in section 8, 9, 10, 11 & 13
(1)(a)(b) & (d) of the existing Act, it is
proposed to omit these sections from the
existing Act - the proposed bill does not
seem to be achieving it as will be explained
later.
These are general observations on the Statement of Objects
and Reasons. Therefore, no comments are necessary.
The new definitions of bribery proposed in the new Act
are comprehensive enough to cover all offences of bribery
included in section 8, 9, 10, 11 & 13 (1)(a)(b)&(d) of the
existing Act, as explained in the relevant paragraphs of the
stakeholders suggestions which follow.

109
5. It is proposed to insert a new section 9
punishing bribing a public servant by a
commercial organization when any person
associated with it offers, promise or gives a
financial or other advantage to a public servant
intending to obtain or retain business or some
advantage in the conduct of business for the
commercial organization - a new welcome
addition.
6. It is proposed to insert a new section 10
punishing persons in charge of the said
commercial organization.
7. Section 12 of the existing Act is proposed
to be substituted with a new section 12
wherein abetment of all offences under the
Act will be made punishable – a welcome
change.
8. The sub-section (1)(e) of section 13 in
the existing Act is proposed to be amended
by incorporating the element of intentional
enrichment and to modify the definition of
“known sources of income” as contained in
the Explanation, by doing away with the
requirement of intimation in accordance with
any law, rules, or orders applicable to a
public servant – No rational given for above
amendments.
The stakeholder has welcomed the proposed amendment.
No comments.
These are general observations on the Statement of Objects
and Reasons. Therefore, no comments are necessary.
The stakeholder has welcomed the proposed amendment.
No comments are, therefore, necessary.
Section 13(1)(e) of the PC Act makes it an offence (criminal
misconduct) if any public servant or any person on his
behalf, is in possession or has, at any time during the
period of his office, been in possession for which the
public servant cannot satisfactorily account, of pecuniary
resources or property disproportionate to his known sources
of income. Under Article 20 of the UNCAC, it is necessary
for State Parties to establish as a criminal offence, when
committed intentionally, illicit enrichment, that is, a
significant increase in the assets of a public official that he
or she cannot reasonably explain in relation to his or her
lawful income. Thus, the offence of illicit enrichment,
under the Convention, has to be intentional. The present
provisions do not contain this element of intention. It is
accordingly proposed to amend clause 13(1)(e) to provide
for incorporation of this clement of intentional illicit

110
12 3 4
enrichment. The intentionality of the illicit enrichment will
have to be gathered from the inability of the public servant
to reasonably explain the disproportionate assets in relation
to his lawful income.
As regards the proposed modification of definition of
“known sources of income”, it is submitted that since the
relevant sub-clause [13(1)(e)] itself predicates criminal
liability on the condition that the public servant cannot
satisfactorily account for such assets, the present provision
in the Explanation “and such receipt has been” intimated in
accordance with the provisions of any law, rules or orders
for the time being applicable to a public servant” goes
against the very spirit of the substantive provision.
Therefore, it is proposed to delete the said expression from
the Explanation under section 13 on the lines of the 2008
Bill.
The stakeholder has welcomed the proposed amendment.
No comments.
The stakeholder has welcomed the proposed amendment.
No comments.
9. Section 14 of the existing Act is proposed
to be amended to provide for punishment for
habitual  commission of offences of all the
offences under  the Act (provided for
separately in sections 13 (1)(a)(b)&14 of the
existing Act) – a welcome change.
10. A new chapter is proposed to be inserted
to incorporate provisions of the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Ordinance 1944 to provide for
the confiscation of bribe and the proceeds of
bribery – a welcome change which also
removes the anomaly in section 5(8) of the
existing Act.

111
11. Section 19 of the existing Act is proposed
to be amended to extend the requirement of
obtaining prior sanction for prosecution to
the public servants who have retired or
demitted office and also for laying down
clear criteria and procedure for sanction of
prosecution, including the stage at which
sanction can be sought, timelines within which
order has to be passed in view or a recent
Supreme Court judgment – a welcome change
but the order of the competent authority
refusing grant of sanction still remains non-
judiciable and it does not overcome the
difficulty faced in obtaining ca: sanctions in
cases where the decision is taken by a
collective body ( e.g. local bodies) and the ad
competent authority does not issue a just and
be speaking order giving reasons for denial
to issue sanction for prosecution.
12. The provisions of section 6A of the
Delhi Special Establishment Act 1949 is
proposed to be amended to extend the
requirement of obtaining prior approval of
the Central Government before conducting
any inquiry or investigation in respect of
offences under the PC Act, 1988, to civil
servants holding senior policy level positions
even after they cease to hold such positions
due to reversion or retirement or other
reasons -understandable change but the
provision itself is not in consonance with
the provisions of the Constitution and need
to be removed.
As regards the suggestion that the provision should mandate
the passing of speaking orders, it is felt that such a
provision is not necessary. The decision according or
denying sanction for prosecution of a public servant, being
an administrative decision, it goes without saying that such
decision should be reasonable and based on appreciation of
the material placed before the sanctioning authority.
Therefore, it is not felt necessary to expressly provide in
the Act that the order should be a speaking one.
As regards the difficulties faced in cases of collective
bodies, it is submitted that under section 19 of the PC Act,
the power to accord sanction for prosecution of a public
servant is vested in the authority competent to remove the
public servant from his office. The delegation of such
powers to a single person, if any, in the case of bodies
such as panchayats, municipalities, universities, etc. would
not call for any amendment in the Prevention of Corruption
Act, as the same should be addressed by appropriate
amendments in the relevant rules/by-laws of such bodies.
The vires of Section 6A of DSPE Act was challenged in
Dr. Subramanian Swamy vs. Director CBI, (2005) 2 SCC
317. The Hon’ble Court found that divergent opinions had
been taken by the Court in Vineet Narain’ s case and in K.
Veeraswamy vs. Union of India, (1991) 3 SCC 655, as to
whether prior permission could be prescribed as a mandatory
precondition for investigation, and referred the issue to a
larger bench, where it is still pending. However, no stay
was granted against section 6A and, as on date, section 6A
of the DSPE Act stands as the law in force. The rationale
behind Section 6A of the DSPE Act is to provide a
screening mechanism to filter out frivolous or motivated
investigations that could be initiated against senior officers
at policy making levels with a view to protecting them
from harassment and to enable them to take decisions

112
12 3 4
The Prevention of Corruption
(Amendment) Bill 2013
1. Omission of section 5(6)  of the
existing Act is a welcome change
because it provides for the Special
Judge enjoying powers of the District
Judge under the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Ordinance 1944 only
during trial and not during investigation.
A new chapter is proposed to be
inserted giving such powers to the
Special Judge during investigation also.
2. New Section 7
– Addition of new terms (request
for and agrees to receive) is
superfluous and may add to
unnecessary confusion and varied
legal interpretations. The four
terms in the existing Act are
enough to deal with all situations.
– Why ‘receive’ and ‘accept’ both
terms have been used for the
same act is not clear.
without fear. Further, it may be mentioned that Section 6A
was inserted in the PC Act through the CVC Act, 2003, on
the basis of a recommendation made by the Joint
Parliamentary Committee in its report on the CVC Bill
itself. The suggestion to delete section 6A is, therefore, not
acceptable.
The stakeholder has welcomed the amendment. No
comments are required.
– The terms “request for” and “agrees to receive” have
different and distinct connotations. While the first
expression refers to a scenario where the public servant
demands bribe the second expression refers to a scenario
where he is offered a bribe and he agrees to receive it.
In order to cover both scenarios, it is necessary to
employ both these expressions.
– The expression “receive” has been used in the context
of “agreeing to receive” whereas the expression
“accepts” has been used as a stand alone expression.

113
– The phrase ‘any financial or other
advantage’ should have been
explained as it can be subjected
to varied interpretations.
– Use of phrase ‘improper
performance of public function
or activity’ in all sub sections
gives an impression that it is okay
with the law if bribe is solicited
or accepted or offered for proper
performance of public function
or activity.
Acceptance of a bribe offered, agreeing to receive an
undue advantage and attempting to obtain an undue
advantage are three different facets of the offence of
bribery and, therefore, in order to make the definition
of the offence comprehensive enough to cover all the
above elements, separate expressions have been used
appropriately.
– The UNCAC requires criminalization of the offer/
acceptance of an “undue advantage” covering both
pecuniary and non-pecuniary advantages. Thus, the use
of the expression “financial or other advantage” in the
clause would cover all kinds of gratifications. The
meaning of the expression is very clear.
– the proposed new section 7 [clause (b)] makes it an
offence where a person who is a public servant or
expecting to be a public servant-
“(b) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive
or accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or
other advantage from any person and the request,
agreement, acceptance or attempt itself constitutes
the improper performance of a relevant public
function or activity.”.
The sub-clause would cover all cases where a public
servant obtains/agrees to receive/accepts or attempts
to receive anything of value (both pecuniary and
non-pecuniary) from any person and the acceptance
of such thing itself would amount to “improper
performance” of a relevant public function. As the
acceptance of the financial or other advantage would
be sufficient to constitute the offence in such cases,
the contention that the Bill gives an impression that
it is okay with the law if bribe is solicited or

114
12 3 4
– Punishing a public servant who
performs or induces another
public servant to perform
improperly a relevant public
function or activity in
anticipation of requesting,
agreeing to receive or accepting
a financial or other advantage
from any person may lead to an
interpretation that whenever a
public function or activity is
performed improperly by a public
servant, it will be presumed that
it was done for the purpose of
soliciting or accepting bribe – does
this not make even  bona fide
mistakes punishable as criminal
offence.
– Explanation 2 of this section
which lays down that it is
immaterial whether the public
servant himself or the one induced
by him had the knowledge or
belief that the performance or
public function or activity was
improper appears to be taking
accepted or offered for proper performance of public
duty or activity is not correct.
– It is not every case of a bona fide mistake which
becomes punishable under the proposed new section.
It is only where a public servant performs or induces
another public servant to perform improperly a
relevant public function in anticipation of requesting,
agreeing to receive or accepting a financial or other
advantage from some person, it will become an
offence. For example, if a superior officer directs
his subordinate, by mistake, to process the matter in
a particular manner, there will be no offence under
the Act. But in case he directs the subordinate to
process the matter in a particular manner so as to
delay the provision of some service to some person
in order to induce that person to make an offer of
bribe, it will be .an offence. The connection between
the improper performance of a public function and
the intention to request, receive or accept a financial
favour are both necessary to constitute the offence.
This intention will have to be gathered from the
relevant facts and circumstances of the case. In
view of this, the provision does not suffer from any
infirmity.
– The proposed new section 7 covers the demanding/
acceptance of a financial or other advantage from
any person 
intending that, in consequence, a relevant
public function or activity would be performed
improperly either by himself or by another public
servant [Section 7(1)(a)]. Thus, the element of mens
rea is already built in the substantive provision of
the section. If the intention of the delinquent public

115
servant is the improper performance of a relevant
public function, his own knowledge or belief as to
whether the performance of the activity or function
is improper or the knowledge of the public servant
who is induced to perform such function improperly
as to whether it is improper, is totally irrelevant. It
is the intention of the bribe seeker which determines
the culpability and not the actual nature of the
performance. Therefore, the explanation does not
suffer from any infirmity. The Explanation is all the
more necessary in cases where the demanding/
acceptance of a bribe itself amounts to improper
performance of a public function. A public servant
who accepts a bribe from another person cannot be
allowed to say that he had no knowledge that the
acceptance of the financial or other advantage
amounted to improper performance of his public
function.
–
There appears to be some drafting error in sub-
section 2(a) of the Bill as it gives an impression that
all four conditions indicated in sub-clauses (i) to (iv)
have to be fulfilled so as to make the relevant
function or activity as a public function or activity .
The intention behind the provision can be gathered
from the corresponding provisions of the UK Br ibery
Act, which were taken as the reference for drafting
the provisions with appropriate changes to suit Indian
conditions. The corresponding provision of UK
Bribery Act segregates (a) the  nature of the function
and (b) the fulfillment of one or more of conditions
relating to “impartiality”, “good faith” and “trust”.
Thus, the intention behind the provision is that any
function or activity would be a public function or
activity if such function or activity is of a public
nature or is performed by a public servant in the
away the element of ‘mens rea’
from the definition of the offence
of bribery, which has been
considered so vital by the
Supreme Court in various
judgments on the Prevention or
Corruption Act 1988 – not
desirable and not likely to
withstand judicial scrutiny.
– In the definition of ‘public
function or activity’ given in sub-
section (2), it is not clear whether
anyone of the four criteria is
sufficient or all four put together
are required for a function or
activity to be taken as public one.

116
12 3 4
course of his employment. The two provisions in
sub-clauses (i) and (ii) are, therefore, alternatives to
each other , as they deal with the nature of the
function or activity . However , as regards the
conditions indicated in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv), it is
submitted that some public functions may be expected
to be performed “impartially” and some “in good
faith” while in the case of some others, the person
performing the function or activity is in a position
of “trust” by virtue of performing it. There may be
some functions or activities which may involve more
than one of these three elements. DoPT, ther efore,
agrees that there is a need to have a relook at
the definition of “public function or activity” in
sub-section (2) of the proposed new section 7, in
consultation with the Ministry of Law and
Justice, so as to avoid any confusion.
– As regards the contention that the application of the
definition in section 7 to cases hitherto covered by
section 13(1)(d)(ii) may lead to an interpretation that
it may now be necessary to prove that position was
abused during discharge of official duty – a condition
which was removed from the PC Act, 1947 through
Anti Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964 is
appearing to be brought back without explanation, it
is submitted that the definition in proposed new
section 7 is comprehensive enough to cover seeking,
accepting, of any such advantage from any person
either for himself or for any other person. The
proposed new section 7 [clause (b)] makes it an
offence where a person who is a public servant or
expecting to be a public servant –
– The applicability of above
definition to cases hitherto covered
by section 13 (1) (d) (ii) of the
existing Act may lead to an
interpretation that it may now be
necessary to prove that position
was abused during the discharge
of official duty – a condition
which was removed from the PC
Act, 1947 through Anti Corruption
(Amendment) Act, 1964 is
appearing to be brought back
without explanation.

117
– The definition of ‘relevant
expectation’ given in sub section
(2) (c) is too ambiguous and
(ii) of it itself requires further
explanation.
“(b) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive or
accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or other
advantage from any person and the request,
agreement, acceptance or attempt itself constitutes
the improper performance of a relevant public
function or activity.”.
As the demand/acceptance/obtaining of any thing of
value (both pecuniary and non-pecuniary) from any
person, either for the benefit of the public servant
or for the benefit of some other person, would itself
amount to improper performance of a public function,
there is no need to prove that there was an abuse
of function during the discharge of official duty in
such cases. Therefore, the contention that the
expression” in the discharge of his duty”, which
was removed from the PC Act, 1947 through Anti
Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964 is
appearing to be brought back without explanation is
not correct.
– As regards the definition of “relevant expectation”, it
is submitted that the UK Bribery Act has, defined
improper performance of a relevant function as
performance of such function in breach of a relevant
expectation (section 4) and also provides a very
simple definition of an expectation test - what is
expected is a test of what a reasonable person
would expect in relation to the performance of the
type of function or activity concerned (section 5).
The definition of “relevant expectation” in the present
Bill has been modeled on the said definition. As
regards clause(ii) of the said definition, the meaning
of the said clause is very clear that in cases of
public functions performed in a position of trust, the
relevant expectation is any expectation as to the

118
12 3 4
manner in which the function is to be performed
and the reasons for which it can be performed,
which arises from the position of such trust. The
provision suffers from no ambiguity.
– Sub-section 7(2)(e) gives a simple test as to what is
expected, what a reasonable person in India would
expect in relation to the performance of the type of
public function or activity concerned. There is neither
any ambiguity or any confusion in its meaning.
– Needs no comments
– In case the person who pays a bribe is offered
protection on the ground that he paid such bribe
under compulsion, this will dilute the very purpose
of section 8, as most of the bribe givers in cases of
consensual bribery would claim that the bribe was
paid under compulsion from the public servant and
thus escape punishment. Whenever any person is
faced with a demand for a bribe by a public servant
in connection with some service to which such
person is otherwise legally entitled and such person
is subjected to harassment bribery, such person has
a duty to report the same to the appropriate law
enforcement agency. In case a person who faces
such a situation where he is compelled to pay a
bribe and he reports such demand for bribe to the
concerned Anti-corruption agency (ACB/CBI/police)
and helps the anti-corruption agency in setting up a
– Similarly the wordings of sub
section (2) (e) is also too
ambiguous and not clear at al1
about what it is attempting to
convey.
3. New Section 8
– Intends to punish the bribe givers
directly, which is a welcome
change.
– It however does not distinguish
between consensual bribers and
harassed bribers and treats them
on the same footing. A consensual
briber is one who himself offers
bribe for inducing a public servant
for improper performance of
public function or activity,
whereas a harassed briber is one
who is coerced to play bribe
mostly as speed money for getting
his legitimate work done.

119
trap to nab the delinquent public servant, the
investigation agency itself will protect such
complainant and not list him as an accused in the
case. Section 8, thus, does not suffer from any
infirmity.
– Needs no comments
– The system a commercial organization has to put in
place for preventing corruption by persons associated
with such commercial organization will vary from
one commercial organization to another, depending
upon the size of the commercial organization, its
sphere of activity, the nature of the business being
carried on by such organization, etc. It is not possible
to spell out the details of the systems which may
meet this requirement in the Act itself. It will depend
on the facts and circumstances of each case as to
whether a commercial organization has adequate
systems in place to prevent bribery by persons
associated with it.
In the United Kingdom, section 9 of the UK Bribery
Act empowers the Secretary of State to publish
guidance about procedures that relevant commercial
organizations can put in place to prevent persons
associated with them from bribing and to revise
such guidelines from time to time. The relevant
provisions of section 9 of the UK Bribery Act read
as under:
4. New Section 9
– Punishing commercial organization
when any person associated with
it acts as a bribe gives defined in
section 8 is a welcome addition.
– It may however, be difficult to
do so in practice because in view
of the proper defense provided in
sub section (1) (b), most of the
organizations are likely to have in
place procedures required in this
sub-section on paper and persons
working for it still could be
coerced to act as bribe givers.

120
12 3 4
“9. Guidance about commercial organisations
preventing bribery.
(1) The Secretary of State must
publish guidance about
procedures that relevant
commercial organisations can put
in place to prevent persons
associated with them from bribing
as mentioned in section 7(1).
(2) The Secretary of State may, from
time to time, publish revisions to
guidance under this section or
revised guidance.”.
The Secretary of State has accordingly published
guidelines
DoPT is open to any recommendation which the
Hon’ble Standing Committee may make in this regard.
– Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 9 of the Bill
have to be read together so as to understand the
intention behind the provision. The two sub-sections
read as under:
9. (1) A commercial organisation shall be guilty
of an offence and shall be punishable with
fine, if any person associated with the
commercial organisation offers, promises or
gives a financial or other advantage to a public
servant intending–
 – Sub sec. (2) provides for such
person to be eligible for guilty of
offence under section 8 whether
or not he has been prosecuted
for such offence – defies logic
and common sense that why such
a person should not be prosecuted
under the same Act when it is an
offence.

121
(a) to obtain or retain business for such
commercial organisation; and
(b) to obtain or retain an advantage in the
conduct of business for such commercial
organisation:
Provided that it shall be a defence for the
commercial organisation to prove that it had
in place adequate procedures designed to
prevent persons associated with it from
undertaking such conduct.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person
offers, promises or gives a financial or other
advantage to a public servant if, and only if,
such person is, or would be, guilty of an
offence under section 8, whether or not the
person has been prosecuted for such an
offence.
– The intention behind the provision is that a
commercial organisation should be equally liable if
any person associated with it commits an offence
under section 8 (offering/giving a bribe). Thus, it is
clear that in order to constitute the offence under
section 9, the person who actually offered/gave the
bribe should be guilty of an offence under section 8,
in the first place, so as to make the commercial
organisation liable. The section nowhere says that
the person who bribed will not be prosecuted. It
merely says that for the purpose or section 9, a
person offers, promises or gives a financial or other
advantage to a public servant if, and only if, such
person is, or would be, guilty of an offence under
section 8, whether or not the person has been
prosecuted for such an offence. In other words, the

122
12 3 4
5. New Section 10
– Punishing ever person who at the
time the offence (u/s 9) was
committed was in charge of and
was responsible to the commercial
organization for the conduct of
its business is a welcome step.
– But such a person has been given
an opportunity to defend himself
by proving that the offence was
committed without his knowledge
or that he has exercised all due
diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
6. Section 11 of the existing Act is
omitted – through the statement of
objects and reasons state that its
provisions have been incorporated in
provisions of sub-section (2) make it clear that
when the person who offered/gave the financial or
other advantage to n public servant is guilty of an
offence under section 8, the commercial organisation
for whose benefit he has done so, would be liable
under section 9, irrespective of whether or not such
person has been prosecuted for the offence under
section 8. The clause covers even those situations
where the person who offered the bribe could not
be prosecuted due to death, etc.
   – The stakeholder has supported the amendment. No
comments are required.
   – The stakeholder has merely stated that the person
has been given opportunity to defend himself by
proving that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence
to prevent the commission of such offence. The
stakeholder has not offered any comments as to
why such defence should not be provided or whether
there is anything wrong in providing such defence.
Hence no comments.
The new definition of the offence on the demand side of
corruption will fully cover the offence u/s 11. Section 11
at present covers the acceptance/obtaining/agreeing to
accept/attempting to obtain by a public servant for himself,

123
the new definitions but it does not
seems so or it is not too obvious.
7. New Section 12 makes a welcome
change because it punishes a person
abetting any of the offences  under
this Act.
8. New  Section 13
– Though it is stated in the
or for any other person, any valuable thing without
consideration, from any person whom he knows to have
been, or to be, or to be likely to be concerned in any
proceeding or business transacted or about to be transacted
by such public servant, or having any connection with the
official functions of himself or of any public servant to
whom he is subordinate, or from any person whom he
knows to be interested in or related to the person so
concerned. The proposed new section 7 [clause (b)] makes
it an offence where a person who is a public servant or
expecting to be a  public servant–
“(b) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive
or accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or
other advantage from any person and the request,
agreement, acceptance or attempt itself constitutes
the improper performance of a relevant public
function or activity.”.
The expression “financial or other advantage” in the proposed
new section would  cover all cases where a public servant
obtains/agrees to receive/accepts or attempts to receive
anything of value (both pecuniary and non-pecuniary) from
any person and the acceptance of such thing itself would
amount to “improper performance” of a relevant public
function. In view of this it has not been found necessary
to retain the present provisions of section 11 of the Act.
The stakeholder has supported the amendment. No
comments are required.
– There has been no narrowing of the applicability of

124
12 3 4
statements or objects and reasons
that provisions or section 13 (1)
(d) of  the existing Act have been
incorporated in the new definition
or bribery given in section 7, its
applicability appears to have been
narrowed as explained above.
– The changes made in the existing
sub-section (1) (e) concerning
the offence of possession of
disproportionate assets are not at
all desirable for two reasons, viz.
● Addition the phrase ‘ if he
intentionally enriches himself
illicitly during the period of
his office and’ will make the
task of investigating agencies
more onerous as they will
have to gather additional
evidence to prove the
intention and that enrichment
has been done illicitly – a
difficult proposition. Thus in
effect it would entail that to
prove an offence of D.A. it
would be necessary to
establish misuse or office
when the wealth has been
illicitly gotten. This would
double the burden of proof
because M.O. will also have
to be proved besides D.A.
section 13(1)(d) of the existing Act as can be seen
from the response given to the comments regarding
section 13(1)(d)(ii) above.
  – As regards changes made in sub-section (1)(e) the
position is clarified in the following sub-paragraphs:
● Section l3(1)(e) of the PC Act makes it an
offence (criminal misconduct) if any public
servant or any person on his behalf, is in
possession or has, at any time during the period
of his office, been in possession for which the
public servant cannot satisfactorily account, of
pecuniary resources or property disproportionate
to his known sources of income. Under
Article 20 of the UNCAC, it is necessary for
State Parties to establish as a criminal offence,
when committed intentionally, illicit enrichment,
that is, a significant increase in the assets of a
public official that he or she cannot reasonably
explain in relation to his or her lawful income.
Thus, the offence of illicit enrichment, under
the Convention, has to be intentional. The
present provisions do not contain this element
of intention. it is accordingly proposed to amend
clause 13(1)(e) to provide for incorporation of
this element of intentional illicit enrichment. The

125
Also if M.O. could be
proved, then there would be
no need for D.A. in the same
case.
● ‘Known sources of income’
has now been Explained as
income received from any
lawful source and further
expression ‘and such receipt
has been intimated in
accordance with the
provisions of any law, rules
or order for the time being
applicable to public servant’
has been removed without
giving any explanation – it
will give opportunities to the
offenders in preparing back
dated documents in their
defence.
intentionality of the illicit enrichment will have
to be gathered from the inability of the public
servant to reasonably explain the disproportionate
assets in relation to his lawful income. As such,
there will no doubling of the burden of proof
as apprehended by the stakeholder.
● The existing Explanation below section 13(1)(e)
defines “known source of income” as income
received from any lawful source and such
receipt has been intimated in accordance with
the provisions of any law, rules or orders for
the time being applicable to a public servant.
The Group of Ministers to consider issues
relating to amendment of the Prevention of
Corruption Act constituted in the year 2006
under the Chairmanship of the then Minister of
Home Affairs, had, while considering the
provisions of section 13, made, inter-alia, the
following recommendation:-
‘keeping in view the actual experience
regarding difficulties faced by honest civil
servants, the words “and such receipt has
been intimated in accordance with the
provisions of any law, rules or orders for
the time being applicable to a public servant”
may be deleted from the Explanation of
section 13.’
Accordingly, the Prevention of Corruption
(Amendment) Bill, 2008 (which was passed by the
Lok Sabha but lapsed due to dissolution of the
14
th Lok Sabha) contained a provision to delete the
said expression from the Explanation.

126
12 3 4
– No changes have been made in
the punishment provided for
in section 13 by  its sub-
section (2), meaning thereby it
remains as imprisonment -
minimum one year and maximum
7 years and with fine – In the
existing Act this offence is
considered more serious having
severe punishment – it needs to
be revised.
9. New Section 14  provides for enhanced
punishment for all convicts for any
offence under the Act, who
subsequently commit any other offence
under the Act is a welcome change.
10. Addition of a new Chapter IV A titled
as ‘Attachment And Forfeiture of
Property’ after Chapter IV is a
welcome change it is removes the
Since the relevant sub-clause [13(1)(e)] itself
predicates criminal liability on the condition that the
public servant cannot satisfactorily account for such
assets, the present provision in the Explanation goes
against the very spirit of the substantive provision.
Therefore, it is proposed to delete the expression
“and such receipt has been intimated in accordance
with the provisions of any law, rules or orders for
the time being applicable to a public servant” from
tile Explanation under section 13 on the lines of the
2008 Bill.
  – The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011, as reported
by the Select Committee of Rajya Sabha contains a
provision (in Part III of the Schedule) for
enhancement of the minimum punishment in sub-
section (2) of section 13 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 from “one year” to “four
years” and the maximum punishment under the said
sub-section from “seven years” to “ten years”. The
suggestion made by the stakeholder thus stands
addressed by the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill.
The stakeholder has welcomed the amendment. No
comments.
The basic intent behind the proposed insertion of the new
chapter on attachment and forfeiture is to ensure that the
tainted property is not alienated during the period of trial
of an accused public servant. At the same time, it is also

127
anomaly in the existing law. Under
section 5 (6) of the existing law, the
Special Judge enjoys all the powers
and function of a District Judge under
the Criminal Law (Amendment)
Ordinance 1944 but only while trying
the offences under the Act, whereas
now he would enjoy these powers and
function during investigation of the
offences also. The provisions however,
could have been more effective by
doing away with the necessity of
obtaining prior approval from the
concerned Government as it causes
considerable delays in obtaining such
approval thereby providing opportunity
to the offenders to dispose of the
properties. Either the bill should
mandates a time limit for the
Government in deciding such
applications after it would be deemed
to have been accorded or such an
approval could have been obtained from
the head of the respective investigating
agency.
11. The additions made in section 19 of
the existing Act are welcome as the
protection from vexatious prosecution
is extended to the public servants who
are no longer in office and a time limit
has been laid down but the following
important limitations faced in obtaining
sanction and misuse of this provision
in shielding the corrupt have not been
addressed in the bill.
necessary to ensure that the property is not confiscated
before the public servant is held guilty of the offence he
allegedly committed under the Act. The proposed provisions
strike a pragmatic balance between the individual’s right to
property and the protection of the interest of the State
against alienation of tainted property pending criminal
prosecution. Therefore, DoPT is of the view that it is not
advisable to do away with the prior approval of the
concerned Government. For the same reasons, it is also
not advisable to confer the power to accord such sanction
on the head of the respective investigating agency.
However, DoPT is open to any recommendation which the
Hon’ble Standing Committee may make as regards laying
down a time limit for deciding such applications for
approval of the concerned Government.
The present Section 19 does not contain any time limit
within which request for sanction of prosecution has to be
decided. The Supreme Court had, in Vineet Narain’s case,
laid down a time limit of three months which can be
extended by one month where consultation with Attorney
General/Advocate General is required. The proposed
amendment has placed this time limit as laid down by the
Supreme Court on statutory footing. Accordingly, the Bill
incorporates an amendment to insert a proviso under
Section 19 to the effect that the appropriate Government

128
12 3 4
– The bill does not provide for
action or punishment against the
Competent Authority who fails to
meet the proposed time limits.
What happens to the pending
sanctions in such cases? Whether
it should have been deemed to
have been granted? The bill is
silent on these important issues.
– The denial of sanction for
prosecution is a power given to
the Competent Authority which is
not justiciable in ay court including
the Supreme Court. It is often
used for shielding the corrupt.
This anomaly should have been
rectified by making it justiciable.
– The above becomes important in
cases where Competent
Authorities do not issue a speaking
order spelling our reasons for
denial of sanction for prosecution.
The bill should have at least
mandated the Competent
Authorities to issue a just and
speaking order discussing reasons
for finding the evidence provided
by the investigating agency not
or the competent authority, as the case may be, shall
convey its decision on the request for sanction for
prosecution within a period of three months, which may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing by the appropriate
Government or the competent authority, that the consultation
with the Attorney General or the Advocate General, as the
case may be, is required, be extended by a further period
of one month. However, the suggestion to provide for
punishing the competent authority for failure to meet the
time limit and to insert a clause for deeming the grant of
sanction on expiry of the said period as proposed by the
stakeholder are not acceptable as it may create practical
difficulties.
  – As regards making denials justiciable, it may be
pointed out that the according or denial of sanction
for prosecution of a public servant is an administrative
decision and, as such, DoPT is of the view that
even now the Constitutional Courts have the power
under their writ jurisdiction to go into such decisions.
  – As regards the suggestion that the provision should
mandate the passing of speaking orders, it is felt
that such a provision is not necessary. The decision
of according or denying sanction for prosecution of
a public servant, being an administrative decision, it
goes without saying that such decision should be
reasonable and based on appreciation of the material
placed before the sanctioning authority. Therefore, it
is not felt necessary to expressly provide in the Act
that the order should be a speaking one.

129
good enough for grant of sanction
for prosecution.
– The definition of public servant
given in section 2 of the Act
covers certain categories of
people, who are self-employed or
not employed by a public
authority. The bill has not
addressed the issue of defining
Competent Authority for such set
of public servants for obtaining
sanction for prosecution when
they commit offences under
section 7, 13 & 15 of the bill.
– The bill does not address situations
where the Competent Authority
to grant sanction for prosecution
is not an individual but a collective
body of elected representatives or
other persons. It is experienced
that such collective bodies issue
denial as a matter of rule rather
than exception.
12. Section 20 has been amended keeping
in view the new definitions of
proposed section 7 which seems okay.
13. Section 24 is proposed to be omitted
but it will make laying of traps difficult
– Section 19(1)(c) clearly provides that in the case of
any other person, the  authority competent to accord
sanction is the authority competent to remove  him
from his office. Thus, any public servant enumerated
in the definition in  section 2 and not covered under
sub-clause (a) and (b) of section 19 will be covered
under sub-clause (c) of section 19. Hence, there is
no need for any amendment for this purpose.
– As regards difficulties faced in obtaining sanctions
in cases where a collective  body is the competent
authority, it may be pointed out that under
section 19 of the PC Act, the power to accord
sanction for prosecution of a public servant is vested
in the authority competent to remove the public
servant from his office. The delegation of such
powers to a single person, if any, in the case of
bodies such as panchayats, municipalities, universities,
etc. would not call for any amendment in the
Prevention of Corruption Act, as the same should be
addressed by appropriate amendments in the relevant
rules/by-laws of such bodies.
The stakeholder has supported the amendment. No
comments.
Sincc the intentional offering, promising or giving of a
bribe is sought to be separately defined as an offence, the

130
12 3 4
for catching those soliciting or
accepting bribe red handed. While
laying traps during verification of
demand or transaction of bribe, often
the complainant offers bribe to the
accused which is accepted by the later.
In the absence of protection of section
24, such complaints would be now
liable for punishment under the
proposed section 8. As explained earlier
this section should be retained to
provide protection to the harassed
bribers who approach the investigation
agencies for laying of traps.
14. Though the proposed change in section
6A of DSPE Act, 1949 makes sense
but this provision itself is not in
consonance with articles 14 and 15 of
the Constitution, hence  it should have
been considered for omitting it.
protection to the bribe giver under section 24 should not
be available in the proposed scheme of things. Whenever
any person is faced with a demand for a bribe by a public
servant in connection with some service to which such
person is otherwise legally entitled and such person is
subjected to harassment bribery, such person has a duty to
report the same to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
In case the person who pays a bribe is offered protection
on the ground that he paid such bribe under compulsion,
this will dilute the very purpose of section 8, as most of
the bribe givers in cases of consensual bribery would
claim that the bribe was paid under compulsion from the
public servant and thus escape punishment. However, in
case a person who faces such a situation where he is
compelled to pay a bribe and he reports such demand for
bribe to the concerned Anti-corruption agency (ACB/CBI/
police) and helps the anti-corruption agency in setting up
a trap to nab the delinquent public servant, the investigation
agency itself will protect such complainant and not list him
as an accused in the case. DoPT accordingly feels that
there is no need to retain the provisions of section 24 of
the Act. However, DoPT is open to any recommendation
which may be made by the Hon’ble Committee in this
regard.
The vires of Section 6A of DSPE Act was challenged in
Dr. Subramanian Swamy vs. Director CBl, (2005) 2 SCC
317. The Hon’ble Court found that divergent opinions had
been taken by the Court in Vineet  Narain’ s case and in K.
Veeraswamy vs. Union of India, (1991) 3 SCC 655, as to
whether prior permission could be prescribed as a mandatory
precondition for investigation, and referred the issue to a
larger bench, where it is still pending. However, no stay
was granted against section 6A and, as on date, section 6A

131
Some other observations
1. The bill fails to explain how the
proposed section 7 is an
improvement over the provisions
contained in sections 7, 8, 9, 10,
11 & 13 (1) (d) of the existing
Act.
2. Sections 8 & 9 of the existing
act punish those intermediaries
who solicit or accept bribe for
inducing the public servant even
without his knowledge or
connivance. The proposed bill
does not punish such
intermediaries because it punishes
such intermediaries only when
they are acting as conspirators or
abettors either with the  public
servant or with the bribe giver. It
is an important lacuna of the
proposed bill.
of the DSPE Act stands as the law in force. The rationale
behind Section 6A of the DSPE Act is to provide a
screening mechanism to filter out frivolous or motivated
investigations that could be initiated against senior officers
at policy making levels with a view to protecting them
from harassment and to enable them to take decisions
without fear. Further, it may be mentioned that Section 6A
was inserted in the PC Act through the CVC Act, 2003, on
the basis of a recommendation made by the Joint
Parliamentary Committee in its report on the CVC Bill
itself. The suggestion to delete section 6A is, therefore, not
acceptable.
As regards definition of corruption related offences, the
most recent legislation by the UK on the subject, namely
the UK Bribery Act, 2010 has addressed issues on both the
demand side and supply side of corruption, i.e., the act of
accepting a bribe as well as the act of offering a bribe,
including bribery through intermediaries, in a comprehensive
manner. In the prop osed amendments relating to coverage
of offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988,
the definitions now proposed to be adopted are broadly
based on the contours of the definitions as contained in the
UK Bribery Act, with suitable modifications required in the
Indian context. The provisions of section 7 and 8 are
comprehensive enough to cover all offences under existing
sections 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 13(1)(d), as explained in the
following paragraphs.
In the proposed new dispensation, a public servant who
seeks/takes a bribe is punishable under section 7. The
person who offers/gives the bribe to another person (who
may or may not be a public servant) to induce a public
servant to perform improperly a public function is punishable
under section 8. The person who takes a bribe so as to

132
12 3 4
induce a public servant to improperly perform a public
function is also punishable under section 12 with the same
punishment as is applicable to the bribe giver and the
bribe-taker (public servant). Thus, the proposed new
provisions cover the bribe-giver, bribe-taker (public servant)
and the middleman to whom bribe is paid by the bribe
giver. In case a middleman accepts a bribe from some
person on the pretext of inducing a public servant to
perform a public function improperly, but there is actually
no link between such middleman and the public servant,
then, in that case, the middleman is not committing an
offence of bribery but an offence of cheating. Accordingly,
it is felt that when such a middleman who accepts a
financial or other advantage from any person on the pretext
of inducing a public servant to improperly perform a
public function but where there is no established link
between such middleman and the public servant, the case
against such middleman would be one of cheating and will
fall under the general criminal law for the offence of
cheating. Nevertheless, the person who offered the bribe
to such middleman would be guilty of the offence under
section 8 of the PC Act. Thus, DoPT feels that there is
no lacuna in the proposed provisions. However, DoPT is
open to any recommendation which the Hon’ble
Standing Committee may make in this regard.
The new definition of the offence on the demand side of
corruption will fully cover the offence u/s 11. Section 11
at present covers the acceptance/obtaining/agreeing to
accept/attempting to obtain by a public servant for himself,
or for any other person, any valuable thing without
consideration, from any person whom he knows to have
been, or to be, or to be likely to be concerned in any
proceeding or business transacted or about to be transacted
3. The proposed sections 7 & 8 in
the bill do not cover the provisions
of section 11 or the existing Act
because it nowhere lays down
that soliciting or accepting a
financial or other advantage by a
public servant from persons who
may not be seeking improper

133
performance of public function
or activity by the public servant
at that point of time but with the
expectation of seeking so in the
future.
4. By laying too much emphasis on
soliciting or accepting or offering
bribe for improper performance
of public function or activity by
a public servant, the bill gives an
impression that it is okay with
the law if bribe is solicited or
accepted or offered for proper
performance of public function
or activity.
by such public servant, or having any connection with the
official functions of himself or of any public servant to
whom he is subordinate, or from any person whom he
knows to be interested in or related to the person so
concerned. The proposed new section 7 [clause (b)] makes
it an offence where a person who is a public servant or
expecting to be a public servant–
“(b) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive
or accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or
other advantage from any person and the request,
agreement, acceptance or attempt itself
constitutes the improper performance of a
relevant public function or activity .”.
The expression “financial or other advantage” in the proposed
new section would cover all cases where a public servant
obtains/agrees to receive/accepts or attempts to receive
any thing of value (both pecuniary and non-pecuniary)
from any person and the acceptance of such thing itself
would amount to “improper performance” of a relevant
public function. As the acceptance of the financial or other
advantage would be sufficient to constitute the offence in
such cases, the question whether it was accepted for a
present favour or a future favour is not relevant.
As already mentioned above, the proposed new section 7
[clause (b)] makes it an offence where a person who is
a public servant or expecting to be a public servant—
“(b) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive
or accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or
other advantage from any person and the request,
agreement, acceptance or attempt itself
constitutes the improper performance of a
relevant public function or activity.”.

134
12 3 4
5. Many of the terms of phrases
used in the bill such as ‘improper
performance’, ‘relevant
expectation’, ‘test of what
expected’ etc. are too ambiguous
and likely to be subjected to varied
legal interpretations.
The expression “financial or other advantage” in the proposed
new section would cover all cases where a public servant
obtains/agrees to receive/accepts or attempts to receive
any thing of value (both pecuniary and non-pecuniary)
from any person and the acceptance of such thing itself
would amount to “improper performance” of a relevant
public function. As the acceptance of the financial or other
advantage would be sufficient to constitute the offence in
such cases, the contention that the bill gives an impression
that it is okay with the law if bribe is solicited or accepted
or offered for proper performance of public duty or activity
is not correct.
The formulation of the proposed new section 7, as contained
in the present Bill, follows the terminology used by the UK
Bribery Act, 2010. It may be mentioned in this context that
one of the most significant changes in the approach to
tackling bribery introduced by the UK Bribery Act 2010 is
in respect of the trigger to criminal action in bribery cases.
Traditionally, the trigger to a criminal proceeding in a
bribery case has been the “doing or omission to do” an act
by a public servant. The Bribery Act, 2010 makes an
important change in this approach, in that, it now bases
the action against a public servant on “improper
performance”. Thus, under the new Act, what triggers the
action in a case of alleged bribery is not so much the act
(or the omission to act) of the public servant but the
manner in which a relevant function is performed. The UK
Bribery Act has, for this purpose, defined improper
performance of a relevant function as performance of
such function in breach of a relevant expectation
(section 4) and also provides a very simple definition of an
expectation test what is expected is a test of what a
reasonable person would expect in relation to the

135
6. The mode of defining various acts
or crime in the bill are too
complicated, often difficult to
understand and subjected to
various interpretations.
7. The bills does not seem to be
doing justice to the provisions of
section 13 (1) (d) of the existing
Act because the new section 7 is
a poor substitute for it. Its
applicability has been narrowed
by linking it with the improper
performance of public function
or activity. Whereas the condition
of obtaining pecuniary advantage
or valuable thing by n public
servant for himself or any other
person ‘in the discharge of official
duty’ had been removed in
amendment to the old PC Act of
1947 effected by the Anti
Corruption Law (Amendment)
Act 1964, the same condition is
intended to be brought back in
the existing bill without giving
proper explanation for the same.
performance of the type of function or activity concerned
(section 5). This marks not only a paradigm shift in the
approach to tackling bribery but also a significant step
forward in the evolution of the law. The relevant provisions
of the UK Bribery Act, 2010 thus contain a much more
clear conceptual definition of ‘bribery’, which is being
adopted in the new definition of the offence under
section 7.
As in 5 above.
As regards the contention that the provisions of section 7
is a poor substitute for section 13(1)(d), and that its
applicability has been narrowed by linking it with a improper
performance of public function or activity, it is submitted
that the definition in proposed new section 7 is
comprehensive enough to cover seeking, accepting, of any
such advantage from any person either for himself or for
any other person. The proposed new section 7 [clause (b)]
makes it an offence where a person who is a public
servant or expecting to be a public servant-
“(b) requests for, or obtains or agrees to receive
or accepts or attempts to obtain, a financial or
other advanta
ge from any person and the request,
agreement, acceptance or attempt itself
constitutes the improper performance of a
relevant public function or activity.”.
As the demand/acceptance/obtaining of anything of value
(both pecuniary and non-pecuniary) from any person, either
for the benefit of the public servant or for the benefit of

136
12 3 4
The existing Act punishes a public
servant whenever he obtains
pecuniary advantage or valuable
thing for himself or any other
person by abusing his official
position in any manner-while
performing duty or otherwise.
8. On the one hand the proposed
bill narrows down the scope of
existing offence defined in
section 13 (1) (d) as explained
above, it  intends to take away
the essential element of proving
‘mens rea’ or ‘guilty mind’ when
it lays down that it is not
necessary to prove that the public
servant had the knowledge or
belief that he was performing a
public function or activity
improperly. On the other hand it
has been made a legal defence
for the persons in charge of or
responsible for the conduct of
business of a commercial
organization that they had no
knowledge of committing the
offence. In addition to such a
provision being against the basis
tenets of criminal jurisprudence,
it is not likely to withstand judicial
scrutiny in view of various rulings
or Supreme Court requiring
some other person, would itself amount to improper
performance of a public function, there is no need to
prove that there was an abuse of function during the
discharge of official duty in such cases. Therefore, the
contention that the expression “in the discharge of his
duty”, which was removed from the PC Act, 1947 through
Anti Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964, is intended
to be brought back without explanation is not correct.
As already explained in response to the comments at
Sl.No.7 above, the bill does  not narraw down the scope
of existing offence defined in section 13(1)(d). As regards
the contention that the provision intends to take away the
essential element of proving ‘mens era’, it is submitted that
in the proposed section 7(1)(a), the demanding/acceptance
of a financial or other advantage from any person intending
that, in consequence, a relevant public function or activity
would be performed improperly either by himself or by
another public servant, is an offence. Thus, the element of
mens era is already built into the substantive provision of
the sub-section. The Explanation 2 of section 7 merely
speaks about possession of knowledge or belief as to
whether the act is being performed improperly on the part
of the bribe seeker or the public servant who is induced
by the bribe seeker. If the intention of the delinquent public
servant is the improper performance of a relevant public
function, his own knowledge or belief as to whether the
performance of the activity or function is in fact improper
or the knowledge of the public servant who performs
such function as to whether it is o improper, is totally
irrelevant. It is the intention of the bribe seeker which
determines the culpability and not the actual nature of the
performance and not the correctness of such knowledge
or belief. Therefore, the explanation does not suffer

137
mandatorily proving ‘mens era’
in cases of corruption.
9. One of the important omissions
in the bill is the absence of
revision of punishment for
offences under section 13. It has
been left unchanged as
punishment of imprisonment not
less than one year but extendable
up to seven years and also fine
as given in sub section (2) of
section 13. It should have also
been changed as proposed in new
sections 7 & 8. The offences
defined in section 5 of the PC
Act 1947 were considered more
serious in nature by the
legislature, hence harsher penalties
were provided for the same. This
shortcoming needs to be
addressed.
10. Delay in disposal of corruption
cases in the courts of Special
Judge is considered one of the
hindrances in punishment having
any deterrent effect in society.
Though section 4 of the existing
from any infirmity as it is intended to plug any possible
escape route for the delinquent public servant. The
Explanation is all the more necessary in cases where the
demanding/acceptance of a bribe itself amounts to improper
performance of a public function. As already submitted
supra, a public servant who accepts a bribe from another
person cannot be allowed to say that he had no knowledge
that the acceptance of the financial or other advantage
amounted to improper performance of his public function.
As already mentioned above in response to similar
suggestion, the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011, as
reported by the Select Committee of Rajya Sabha (Bill
already passed by Lok Sabha. and presently pending in
Rajya Sabha) contains a provision (in Part III of the
Schedule) for enhancement of the minimum punishment in
sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 from “one year” to “four years” and
the maximum punishment under the said sub-section from
“seven years” to “ten years”. The suggestion made by the
stakeholder thus stands addressed by the Lokpal and
Lokayuktas Bill.
Section 4(4) of the Prevention of Corruption Act already
contains a provision that “Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
1974), a Special Judge shall, as far as practicable, hold the
trial of an offence on a day-to-day basis.

138
12 3 4
Act speaks of trial of such cases
on day-to-day basis, in practice it
is hardly done. The disposal of
cases in the courts takes
inordinately long time. The
proposed bill should have
addressed this issue and
incorporated provisions regarding
seeking adjournments etc. to
ensure expeditious disposal of
these cases.
It may also be mentioned in this context that, in its
questionnaire on the present Bill [forwarded by Rajya Sabha
Secretariat vide their O.M. dated 11.09.2013], the Hon’ble
Standing Committee has, inter alia , made the following
suggestion in Question No.20 of the questionnaire, namely:–
“Even though Section 4(4) of the principal Act
says that cases under Prevention of Corruption Act
have to be tried on day by day basis by Special
Judges, it is not adhered to uniformly. The reasons
may be many. One of the reasons is that the courts
constituted for trial of cases under Prevention of
Corruption Act have got number of cases and so it
is not possible to post the cases day by day. So
some provision is to be made. If cases is adjourned,
reasons to be assigned.
The recent Civil Procedure Code (Amendment)
Act 1999 has suggested that witnesses could be
examined by junior lawyer so that unnecessary
adjournments and the time consumed for examination
of witnesses would be avoided. By introducing such
amendments in the Prevention of Corruption Act it
will have a salutary effect. The time consumed for
examination of witnesses could be curtailed.
What is the reaction of the Ministry in regard to the
suitable amendment of Section 4(4) of the principal
Act in view of the above observation of the Committee?”.
The above suggestion of the Hon’ble Standing
Committee was considered by this Department and this
Department has, in its response to the said suggestion
indicated as follows:

139
11. Though the punishment for
sections 7, 8 & 10 have been
increased to  imprisonment of
minimum 3 years and maximum
7 years and fine, the experience
shows that majority of the convict
are awarded punishment of
imprisonment of 3 years or less
and they are released on bail by
the trial court when they declare
an intent to file appeal in  the
High Court as per provisions of
section 389 (3) of CrPC Appeals
take much longer (more than 20
years in majority of cases). Hence
hardly anybody goes to prison
even after being sentenced in
corruption case.
12. Experience and data available also
shows that even those few
who are awarded punishment of
imprisonment of more than
3 years, are released on bail by
the High Court and their sentence
suspended on admission of
appeal. Such people remain in
prison for few days only.
“As the issue raised by the Hon’ble Committee
raises an important  question of law, the Ministry of
Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) is
being requested to give its advice in the matter. In
principle,  DoPT does not have any objection to any
amendment in section 4(4) of the Act, which is
aimed at avoiding delay and ensuring expeditious
conclusion of trials.”.
Points 11 to 13:  As the comments/suggestions in these
three paragraphs are interconnected, the response of DoPT
to these paragraphs are combined in the following
paragraphs:–
While the provisions of the Act provide for minimum and
maximum punishment for specific offences, it is for the
courts, based on the facts and circumstances of the case
to award appropriate sentence in individual cases.
As regards the High Court’s power to release a convicted
person on bail under section 389 of CrPC, it is not in
every case that the Appellate Court suspends the sentence
pending the appeal and releases the appellant on bail. The
provisions of section 389 clearly lay down that “Pending
any appeal by a convicted person, the Appellate Court may,
for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the
execution of the sentence or order appealed against be
suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be
released on bail, or on his own bond.” The section further
provides that in cases where a convicted person is released
on bail it shall be open to the Public Prosecutor to file an
application for the cancellation of the bail. The right to
move an appellate court against a sentence imposed by a
trial court being a guaranteed right of a convicted person,
any provision of law which will have the effect of enforcing
the sentence, even while such appeal is pending, will not
only fetter the powers of the appellate court but would

140
12 3 4
13. In view of above, it may be
considered  exempting the
punishments under this law from
applicability if section 389 of
Cr.PC to send a strong message
against corruption.
14. The proposed amendment does
not lay down any limits for fine
as punishment and the experience
and data shows that it is a paltry
sum in majority of the cases. For
above reasons, it should also be
considered to lay down a
minimum amount of fine in the
law itself.
15. To send out a strong message
and to have a deterrent effect,
the nature of imprisonment should
be prescribed as rigorous in the
law itself.
16. One of the major reason behind
convicts roaming free even after
being sentenced is the huge delay
involved in deciding appeals
against the convictions. It should
be considered to set time limits
for deciding appeals for offences
under the Act and to have
exclusive benches of the High
Courts for expeditious disposal or
such appeals.
also be against the guaranteed right of the convicted person.
Having regard to this, it may not be advisable to exempt
punishments for offences under the Prevention of Corruption
Act from the applicability of section 389 of CrPC.
The quantum of fine to be imposed on a person convicted
for an offence under the Act will vary according to the
gravity of the offence and will be decided by the Court.
The Bill has already proposed substantial increase in the
quantum of punishment by way of imprisonment. It is,
therefore, not considered necessary to provide in the Act
for “rigorous imprisonment”.
The suggestion made by the stakeholder to lay down time
limits for disposal of appeals by the High Courts and for
setting up of exclusive Benches of High Courts for PC Act
cases appears to be impracticable.

141
17. The experience and data further
shows that  sentences awarded
on multiple counts when an
accused is held guilty on more
than one count are ordered to
run concurrently in corruption
cases, whereas section 31 of
CrPC empowers the judge to
fix the sequence of undergoing;
imprisonment of such convicts as
consecutively, that is, one after
the other or concurrently, that is,
all the same time. The law should
mandate sentences undergoing
consecutively, when awarded on
multiple counts, in cases of
corruption.
18. The proposed bill should exempt
applicability of the Probation of
Offender’s Act 1958 and
section 360 of CrPC to all the
offences punishable under the
prevention of Corruption Act 1988.
As of today this exemption is
applicable only in  case of
offences under section 13. There
is no rational for keeping this
discrimination.
The Bill has already proposed substantial increase in the
quantum of punishment by way of imprisonment. It is,
therefore, not considered necessary to provide in the Act
for consecutive running of sentences awarded on multiple
counts in cases or corruption. Even now, there is nothing
in the PC Act which prevents the Court from ordering
consecutive running of sentences in appropriate cases.
As regards the applicability or the provisions of the Probation
of Offenders Act to offences under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, the Hon’ble Standing Committee has, in its
questionnaire on the present Bill [forwarded by Rajya Sabha
Secretariat vide their O.M. dated 11.09.2013], inter alia ,
made the following suggestion in Question No.2l of the
questionnaire, namely:–
“What is the opinion of the Ministry regarding the invoking
of the benevolent provisions of the Probation of Offenders
Act, in the Principal version of Prevention of Corruption
Act? Details please.”.
The above suggestion of the Hon’ble Standing Committee
was considered by this Department and this Department
has, in its response to the said suggestion indicated as
follows:

142
12 3 4
“As the issue raised by the Hon’ble Committee raises an
important question of law, the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs) is being requested to 
give its
advice in the matter.”.
Ministry of Law and Justice has been requested to expedite
its advice.
As already mentioned by Secretary (P) in his introductory
remarks during the presentation on the Prevention of
Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 before the Hon’ble
Committee on 13
th September, 2013, as regards definition
of corruption related offences, the most recent legislation
by the UK on the subject, namely the UK Bribery Act,
2010 has addressed issues on both the demand side and
supply side of corruption, i.e., the act of accepting a bribe
as well as the act of offering a bribe, in a comprehensive
manner. In the proposed amendments relating to coverage
of offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988,
the definitions now proposed to be adopted are broadly
based on the contours of the definitions as contained in the
UK Bribery Act, with suitable modifications required in the
Indian context.
As regards the definition or “relevant expectation” and the
test of what is expected is concerned, it may be pointed
out that section 5 of the UK Bribery Act, 2010 reads as
under:-–
“5.Expectation test
(1) For the purposes of sections 3 and 4, the test of
what is expected is a test of what a reasonable
person in the United Kingdom would expect in
11. In his letter dated 03.10.2013, addressed to
Hon’ble Chairman, Parliamentary Standing
Committee which is considering the Prevention
of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013, apart
from giving suggestions on the said Bill, Shri
Rath, Ex-MLA, Puri, has stated that the Bill
contains sentences/segments lifted from the
UK Bribery Act, 2010 without disclosing this
fact anywhere in the Statement of Objects
and Reasons. For this, he has cited one
example saying that U.K. Bribery Act 2010
deals “Expectation Test” clearly, completely
and concretely in three sub-clauses of its
Section, but only part of one sentence has
been lifted from its sub-clause 1 and
implanted in Sub Clause (e) at Page 3 of the
Present Bill. Thus, he has stated that it has
made the borrowed concept sound vague,
inadequate and subjective and such improper
copy and paste job without disclosing what
has been copied and pasted and from which
source may lead to disastrous legal
consequences on account of implantation of
Foreign Law on Indian Law. In this regard,
he has also requested that the Hon’ble
Minister, i.e. MOS(PP) in this case, may be
Shri Uma Ballav Rath,
Ex-MLA, Puri,
60, Forest Park,
Bhubaneswar - 751009

143
requested: - (i) to arrange to supply a marked
copy of the Bill clearly underlining all the
portions, sentences and segments lifted from
U.K. Bribery Act, 2010, and implanted in the
Bill, and, (ii) to enlighten which other Acts
of other nations have been borrowed from
and relied upon and what is the content of
the original source since the Statement of
Objects and Reasons claims to amend the
present PC Act, 1988 in line with the current
international practice.
relation to the performance of the type of function
or activity concerned.
(2) In deciding what such a person would expect in
relation to the performance of a function or activity
where the performance is not subject to the law
of any part of the United Kingdom, any local
custom or practice is to be disregarded unless it
is permitted or required by the written law
applicable to the country or territory concerned.
(3) In subsection (2) “written law” means law contained
in:—
(a) any written constitution, or provision made
by or under legislation, applicable to the
country or territory concerned, or
(b) any judicial decision which is so applicable
and is evidenced in published written
souces.”.
A careful perusal of the previsions of sub-sections (2) and
(3) would show that these provisions relate to performance
of a function or activity where the performance is not
subject to the law of any part of the United Kingdom. In
other words, they relate to performance of functions and
activities outside the United Kingdom and thus are relevant
only in cases of foreign bribery. The UK Bribery  Act
being one which covers domestic bribery and foreign
bribery, the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) have
been incorporated therein so as to clearly provide that in
such cases, any local custom or practice is to be disregarded
unless it is permitted or required by the written law
applicable to the country or territory concerned. In India,
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 is concerned only
with domestic bribery. Foreign Bribery is the subject matter

144
12 3 4
of a separate Bill, namely, the Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011, which is presently pending in Lok
Sabha Thus, the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 5 of the UK Bribery Act have absolutely no
relevance in the context of the Prevention of Corruption
Act in India. Therefore, the allegation that the definition as
contained in section 5 of the UK Bribery Act, 2010 is
clear, complete and concrete in three sub-clauses but only
one sub-clause has been lifted from its sub-clause (1) and
implanted in section 7(2)(e) (Page 3 of the Bill) thus
making it vague, inadequate and subjective, is not correct.
The allegation is based on a clear mis-appreciation of the
true Import of the relevant clauses of the UK Act and also
of the present Bill.
The PC Act does not, at present, contain any provisions as
regards the time limit for obtaining the sanction of the
competent authority. In Vineet Narain’s Case, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court had specified the period of three months.
It is now proposed to incorporate a proviso in sub-
section (1) of section 19 of the Act, to the effect that the
appropriate Government or the competent authority, as the
case may be, shall convey its decision under this sub-
section within a period of three months, which may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing by the appropriate
The suggestions given by Shri Rath are as
follows:–
Fixing 3 Months’ time limit for Processing
sanction of prosecution orders, and Article
21 of Constitution of India promising
speedy trial:
(a) Processing of sanction orders u/s 19
and then going through trial procedure of
offences under the P.C. Act 1988 are separate
parts of the same process of procuring justice
to the offender under the Act. It is common
knowledge that trial of cases under the P.C.
Act, 1988, takes between 10 and 20 years.
In Odisha, Vigilance cases which are 33 years
old are still pending in Court (Since 1980).
Thus, time limit for processing sanction

145
proposals and time limit for completion of
trial must be dealt as related subjects.
Thus the Hon’ble Minister may kindly furnish
a  complete list of C.B.I and State Vigilance/
A.C.B (one State at least) disposed of during
past 5 years showing date of initiation of the
trial and date of completion of trial ( i.e.,
Date of Initiation means filing of report in
Court u/s 173 CrPC 1973). This information
will help in appreciating the suggested
provision of the Bill to issue sanction order
within 3 months since accelerated issue of
sanction orders within 3 months makes little
sense when trial is taking more than 30
years.
(b) Trial of criminal offence under the P.C.
Act 1988 is different from trial of other
offences. In P.C. Act cases, the State is the
victim. It is also the State, which prosecutes
the alleged accused in the Court. Thus, issue
sanction order is an onerous responsibility. It
may be informed whether in any other
democratic nation there is any explicit legal
provision to prevent frivolous, vexations, and
mindless sanction order and frivolous and
vexation prosecution resulting from it. If not,
whether such a provision can be provided
u/s 19 of P.C. Act, 1988, through appropriate
sub-clause. In other words, hasty sanction
orders and prolonged trial procedure ending:
in acquittal, unless addressed by an adequate
provision, will constitute a poisonous cocktail
Government or the competent authority, that the consultation
with the Attorney General or the Advocate General, as the
case may be, is required, be extended by a further period
of one month.
As regards, delay in the disposal of cases by the courts,
Section 4(4) of the Prevention of Corruption Act already
contains a provision that “Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
1974), a Special Judge shall, as far as practicable, hold the
trial of an offence on a day-to-day basis.
It may also be mentioned in this context that, in its
questionnaire on the present Bill [forwarded by Rajya
Sabha Secretariat vide their O.M. dated 11.09.2013], the
Hon’ble Standing Committee has, inter alia , made the
following suggestion in Question No.20 of the
questionnaire, namely:–
“Even though Section 4(4) of the principal Act
says that cases under Prevention of Corruption Act
have to be tried on day by day basis by Special
Judges, it is not adhered to uniformly. The reasons
may be many. One of the reasons is that the courts
constituted for trial of cases under Prevention of
Corruption Act have got number of cases and so it
is not possible to post the cases day by day. So
some provision is to be made. If cases are adjourned,
reasons to be assigned.
The recent Civil Procedure Code (Amendment)
Act 1999 has suggested that witnesses could be
examined by junior lawyer so that unnecessary
adjournments and the time consumed for examination
of witnesses would be avoided. By introducing such
amendments in the Prevention of Corruption Act, it

146
12 3 4
will have a salutary effect. The time consumed for
examination of witnesses could be curtailed.
What is the reaction of the Ministry in regard to the
suitable amendment of Section 4(4) of the principal
Act in view of the above observation of the
Committee?”.
The  above suggestion of the Hon’ble Standing
Committee was considered by this Department and this
Department has, in its response to the said suggestion
indicated as follows:
“As the issue raised by the Hon’ble Committee
raises an important question of law, the Ministry of
Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) is
being requested to give its advice in the matter. In
principle, DoPT does not have any objection to any
amendment in section 4(4) of the Act, which is
aimed at avoiding delay and ensuring expeditious
conclusion of trials.”.
The Ministry of Law has been requested to expedite their
advice in the matter.
A statement showing the details of PC Act cases registered
and convicted during the last ten years, as furnished by
CBI, is placed at Annexure-A. Statistics regarding PC Act
cases registered by State Vigilance/ACBs are not centrally
maintained.
to defeat Constitutional provision of
expeditious trial under Article 21.
Performance of CBI and State Vigilance
under existing Law:
It is common impression that cases filed by
the C.B.I. and the State Vigilance/A.C.B. under
the P.C. Act, 1988 are ending in acquittal in
most of the cases after 10-30  years of trial.
The percentage of acquittal appears to be
60% for C.B.I. cases; and up to 90%  in State

147
Vigilance cases. The annual reports of C.B.I.
reveal exact number of registered cases under
3 categories of Trap, Disproportionate Assets,
break-up of cases awarded with a
“conviction” order on conclusion of trial.
The success rate of CBI and State Vigilance
in conviction of Trap cases >90%. This high
percentage of conviction in Trap cases is
used to inflate the figure of total convictions.
Thus it is necessary to appreciate the success/
failure of the C.B.I. and the State Vigilance/
A.C.B. on the basis of data, which may be
furnished in the following table:
C.B.I. (Last 10 years)
Year Case Registered Case convicted
during year during the year
Trap D.A. Loss Trap D.A Loss
I 2 3 4567
N.B.:– It is known that cases undergoing
trial were registered in different years; and
figure on the right side of the Table which
happened in a particular year are not related
to figure on left side. But total numbers will
give some idea of success of C.B.I., State
Vigilance in “other than Trap” cases.
State Vi
gilance/A.C.B
Same DATA for at least one State.
Vexation Prosecution:
Vexation Prosecution and malicious
prosecution are criminal offences under
As regards the issue raised by the stakeholder regarding
success rates of investigating agencies under different heads,
it is submitted that the success rate of cases instituted by
CBI/State ACBs is not the subject matter of the present
Bill. The functioning of these agencies are governed by the
respective law/order under which they derive their powers.
The suggestion made by the stakeholder is not germane to
the purpose of the present Bill.

148
12 3 4
provisions of I.P.C. 1860 (Chapter Xl). Thus
vexation prosecution against ‘In service’ or
‘retired’ public servant’s and ‘person in office’
and ‘after demitting public office’ is not to
be encouraged by the State by giving
unbridled powers to the Police and the
Sanctioning authority. Vexation prosecution is
to be screened beforehand by providing for
adequate provisions at the time of sanction
itself and not left to the Court, which has
very little scope to eliminate vexatious
prosccutions. Existing provision Under
Section 227 CrPC. 1973 has become a
practical nullity in Indian Courts because of
numerous judicial interpretations by Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India such as State of
Odisha vs. Debendra Nath Padhi (2005) 30
OCR (SC) 177 1 SCC 568); Satish Mehra
vs. Delhi Administration (1996) 9 SSC 766;
Rukmini Narvekar vs. Vijay Satardekar and
Ors. (2008) 41 OCR (SC) - 853 etc. Petitions
filed by accused public servants for discharge
u/s 227 are mechanically rejected in more
than 99% or cases because the Judge, as per
Supreme Court ruling, is not required to apply
his judicial mind as rigorously at the time of
discharge procedure u/s 227 as during trial.
Procedure of pre-trail scrutiny, which was
available in previous CrPC, is not available in
1973 CrPC Courts in U.K and U.S.A go
through detailed pre-trail scrutiny. But there
is no such provision in CrPC 1973. Thus,
there is not effective mechanism to eliminate
vexatious prosecution through the Court.

149
Therefore, provision has to be made to
eliminate vexation prosecution by providing
suitable procedure such as:
(a) Designating a particular Officer(s) as in
U.K. who is to apply his mind, go through
material and issue or reject sanction proposal,
and also be responsible for it, and suffer
consequences of malicious and vexation
prosecution based on sanction orders issued
by him. Present practice of CVC giving
sanction advice and not being responsible for
consequences of bad or wrong advice, and
sanctioning authority relying on CVC advice,
which is given without taking any
responsibility for consequences, is a
procedure which needs to be discarded in
entirety.
(b) In minor offences, the State the victim
of offences under the P.C. Act, 1988 may
compound the offence on deposit of lost
amount or bribe money plus fine since
compounding of offences is already provided
in section 320 of CrPC 1973 for even
heinous offences.
(a) The suggestion made by the stakeholder to designate
particular officers to go through material and issue or
reject sanction proposal will be workable only in a scenario
where the prosecution of cases is done by an independent
prosecution agency. In view of this, the suggestion to do
away with section 19 is not found to be acceptable.
(b) As regards the suggestion to make offences under the
PC Act compoundable, it is submitted that the suggestion
is based on the premise that the State is the victim of the
offence and, as the victim of the offence, the State may
compound the offence, which is not correct. The provisions
of section 320 CrPC incorporate certain offences under
IPC and the persons by whom (other than the State) they
can be compounded. Thus, an offence of cheating (s.417
IPC) can be compounded by the person cheated; the
offence of causing hurt or grievous hurt (s.334 and
335 IPC) can be compounded by the person to whom the
hurt is caused, the offence of adultery (S.497 IPC) can be
condoned by the husband of the woman. Thus, it may be
seen that compoundable offences are offences that have
primarily resulted in some injury to some victim (other
than the State) and the person so victimised may compound
the offence if he so chooses. Here again, relevant provisions

150
12 3 4
Independent Investigation and Prosecution
Wing:
The Investigation Wing and Prosecution
Wing of offences under P.C. Act, 1988 are
presently functioning under the directors of
the CBI and State Vigilance. Provision needs
to be made for an independent Prosecutor
who is not in any way under control of
C.B.I. and State Vigilance. Thus, separate
and independent Prosecution Wing is desirable
as in the U.K.
Attachment and Confiscation:  It is
necessary to assess the impact of attachment
and confiscation provisions in the Bill in the
light of similar provisions in laws of other
democracies. There should not be any law
attempting to tamper with the right to property
of CrPC provide that while offences listed in the Table
following sub-section (1) of section 320 can be compounded
by the persons mentioned in the Table, those offences
listed in the Table following sub-section (2) of the said
section can be compounded by the persons mentioned in
the Table (victims) only with the permission of the Court
before which any prosecution for such offence is pending.
The contention that section 320 CrPC provides for even
heinous offences is also not correct. Any amendment in
the PC Act to provide for compounding of offences under
the Act will take the sting out of the penal provisions of
the Act and would thus weaken the law. The suggestion is,
therefore, not acceptable.
The CSI handles not only corruption cases but also a
number of types of other cases. Therefore, the question of
separation of Investigation Wing and Prosecution Wing in
CBI has to be addressed by making appropriate provisions
in the DSPE Act. The question of establishment of an
independent Director of Prosecution in CBI is being
examined by Government separately.
As regards State Vigilance, the structure of their vigilance
set up has to be decided by the respective State Governments.
The basic intent behind the proposed insertion of the new
chapter on attachment and forfeiture is to ensure that the
tainted property is not alienated during the period of trial
of an accused public servant. At the same time, it is also
necessary to ensure that the property is not confiscated
before the public servant is held guilty of the offence he

151
except through due process of law which
means that if the offence is illegal acquisition
of large volume of assets, the cases must be
treated on urgent basis and trial completed in
3-6 months and illegally acquired property
may be attached and confiscated only on
pronouncement of conviction order.
Known Source  of Income: Substitution of
“Known source of income” by “lawful
sources of income” needs to be examined in
the light any such or more effective provision
in law of any other democratic nation. This
is because intimation about acquisition of any
asset by a public servant to employer, or the
concerned Government; and declaration given’
before the Income Tax Department provide
for screening of whether the  said acquisition
is from lawful source or not. Authority under
Income Tax Act or Service Law is free to
raise questions about such acquisition. Thus,
present Law already provides for scrutiny of
acquisition of assets by a lawful authority.
The question arises if the exiting provision
of “known sources of income” is substituted
by “lawful sources of income”, who will
decide what is to be considered as lawful
source under the respective service law or
the Income Tax Act? Should the judge trying
offence under the PC Act be burdened with
accountancy functions in addition to his
primary function in judging whether evidence
be fore him proves commission of a charged
offence or not?
allegedly committed under the Act. The proposed provisions
strike a pragmatic balance between the individual’s right to
property and the protection of the interest of the State
against alienation of tainted property pending criminal
prosecution. The suggestion that in all such cases, trial
should be completed in 3-6 months is impracticable.
The existing provision in section 13 of the PC Act relating
to disproportionate assets reads as under:
“13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant.  (1) A
public servant is said to commit the offence of criminal
misconduct,–
.....................
(e) if he or any person on his behalf, is in possession or
has, at any time during the period of his office, been in
possession for which the public servant cannot satisfactorily
account, of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate
to his known sources of income.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, “known
sources of income” means income received from any
lawful source  and such receipt has been intimated in
accordance with the provisions of any law, rules or orders
for the time being applicable to a public servant.”.
The proposed new section 13 in this regard provides as
under:
“13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant.  (1) A
public servant is said to commit it the offence or criminal
misconduct,-
.....................

152
12 3 4
12. Bombay Chamber of
Commerce and Industry
In his representation dated 4.10.2013,
Director General of Bombay Chamber of
Commerce and Industry, has conveyed that
in order to supplement in progressive move
undertaken by the Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee relating lo the Prevention
of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013,
Bombay Chamber has instituted a study
(b) if he intentionally enriches himself illicitly during the
period of his office and, he or any person on his behalf,
is in possession or has, at any time during the period of
his office, been in possession for which the public servant
cannot satisfactorily account, of pecuniary resources or
property disproportionate to his known sources of income.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “known
sources of income” means income received from any
lawful source.
A careful perusal of the existing provision and the proposed
amendment would show that there is no proposal to
substitute the expression “known sources of income” with
the expression “lawful sources of income” as stated by the
stakeholder.
The proposed amendment is merely aimed at bringing the
provisions of the existing clause relating to disproportionate
assets in line with the requirement of Article 20 of the
UNCAC (for inserting the requirement of intentional illicit
enrichment) and at deleting the expression “and such receipt
has been intimated in accordance with the provisions of
any law, rules or orders for the time being applicable to a
public servant” from the Explanation.
The request from the stakeholder is that it may be allowed
to present a certain research report findings, on the basis
of a study commissioned by it, before the Committee
finalises its report on the Bill. Since the present
communication does not contain any specific suggestions/
comments on the Bill, the DoPT has no specific comments
to offer.

153
with international experts and the study will
cover:–
(i) An analysis of deficiencies, if
any, in the legislation which
hampers the cause of good
governance.
(ii) A survey of international legal
provisions and best practices on
bribery in the private sector
which can serve as in
information database.
(iii) Model legal provisions on bribery
in the private sector applicable
to the Indian context in
anticipation of consultations/
amendments that might be
initiated by the Government of
India related to the Prevention
of Corruption Act.
They have also stated that they would like to
share the research report of this study with
the Committee and with all appropriate
authorities and has requested to allow them
to present their research report findings
before the Committee finalizes the
amendments in the Prevention of Corruption
(Amendment) Bill, 2013.
(a) There are various means which
are adopted for corruption by the
Public Servants. Bribery is
rampant. So the first suggestion
is that all such persons/
organizations who give bribe to
Gagan Chhabra,
Advocate Supreme Court
of India,
Member-
Indian Council of
Arbitration,
13. The concern expressed by the stakeholder already stands
addressed by the present Bill as it now prescribes the same
punishment to the bribe giver as is given to the bribe taker.

154
12 3 4
the public servants, directly or
indirectly should get the same
punishment as is prescribed for
the Public Servant. No excuse
should be entertained by anybody
who first gives bribe and then
later on says he was forced to do
so or had no choice.
(b) The Forfeiture of Property should
not be only of the public servants
but also of such persons/
organisations which indulge in
giving bribe.
(c) Any Organisation which is found
to have been indulging in giving
CEO-
Smart Attorneys,
Chamber No. 131,
Supreme Court of India,
New Delhi.
Section 18B of the proposed new Chapter IV A provides
as follows:–
“18B. (1) Where any police officer authorised to investigate
any offence under section 17 has reason to believe that
any person has committed any offence under this Act
and such person has procured money or other property by
means of such offence, the Investigating Officer may,
with the prior approval of the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be, at any stage,
whether or not any court has taken cognizance, move an
application before the special Judge appointed under
section 3 for attachment of the said money or property or
if such money or property cannot, for any reason, be
attached, other property of the said person of value as
nearly as may be equivalent to that of the aforesaid money
or other property.”.
Thus, any money or property procured by means of an
offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act is subject
to process under the Act, whether it is in the hands of a
public servant or in the hands of any other person/
organisation.
The suggestion to blacklist any commercial organisation
found to have indulged in corruption does not call for any

155
bribe to the public servant should
be blacklisted and banned.
(d) Though the public servant is
required to declare the assets of
himself and of his wife it is
common knowledge that no
verification is carried out.
Secondly, it is also known fact
that the children of the public
servants who are into various
businesses often act as
Intermediaries who accept the
bribe and chanalize the money
through their personal business and
in this manner large sums of
money are exchanged without
getting noticed. To curb this
practice, it is recommended that
the details of the businesses of
children of Public Servants should
also be called for and looked in to
and made as a mandatory
declaration.
amendment in the Prevention of Corruption Act as the
same can be done by way of administrative action.
Section 13 (1)(e) already covers all properties
(disproportionate assets) held by the public servant or by
any person on his behalf. Thus, any disproportionate assets
acquired in the names of family members and others, the
possession of which cannot be explained by the public
servant Cannot satisfactorily account, are already subject
to process. Further, there are already provisions in the
relevant conduct rules applicable to various categories of
public servants regarding acquisition of property by them
either in their own name or in the names of their family
members. For example, sub-rules (2) to (4) of Rule 18 of
the CCS (Conduct) Rules provide as under:-
“(2) No Government servant shall, except with
the previous knowledge of the prescribed
authority, acquire or dispose of any immovable
property by lease, mortgage, purchase, sale, gift
or otherwise either in his own name or in the
name of any member of his family:
Provided that the previous sanction of the
prescribed authority shall be obtained by the
Government servant if any such transaction is
with a person having official dealings with him
(3) Where a Government servant enters into a
transaction in respect of movable property either
in his own name or in the name of the member
of his family, he shall, within one month from
the date of such transaction, report the same to
the prescribed authority, if the value of such
property exceeds twenty thousand rupees in the
case of a Government servant holding any Group

156
12 3 4
(c) There is no provision in the act to
look into the aspect of corruption
in the judiciary. There are sitting
judges of Supreme Court, High
Court and District Courts whose
children/spouses are practicing
in same Courts as lawyers.
There are instances where a
particular relative of a Supreme
Court or a High Court judge gets
‘A’ or Group ‘B’ post or fifteen thousand rupees
in the case of a Government servant holding any
Group ‘C’ or Group ‘D’ post:
Provided that the previous sanction of the
prescribed authority shall be obtained by the
Government servant if any such transaction is
with a person having official dealings with him.
(4) The Government or the prescribed authority
may, at any time, by general or special order,
require a Government servant to furnish, within
a period specified in the order, a full and complete
statement of such movable or immovable property
held or acquired by him or on his behalf or by
any member of his family as may be specified in
the order. Such statement shall, if so required by
the Government or by the prescribed authority,
include the details of the means by which, or the
source from which, such property was acquired.”.
The concern expressed by the stakeholder thus stands
addressed already under the  law/rules.
The provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act are
equally applicable to the Judiciary. The definition of public
servant in section 2(c) of the Act expressly covers [section
2(c)(iv)] any Judge. No further amendment in the Act is,
therefore, considered necessary.

157
“extraordinary relief’ from other
brother/sister Judge/ Subordinate
Judges. The prevention of
Corruption Act along with its
amendments should cover the
public servant in every format.
Judiciary by and large is not
covered in the strict sense under
the Act because of various
complex reasons. The judges are
also public servants and the
records show that there are not
many instances where the people
from the Judiciary have faced any
prosecution under the Act. So the
suggestion is to ensure that all
public servants in the country
should come under the ambit of
the act without any fear, though
of course with prior sanction of
the competent authority.
(f) Prior Sanction of the competent
authority is also very debatable
issue as there are many judgments
of Supreme Court which says that
in absence of proper sanction, no
prosecution can be launched or
continued against the corrupt
public servant. Therefore the
suggestion is that the competent
authority which has to give
sanction should first meticulously
examine the issue, the records on
which the sanction is sought, so
that once the sanction is granted
The decision according or denying sanction for prosecution
of a public servant, being an administrative decision, it
goes without saying that such decision should be reasonable
and based on appreciation of the material placed before the
sanctioning authority. Therefore, it is not felt necessary to
expressly provide in the Act that the order should be a
speaking one.

158
12 3 4
the prosecution is not hit by the
issues relating to sanction not
being proper or without a speaking
order.
(g) Immunity to the Public Servants–
As the corruption has increased
so has the vexatious complaints.
The public servants are sometimes
worried to take a particular
decision for the fear of getting
unnecessarily entangled into court
cases. A bonafide decision taken
by a public servant by proper
application of mind and due
diligence still attract false and
baseless complaints by the
persons/organisations who do not
get benefit from the decision. A
common example is award of
Contract to a particular party by
adhering to the procedure and in
the best interest of the
Government. But the party who
losses out still chooses to make a
false complaint against the public
servant purely out of vengeance.
This practice unfortunately is
growing therefore any complaint
made against a Public Servant
should necessarily be thoroughly
examined and the complainant’s
statement should be recorded
before the Magistrate and also
The proposed amendments in the Bill, inter alia , are aimed
at protecting honest public servants from vexatious and
frivolous prosecutions. However, the suggestion that any
complaint made against a Public Servant should necessarily
be thoroughly examined and the complainant’s statement
should be recorded before the Magistrate and that the
investigating Officer conducting Preliminarily enquiries should
be made more responsible to give reasons in writing to
their seniors before FIR etc. is registered by him, is not
acceptable. Section 200 of the CrPC already provides that
a Magistrate taking cognisance of an offence on complaint
shall examine upon oath the complainant. As regards the
suggestion for recording reasons before registration of
FIRs, etc., the same is outside the purview of the present
Bill as it relates to procedure for investigation of offences,
which is an area common to all criminal offences under
the Code of Criminal Procedure.

159
equally important is that the
investigating Officer conducting
Preliminarily enquiries should be
made more responsible to give
reasons in writing to their Seniors
before FIR etc. is registered by
them.
(h) In the present atmosphere there
are instances where old scams have
surfaced. It has been seen that
the Politicians who may have
indulged in corrupt practices are
being prosecuted. When there is
no bar to prosecute a Politician
for Scam of 5-15 years old, then
there is no justification for giving
any immunity to the public
servants for such corrupt practice
which are detect even after their
retirement.
The Bill does not seek to provide any immunity to public
servants for old corruption cases. The Bill merely seeks to
extend the protection of previous sanction of the appropriate
government/competent authority to retired public servants,
so as to protect them against vexatious and frivolous
prosecutions. Such a protection is already available to
public servants under section 197 CrPC.

160
Data Related to PC Act Cases
Year Cases registered during year Cases convicted during year
Trap D.A. Criminal Misconduct Trap D.A. Criminal Misconduct
13(1)(d) and Others 13(1)(d) and Others
12 3 4 5 6 7
2003 278 78 430 113 3 100
2004 273 81 521 97 5 98
2005 218 173 512 75 14 147
2006 241 91 518 95 14 154
2007 231 96 378 117 11 166
2008 334 101 371 88 14 151
2009 338 84 459 103 19 186
2010 259 72 436 99 10 205
2011 255 64 354 118 23 198
2012 261 66 430 185 36 322
2013 (upto 212 39 303 136 25 269
30.09.2013)
T
OTAL: 2900 945 4712 1226 174 1996

161
Memo Name of the Comments/Suggestions Comments of DoPT
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
14. Shri Nripendra Mishra,
IAS (Retd.), Director,
Public Interest Foundation,
B-32, Greater Kailash-I,
New Delhi.
The draconian provision under section l3(1)(D)(iii)
of the Prevention of the Corruption Act of 1988
stating one of the criminal misconducts by a public
servants requests urgent attention, particularly from
our parliamentarians. The provision reads, “While
holding office as a public servant obtains for any
person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage
without any public interest.” This provision is
exposed to a potential interpretation that a public
servant could be prosecuted if an individual decision
result in pecuniary gain to a person without any
public interest. At a time when escalation of public-
private partnerships is deemed necessary to trigger
swift growth of country’s economy, the existence
of this provision remains highly contested. The
lawmakers of the country cannot feign to ignore
the fair possibility of many economic decisions being
interpreted differently with the dynamics of the
rationale taking different shades at different times.
In the backdrop of these mounting concerns, the
Committee on Civil Services Reform (Hota
Committee) in its report has strongly recommended
a review of the section l3(1)(D)(III) of the Prevention
of Corruption Act. The committee observed that all
commercial decisions benefit one party or the other,
and it is hard for a public servant to ensure
conformity with the aforesaid provision of law. As
an upshot of this report, the Union Government
The concern expressed by the stakeholder already
stands addressed by the proposed amendment of
section 13 in the Bill, as the Prevention of
Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 already
provides for deletion of section 13(l)(d)(iii). Unlike
other provisions in Section 13(1)(d) of the Act,
which contain express provisions stipulating the
requirement of mens rea (guilty intention), such as
“dishonestly’, ‘fraudulently’, ‘by corruption or illegal
means’, etc., sub-clause (iii) of section 13(1)(d)
virtually gives a go by to the element of mens rea.
No guilty intention is required to be established
under this provision except showing that the public
servant has obtained any valuable thing or pecuniary
advantage for any person ‘without any public
interest’. The definition thus leaves open a very
wide scope for its misuse by investigating agencies.
Accordingly, the Prevention of Corruption
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 has already proposed to
delete section 13(1)(d)(iii) of the Act. Further, the
adoption of the new definitions of bribery as in the
UK Bribery Act would cover all offences as
contained in clauses (a), (b) and (d) of sub-
section (1) of section 13 and these provisions are
also proposed to be deleted.

162
12 3 4
recognized the need for amending the Act. It had
accepted both the recommendations of the Hota
Committee and the significant recommendation of
Law Commission for introducing a deterrent
provision that would permit attachment and forfeiture
of property acquired by the holders of public office
through corrupt means. Although the Bill to amend
the Act was passed by in Lok Sabha on 23rd
December, 2008, it could not become an Act as the
passage in Rajya Sabha was not possible and the
then-Parliament/Lok Sabha was dissolved for 2009
elections.
The Foundation solicits your kind attention toward
the exigency to omit the existing draconian provision
by this amendment bill.
Add one sub-section in section 7 of the
amendment bill–
“If a public servant receives under threat to receive
a sum or valuables from the offender but
subsequently reports to police within reasonable
period of time and he/she not used the bribe money
in question to increase his property, shall not be
punished under sec-7 of this Act. What matters is
not the act of receiving bribe but the act of acquiring
assets disproportionate to known source of income.
If the offender proves that he neither have DA nor
he has any desire for acquiring DA, he shall not be
punished under section-7.
15. Shri Kulamani Mishra,
AT/PO–Torani Pokhari,
Via -Dhenkikote, Distt.
Keonjhar (Odisha) –
758029
Whenever any public servant is faced with any
threat to receive a bribe from any person, such
public servant has a duty to report the same to the
appropriate law enforcement agency. In case the
public servant who accepted a bribe is offered
protection on the ground that he accepted such
bribe under threat but subsequently reported it to
police, it will dilute the very purpose of section 7,
as most public servants in cases of consensual
bribery would claim that the bribe was accepted
under threat from somebody and thus escape
punishment. Further, in case a public servant who
received a bribe reports the matter to police
subsequently i.e., at a later point of time, it will
almost be impossible to nab the bribe-giver as the
bribe-giver would invariably deny having given the
bribe. However, in case a public servant who faces

163
such a situation reports the matter to the
Anti-corruption agency concerned (ACB/CBI/police)
and helps the anti-corruption agency in setting up a
trap to nab the bribe-giver, the investigation agency
itself will protect such public servant and not list
him as an accused in the case.
The suggestion made by the stakeholder is not
acceptable. Every instance of taking a bribe by a
public servant is a punishable offence. In case
every case of bribery is to be corroborated with
verification of assets of the public servant, it will
not be possible to get most of the public servants
who accept bribe convicted for the offence, as it
may not be possible to prove that the public servant
has in fact amassed disproportionate assets in each
case. The shifting of focus from physically receiving
bribe to the acquiring or physically creating
disproportionate assets, as suggested by the stake-
holder would totally weaken the law.
If a crime under section 7 is reported against a
public servant, the act of crime as reported should
not end with the specific bribe amount alone, it
should extend to verification of total assets in his
own name and in his family without which the case
shall not be closed.
We very often find that the anti-corruption machinery
is misused or used with nefarious motive to harass
honest officials or due to enmity of their relatives,
friends, with some officials by planting cash/valuables
in his/her offices, houses and arresting them on
charges of accepting bribe. This should be totally
done away with. A single incident of red handed
arrest is not good, if the taker is a habitual bribe
taker by disrepute in office or in client’s  circle, only
then he should be proceeded with. What matters is
not finding, bribe money with the public servant, but
it is important to find DA, because people receive
bribe to acquire assets. We should shift the focus
from physically receiving bribe to physically creating
DA. Therefore, verification of assets of vulnerable
public servants is a must at regular intervals. Any
body found with DA shall be liable to punishment.
The nuisance of arresting the taker red handed should
be discontinued. The CBI officials/crime branch/
vigilance officials take gratifications or oblige their
friends to settle score with others whom they dislike
and plant bribe money to torture the honest people.

164
12 3 4
To repeat, the act of finding bribe money with the
public servant shall not be treated as crime unless
the accused person found receiving with full consent
to perform, get it performed by some others an act
which should not have been done in normal
circumstances as per law/rule. His act of accepting
gratifications or bribe shall always lead to verification
of his disproportionate assets (DA). Anybody caught
receiving bribe or giving bribe should face assets
verifications to establish the crime. For this purposed
DA shall be properly defined in section-13 as “assets
beyond a reasonable portion of his known and
declared source of income or ancestral property.
Here declared source shall always mean as declared
in IT returns and taxes paid. The term ‘reasonable
portion’ shall be decided by an executive order.”
In a situation where the giver gives to make a gain,
he/she also liable to punishment for acquiring DA.
The giver may not be a public servant. We find
businessmen paying income tax or other taxes only
in thousands but their assets grow in millions and
that remains undeclared. Is it not a crime? In my
opinion necessary changes may be made in Income
Tax Law to compel all those who pay taxes or
submit IT returns (all non-public servants and public
servants) to submit Assets Declarations along with
the IT returns annually.
There are many cases coming to public domain of
accepting bribe through TRUST, Religious trusts,
Shrines, associations etc. There is no law to track
such events. Here both the donors and trustees are
reaping benefits. The donors get the work done by
The suggestion to amend the Income Tax Law to
compel all those who pay taxes or submit IT returns
(non-public servants and public servants) to submit
Asset Declarations along with their IT returns is
beyond the scope of the present Act. As regards
assets declaration by government servants, there are
provisions for declaration of assets and liabilities by
every public servant in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Bill, 2013 (section 44) which has been recently
passed by Parliament.
All cases where a public servant accepts a financial
or other advantage either for his own benefit or for
the benefit of some other person are now covered
in the definition of the offence under the new
section 7. Similarly, any person who pays a bribe to

165
the trustees working as public servants. The bribe
money paid here is treated as secret donation where
neither the donor nor the receiver is affected due
the criminal act. The assets created out of donations
here are shown as assets of the trusts. This should
stop. All secret donations ( Gupt dan ) beyond a
nominal sum of say 1000/- rupees one thousand per
visit should be treated as bribe taken  by such
trustees working as public servants or their relatives
working as public servants. All donations beyond
1000/- should be paid through cheque or other
recorded ways like NEFT/RTGS/Draft etc. It will
be very difficult to locate or spot the donor but
there is no difficulty in finding the receivers (trusts).
Therefore the trusts receiving beyond 1000/- should
disclose the details of the donors from their records.
For this purpose the trusts which are receiving
substantial amount as secret donations shall submit
details of average daily total receipts money beyond
say 100000/- to IT officials in writing. For this the
hundi must be opened in presence of IT officials
and also in camera always which shall be kept as
record for two years. Notes found in hundi above
denominations of 100/- notes (in denominations of
500/- or 1000/-) shall be confiscated.
One sub-section (iv) in section 8 and another sub-
section in section 7 should be included which
should read as “giving secret donations in excess
of Rs. 1000/- in cash or kind at a time by any
individual to any trust, places of worship of all
religions, or shrine boards should be treated as
giving bribe to the trustees who or whose family
members, friends or known confidants are working/
worked as public servants in key positions that
can induce to influence decisions. Here the donor
any person (who may or may not be the public
servant) for the improper performance of a public
function by the public servant will also be guilty of
the offence of bribing a public servant under the
new definition of the offence under section 8. Thus,
in every case where a person makes a donation to
any trust or body which is operated by a public
servant or his relatives, and the payment of such
donation is established to be in connection with the
improper performance of a relevant function by a
public servant, the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker
will both be punishable under the proposed
amendments. The concern expressed by the stake
holder thus already stands addressed. The suggestion
regarding submission of details of donations beyond
Rs..l,00,000 to Income Tax officials in writing,
opening of hundi in the present of IT officials,
CCTV recording of deposits in hundi/donation boxes,
etc. are beyond the scope of the present Bill.

166
12 3 4
shall be treated as giver and the trustee shall be
treated as receiver of bribe.
In case the donor wants to donate sum more than
rupees 1000/-, he should do so by, recorded
payments. It shall be mandatory for the receivers/
trustees to disclose the details of such donors to
income tax department. The donation receiving trusts/
places of worship shall submit recorded pictures
obtained from CCTV footages at regular intervals of
three months to IT dept along with the details of
donations received.
Getting donations to enrich the places of worship/
or getting more is not the main challenge before the
nation. Corruption is the main issue that is faced by
the nation. It does not matter if for tracking
corruption some places of worship are deprived of
secret donations or if it hampers astha/religious
belief of donors. Nobody is prevented from making
open donations through bank drafts/NEFT/RTGS
etc.
Any one throwing huge amount in excess of
1000/- in hundis or donation boxes in cash or kind
should be recorded in CCTV and the details of the
footage should be deposited with IT dept under
oath for re-verification.
We should understand that right to a dignified and
healthy living is a far more superior right than the
right to practice of religion or astha. Astha can be
shrinked in order to protect the right to life if it
comes on the way of right to a dignified living.

167
However, this provision shall not be applicable to
trusts/places of worships whose increase in asset
values is less than ten lakh rupees per year.
To make things move smoothly to prevent gupt dan
(secret donations) in excess of prescribed limit,
currency notes above denominations of 100/- (one
hundred rupees notes) found in hundis/donation
boxes opened in presence of IT dept. officials should
be confiscated as national wealth and deposited in
govt. treasury. This shall be applicable to trusts/
shrine boards/places of worship receiving donations
in excess of rupees one crore or more per year.
I propose to add one sub-section (iii) in section-8
of the proposed amendment bill which shall read as
under- “In case a person being compelled due to
negligence in treatment due to non-payment of extra
money to the doctor and team, offers/induces a
doctor to perform surgery or treatment to his near
and dear ones in hospital/nursing homes, and in
some other compelling circumstances in which the
giver had no choice but to give/induce with bribe in
any form for protection of life/property etc. and
subsequently informs about the incident to police or
to any anti-corruption agency, he/she shall not be
treated as offender under section-8 of the said Act.
He/shall continue to get protection under
section 24 of the principal Act of 1988.
Here the doctor (for example) should have treated
the patient free of charge as per rules but by
compelling the relatives of the patient extracted
extra money as bribe, should be punished under
section 7 of the proposed (A) bill.
Since the intentional offering, promising or giving of
a bribe is sought to be separately defined as an
offence, the protection to the bribe giver under section
24 should not be available in the proposed scheme of
things. Whenever any person is faced with a demand
for a bribe by a public servant in connection with
some service to which such person is otherwise
legally entitled and such person is subjected to
harassment bribery, such person has a duty to report
the same to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
However, in case a person who faces such a situation
where he is compelled to pay a bribe and he reports
such demand for bribe to the concerned Anti-
corruption agency (ACB/CBI/police) and helps the
anti-corruption agency in setting up a trap to nab the
delinquent public servant, the investigation agency
itself will protect such complainant and not list him
as an accused in the case. DoPT accordingly feels
that there is no need to retain the provisions of
section 24 of the Act. However, DoPT is open to
any recommendation which may be made by the
Hon’ble Committee in this regard.

168
12 3 4
I propose to keep section 24 to protect givers as
explained above in medical exigencies as prosecution
witness.
There are some compelling circumstances in
which the bribe given should not be punished under
section 8 such as illiterate person parting with
Rs.30/- or Rs.50/- to TTE in train under TTE’s
pressure of punishment or fine, (he enters the train
due to ignorance about sleeper class or general
class bogie he entered into or having a passenger
train ticket but hurriedly gets into a express train,
or superfast train). Here TTE should be punished
under section 7.
I propose to insert one sub section (iv) in
section-8 to treat secret donation above Rs.1000/-
or open donation above Rs.10000/- as an act of
giving bribe to trustees and shall be punished as per
the Act. All details of donors received above
Rs.l0000/- shall be reported to IT department by
the receiver.
Sub-section (v) of section 8 shall be added to read
as “All public servants must disclose the names of
self and family members working as trustees of
notified trusts/shrine boards/places of worship etc.
before joining office.
The giving of a bribe under any circumstance is an
offence. In case a passenger wrongly enters a non-
entitled class bogie or train and is forced by a TTE
to pay a bribe, the person has a duty to report the
demand of such a bribe by any TTE to the police.
It will be against public policy to allow the person
to pay a bribe in order to avoid fine/penalty.
It is not possible to treat all donations beyond a
limit made to any organisation as bribe, as suggested
by the stakeholder. The suggestion made by the
stakeholder regarding reporting of donations beyond
a point to IT department is beyond the scope of the
Bill.
Public servants are required to declare their assets
as provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill recently
passed by Parliament. The suggestion to obtain
declaration about relatives working as trustees of
notified trusts, etc. is not acceptable. However, the
concern of the stakeholder about payment of bribes
as donations to trusts etc. is already addressed by
the proposed new definition of the offences under
section 7 and 8 of the Act.

169
Another sub-section (vi) to section 8 shall be
added as “all donations in the form of ornaments/
utensils of valuable metals, diamonds etc. shall be
done in recorded form and in no circumstances
these gifts be accepted secretly, and all such
records should be submitted every half year to IT
Department.
I propose to add one sub-section in section 13(1)(e)
to define DA and my explanation is as below.
A public servant accepts bribes and giver gives
bribe to make profits in getting full bill passed for
sub-standard work or supplies done. Here the
damage is done to public property but gain is divided
between giver and takers. Both the giver and takers
create assets which is DA. Unless there is a
complaint how can the anti-corruption agency know
about it.
Who will complain about loot of national wealth?
Naturally the whistle blower, but we do not have
laws for protection of whistle blowers. Do we
have?
Why people come forward to report third party
offences? Huge amount is involved in this type of
passive crimes and in case of active bribery like
auction of coal block, spectrum, natural resources,
lakhs of crores of money is changing hands and
goes unreported. What to do with these cases? The
protection of Whistle Blowers Act should find
precedence over this Act.
The suggestion made by the stakeholder is beyond
the scope of the present Bill.
The possession of disproportionate assets by a public
servant has to be determined with reference to
possession of assets which the public servant is not
able to reasonably account for with reference to his
known sources of income. The possession of assets
disproportionate to known sources of income by a
public servant is itself an offence. It has got nothing
to do with any instances of accepting a bribery,
which are equally punishable offences under the
Act. The suggestion is, therefore, not acceptable.
The protection of whistle blowers is the subject
matter of another Bill, viz., the Whistle Blowers
Protection Bill, 2011. The said Bill has already been
passed by Lok Sabha and is currently pending before
the Rajya Sabha.

APPENDIX

APPENDIX
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY THE COMMITTEE
173
Report
No.
1
Subject of the Report
2
Date of
Presentation
4
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Right to
Information Bill, 2004.
Report on the Andhra Pradesh
Legislative Council Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Bill, 2004.
Report on the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other
Backward Classes (Reservation
in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2004 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2004.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
24.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 24.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
20.04.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.04.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
13.05.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 13.05.2005.
Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 29
th  June, 2005 and
forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha on 29
th June, 2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.07.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.07.2005.
Date of
Adoption
3
23.08.2004
-do-
16.03.2005
22.03.2005
11.04.2005
-do-
10.05.2005
07.06.2005
Session
No.
5
203
203
204
204
204
204
204
204

174
12 4 35
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
28.07.2005
02.08.2005
02.08.2005
23.08.2005
27.10.2005
17.05.2006
-do-
02.08.2006
09.11.2006
27.02.2007
08.05.2007
Report on the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Bill,
2003.
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2005.
Report on the National Tax
Tribunal Bill, 2004.
Report on the Contempt of
Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004.
Report on the Prevention of
Child Marriage Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Representation of
the People (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Electoral Reforms
(Disqualification of persons from
contesting elections on framing
of charges against them for
certain offences).
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
22.05.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 22.05.2006.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
05.12.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 05.12.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
15.03.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 15.03.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007.
205
205
205
205
206
207
207
208
208
208
209

175
12 4 35
20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
29th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006, Ministry of Law and
Justice (Department of Justice).
Report on the Gram Nyayalayas
Bill, 2007, Ministry of Law and
Justice, Legislative Department.
Report on the Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training).
Report on Working of Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and
Training).
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on Action Taken Replies
on Law’s Delays : Arrears in
Courts (85
th Report of Home
Affairs).
Report on The Supreme Court
(Number of Judges) Amendment
Bill, 2008.
Report on Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism.
08.05.2007
01.08.2007
29.08.2007
06.09.2007
04.03.2008
24.04.2008
-do-
-do-
01.08.2008
21.10.2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.08.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.08.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
07.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
11.03.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 11.03.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008.
-do-
-do-
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2008.
Laid on the Tables of the Rajya Sabha
and Lok Sabha on 22
nd October, 2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
209
210
210
210
213
213
213
213
214
214

176
12 4 35
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
Report on Constraints Being
Faced by Kendriya Bhandar.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 25
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 26
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2008.
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008.
Report on the “Action Taken
Replies of the Government
on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the
29
th Report of the Committee on
“Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism”.
Report on “The Constitution
(One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2008”.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 24th Report on
“Working of Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI)”.
21.10.2008
16.12.2008
16.12.2008
16.02.2009
16.02.2009
14.12.2009
14.12.2009
03.03.2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.03.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.03.2010.
214
214
214
215
215
218
218
219

177
12 4 35
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on The Personal Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 23
rd Report of
the Committee on “Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground”.
Report on Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 30th Report of
the Committee on “Constraints
Being Faced by Kendriya Bhandar”.
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 38
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Report on The Constitution (One
Hundred and Fourteenth
Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Public Interest
Disclosure and Protection to
Persons Making the Disclosures
Bill, 2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
1.03.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 1.03.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 09.06.2011.
Laid on the Tables of the Rajya Sabha
on 11.08.2011 and Lok Sabha on
10.08.11.
38
th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
44th
45th
46th
27.04.2010
-do-
29.07.2010
-do-
16.11.2010
-do-
07.12.2010
02.02.2011
11.05.2011
219
219
220
220
221
221
221
222
223

178
12 4 35
Report on the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010.
Report on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
The Administrators-General
(Amendment) Bill, 2011.
The Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on The Right of Citizens
for Time Bound Delivery of Goods
and Services and Redressal of
their Grievances Bill, 2011.
Report on The Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2012.
Report on The Registration of
Births and Deaths (Amendment)
Bill, 2012.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 51
st Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
47
th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
25.08.2011
07.12.2011
24.01.2012
26.03.2012
15.05.2012
-do-
23.08.2012
11.12.2012
22.02.2013
13.03.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 02.02.2012.
Laid to Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
on 20.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.03.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.05.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
28.08.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
27.02.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 27.02.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013.
223
224
224
225
225
225
226
227
228
228

179
12 4 35
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 52
nd Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
The Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Bill, 2013.
Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions.
Report on the “Electoral
Reforms-Code of Conduct for
Political Parties & Anti Defection
Law”.
Report on the “S tatus of Women
Government Employees, Service
Conditions, Protection against
exploitation, Incentives and other
related Issues”.
Report on the Rajasthan
Legislative Council Bill, 2013.
Report on the Judicial
Appointments Commission Bill,
2013.
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment
and Validation) Bill, 2013.
Report on the Right to
Information (Amendment) Bill,
2013.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
25.04.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.04.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
2.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 2.05.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
3.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 3.05.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013.
57
th
58th
59th
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
13.03.2013
23.04.2013
29.04.2013
02.04.2013
19.08.2013
29.08.2013
27.11.2013
27.11.2013
06.12.2013
13.12.2013
228
228
228
228
229
229
230
230
230
230

180
12 4 35
67th
68th
Report on the Infrastructure
Development and Strengthening
of Subordinate Courts.
Report on the Action Taken
Replies of the Government
on the recommendations/
observations contained in the
60
th Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions.
03.02.2014
03.02.2014
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.02.2014.
-do-
231
231

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.