 
DEP
ACTIO
TH
PARTMEN
ON PERS
ON TAKEN 
HE MINIST
(
 (La
PAR
T-RELATE
SONNEL, P
Rajy
Decemb
ONE HUN
ON ONE-H
ON DE
TRY OF PER
(DEPARTM
(Presented t
aid on the Ta
RLIAME
RAJYA
ED PARLIA
PUBLIC GR
ya Sabha Se
er, 2022 / A
NDRED TW
HUNDRED 
EMANDS F
PERT
RSONNEL, 
MENT OF PE
to the Rajya 
Table of the L
 
 
ENT OF 
A SABHA
AMENTAR
RIEVANCE
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecretariat, N
Agrahayana1
WENTY SEC
 
ON 
 
 
TWELFTH
 
FOR GRAN
 
TAINING TO
PUBLIC GR
ERSONNEL
 
Sabha on 8t
Lok Sabha on
INDIA 
A 
RY STANDI
ES, LAW AN
 
New Delhi 
1944 (Sakya
COND REP
H REPORT
NTS (2022-23
O 
RIEVANCE
L AND TRAI
th December,
n 8th Decemb
ING COMM
ND JUSTIC
a) 
PORT 
T OF THE C
3) 
ES AND PEN
INING) 
, 2022) 
ber, 2022) 
MITTEE 
CE 
REPORT
122
COMMITTE
NSIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T NO. 
2 
EE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
2

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION  5 
   
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                              6 
 
4. REPORT 8 
(i) CHAPTER I         9            
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY  
(ii) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                16 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY  
(iii) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                  33 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE 
DOES N O T  A C C E P T  T H E  R E A S O N S  G I V E N  F O R  N O T  A C C E P T I N G  I T S  
RECOMMENDATIONS AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS.    
  
 
   5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      47 
 
  6. A NNEXURE                                                                                                                                                             50 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                      
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) 
 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. *Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
  Ms.I.V.Rajya Laxmi, Assistant Committee officer 
________________________ 
* Nominated in place of Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary w.e.f. 16.11.2022  
 
 
4

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standin g Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been auth orized by the Committee to 
present the Report in its behalf, do hereby present this One Hu ndred Twenty Second Report 
on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observatio ns contained in the One 
Hundred Twelfth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants ( 2022-23) of the Ministry 
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. 
2. The One Hundred Twelfth Report of the Department related Par liamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions was pres ented to the Rajya Sabha 
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 24th March, 2022. 
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions fu rnished the Action 
Taken Replies on the One Hundred Twelfth Report of the Committe e in July 2022. The 
Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at i ts meeting held on 5 th 
December, 2022. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observati ons and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
5th December, 2022                                 Chairman,  
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5

ACRONYMS 
 
ACC   Appointments Committee of the Cabinet   
AGMUT  Arunachal Pradesh-Goa-Mizoram and Union Territory 
AIS All India Services  
APPPA Advanced Professional Programme in Public Administration 
CAT   Central Administrative Tribunal  
CAPF   Central Armed Police Forces 
CBC   Capacity Building Commission 
CBI   Central Bureau of Investigation   
CCA   Cadre Controlling Authority 
CCS    Central Civil Services 
CET Common Eligibility Test 
CIC    Central Information Commission   
CISF Central Industrial Security Force  
CPGRAMS   Centralised Public Gri evance Redress and Monitoring  
   S y s t e m  
CPIO   Central Public Information officer 
CPSE   Central Public Sector Enterprise 
CRC  Cadre Review Committee 
CSE   Civil Services Examination   
CSS   Central Staffing Scheme   
CTV   Centralized Technology Vertical 
CVC    Central Vigilance Commission   
CVO   Chief Vigilance Officer 
DARPG  Department of Administr ative Reforms and Public   
   G r i e v a n c e s  
DoLA   Department of Legal Affairs 
DoPT   Department of Personnel and Training 
DRPSC Department related Par liamentary Standing Committee 
DPC Departmental Promotion Committee 
IAS   Indian Administrative Service 
IBPS Institute of Banking  and Personnel Selection 
6

iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training 
ICEFS  International Centre for Excellence in Forensic Sciences  
ICEI   International Centre for Excellence in Investigation 
ICT   Information and Communication Technology 
IIPA   Indian Institute of Public Administration  
IPR   Immovable Property Returns 
IPS                        Indian Police Service 
ISTM   Institute of Secretar iat Training & Management   
JCM    Joint Consultative Machinery   
LBSNAA   Lal Bahadur Shastri Na tional Academy of Administration 
MCTP Mid-Career Training Programme 
NCGG   National Centre for Good Governance   
NeGP   National e-Governance Plan   
NPCSCB   National Programme for C ivil Services Capacity Building 
NRA National Recruitment Agency 
OBCs   Other Backward Classes 
PESB   Public Enterprises Selection Board 
PSU   Public Sector Undertaking 
RRB Railway Recruitment Board 
RRFAMS  Recruitment rules formulation, Amendment Monitoring 
System 
RRs Recruitment Rules 
RTI    Right to Information 
SCs   Scheduled Castes 
SSC    Staff Selection Commission   
STs   Scheduled Tribes 
UNCAC               United Nations Convention Against Corruption 
UPSC   Union Public Service Commission  
VRS   Voluntary Retirement Scheme  
  
7

R E P O R T 
  
 This Action Taken Report of the Department-related Parliamenta ry Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice deal s with the action taken by 
the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on th e 
recommendations/observations made by the Committee in its One Hundred twelfth Report on 
the Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry, which was pre sented to the Rajya Sabha 
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 24th March, 2022. 
2. The Committee had made as many as 37 recommendations/observa tions in its One 
Hundred twelfth Report. Replies of the Ministry of Personnel, P ublic Grievances and 
Pensions thereto have been categorized and scrutinized under th ree chapters on the basis of 
satisfaction of the Committee. Out of 37 recommendations where final replies have been 
received as many as 26 (70 percent approximately) of total reco mmendations are satisfactory. 
These replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations (09) which have been accepted by  t h e  
Ministry, i.e. in respect of paras 2.16, 4.4, 4.13, 5.5, 5.6, 5 .12, 5.18, 5.22 
and 6.32 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that t he Ministry 
has accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:   Recommendations/observations (17) which the Committee does n ot desire 
to pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry, i.e. in  r e s p e c t  o f  
paras 2.13, 2.38, 2.42, 3.6, 3.22, 3.25, 3.26, 3.30, 3.31, 4.16 , 4.20, 4.29, 
5.17, 6.14, 6.22, 6.26 and 6.30 of the Report. The Committee is  satisfied 
with the explanations advanced by the Ministry and does not wis h to 
pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations (11) in respect of which Committ ee has 
not accepted the replies of the Ministry, i.e. with regard to paras 3.13, 3.17, 
3.21, 4.7, 4.10, 4.25, 5.11, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10 and 6.21 of the Rep ort. The 
Committee does not accept the reasons given for not accepting i ts 
recommendations of the Committee and reiterates the same. 
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish poi nted and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendation s/Observations made by the 
Committee in this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have b een discussed in the respective  Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. 
  
8

CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.0 The Committee believes that opt imal utilization of funds is  as important as allocation 
of funds itself. A closer look at the budget utilization trends of 13 organizations functioning 
under DoPT reveals that only 6 organizations have utilized more than 80% of the funds 
allocated to them. The Committee notes that Capacity building Commission and Lokpal could 
utilize only 22 % and 42% of the funds sanctioned to them respectively. The Committee also 
notes that IIPA which is grappling with infrastructure issues has also not fully utilized the 
amount provided to it.  The Committee is of  the opinion that underutilization of funds 
influences allocations for the next fiscal. In view of the above, the Committee recommends all 
the bodies functioning under the administrative control of DoPT to utilize the funds allocated 
to them in an optimal manner.                   2.16  
Action Taken 
1.1  The recommendation regarding ut ilization of f unds allocated to the organizations in 
an optimal manner has been noted for compliance.  
Further observation 
1.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes tha t all the bodies 
functioning under the administrative control of DoPT will utili ze the funds allocated to 
them in an optimal manner.  
 
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.3 The Committee notes, from the data made available to it, that, during 2010, 2011, 
2012, 2013 and 2019 Civil Services recruitment, the number of vacancies notified at the stage 
of preliminary examination were different from those notified a t Main and final stages. For 
instance, in 2010, 965 vacancies had been declared at the time of notification, 1014 vacancies 
at time of declaration of preliminary result, 1064 vacancies at  the time of declaration of Main 
result, and 1043 in the final result. The Committee feels that if 1043 vacancies had been 
declared at the time of announcement of preliminary result itse lf, more candidates would 
have got an opportunity to appear in Mains examination and cons equently, the final result 
9

would have been different. Therefore, the Committee feels that changing the number of 
vacancies, at different stages of examination is not a healthy practice. The Committee 
recommends UPSC to ensure that vacancies declared at the time of announcement of result of 
preliminary examination should remain constant throughout the recruitment cycle.             4.4 
Action Taken 
1.4 The Cadre Controlling Authorities of participating Services  in Civil Services 
Examination (CSE) have been requested to comply with the recomm endation of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee and as far as possible, to ens ure that firm number of 
vacancies for the participating Services of Civil Services Exam ination (CSE) are intimated 
before the announcement of result of Preliminary Examination of  the given CSE year and the 
same is kept constant throughout the recruitment cycle. 
Further observation 
1.5 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6 The Committee notes that over 500 Recruitment Rules approved by UPSC are 
pending notification by Ministries/Departments  concerned. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends DoPT to impress upon Ministries /Departments concerned to designate a nodal 
officer for this purpose. The nodal officer may be held accountable for any delay in 
notification of Recruitment Rules thereafter.                                                                       4.13 
Action Taken 
1.7 (i) Para 5.2 of DoPT’s OM No. AB-14017/48/2010-Estt (RR) da ted 31.12.2010 
provides that Recruitment Rules (RRs) approved by UPSC are requ ired to be notified within 
a period of 10 weeks from the date of receipt of UPSC’s advice, to be adhered to strictly. Para 
5.5 of the said OM dated 31.12.2010 further provides that Minis tries/Departments are 
required to furnish Quarterly Returns in respect of  RRs to DoP T and UPSC, to enable 
monitoring the progress of framing/amendment of RRs. This Depar t m e n t ’ s  O M  N o .  A B -
14017/61/2008-Estt (RR) dated 27.01.2016 and dated 17.03.2016 a lso refer in this regard. 
Thus, an accountability mechanism already exists for ensuring t imely notification of 
approved RRs. These instructions enjoin upon the Ministry/Depar tment to take timely action, 
which would include notification of approved RRs within the prescribed time limit. 
(ii) However, as per recommendation of DRPSC vide Para 4.13, vi de its OM No. F. No. AB-
14017/21/2019-Estt (RR) dated 18.04.2022 Ministries/Departments  have been requested to 
nominate an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary, as t he Nodal Officer for 
Recruitment Rules relating to that Department/Ministry. The sai d OM provides that it would 
10

be responsibility of the Nodal Officer to monitor the progress of framing/amendment of RRs 
of posts under the administrative control of that Department/Mi nistry and he shall also be 
responsible for ensuring that the time limit of ten weeks, for notifying the approved RRs, is 
scrupulously adhered to.      
Further observation 
1.8 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes tha t the 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India would notify the Recruitment Rules 
w i t h i n  t h e  s t i p u l a t e d  t i m e  l i m i t .  T h e  C o m m i t t e e  r e c o m m e n d s  D o P T to explore the 
feasibility of placing the Quarterly progress report submitted by 
Ministries/Departments in respect of Recruitment Rules in publi c domain and intimate 
the Committee accordingly. 
TRAINING INSTITUTIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.9 The Committee is of the view that training should be continuous and it should be 
tailored to the needs of the individual. The current training programmes offered at LBSNAA, 
especially at mid-career level, are based on the premise that all officers need training, that 
too, the same kind of training. The Committee feels that this assumption is basically flawed. 
Training needs vary from individual to individual and therefore, the Committee recommends 
LBSNAA to first assess the core competencies  of the officer, then perform a gap analysis, 
determine the training needs and chalk out a training programme accordingly. The 
Committee recommends LBSNAA to shift its approach from ‘one-size-fits-all training’ to 
‘need-based customized training’. Further, the Committee also recommends LBSNAA to 
make its digital library, training modules accessible to general public.                                5.5 
Action Taken  
 
1.10 Training Needs Analysis for  Phases— III, IV and V of the M id Career Training 
Programmes is under process in a ssociation with IIM Kozhikode. As regards digital library, 
the Academy already has a GYAAN Learning Management System (LMS ) portal that also 
functions as a digital library. Besides recordings of training session on ICT, the Academy has 
also curated and got developed many learning videos on ICT topi cs. They are also available 
on GYAAN LMS. In addition, the Academy is also working on a Dig ital Gov Lab in a cloud 
environment for hands-on experience on ICT tools, technology, a pplications, platforms and 
62C/G2G/G2B services. Hon’ble Co mmittee’s suggestions to make t he resources accessible 
to general public has been noted. 
11

 
Further observation 
1.11  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.12  The Committee is of the considered view that LBSNAA needs to re-orient its training 
programme to make young civil servants se nsitive to the needs of the general public, 
especially the marginalized and the vulnerable. LBSNAA needs to integrate class room based 
theoretical training with experiential training in real settings. During the course of training, 
LBSNAA may assign young officer trainees to tr ibal hamlets, remote villages, areas with 
harsh terrains and difficult conditions for two-three weeks, completely disconnected from 
mundane life and enable them to get first-hand experience about the challenges faced by 
these groups of people on day-to-basis. The Comm ittee is confident that this change will go a 
long way in bridging the gap between the Government and the governed.                            5.6 
Action Taken  
1.13 The IAS District training programme covers a duration of 53 wee ks. At the moment, 
the following is the manner in which village-stay component is designed: 
Training in Development Administration 
Stay in the village and 
interact with AWW, 
ANM, ASHA, teachers 
and other filed level 
functionaries of different 
departments. 
1 week Understand the perspective and roles of 
different grassroots functionaries. The 
probationer is expected to stay in the 
village during this period and interact 
closely with people and functionaries. 
 
1.14 However, given the suggestion of the Parliamentary Committ ee, the Academy is 
exploring the option of a 3-week village-stay module in the district training phase. During the 
said module, the trainees can be directed to stay for the 3-wee k long period in tribal hamlets, 
remote villages in difficult terrain, and learn the core values  of Ability, Anonymity & 
Austerity through living along with the villagers.  
1.15 Technology is a proven enabler and serves the public witho ut any discrimination. The 
Academy demonstrates this during its training, as well as provi des hands-on training on 
technology tools to handle data of Government schemes like DBT (Direct Benefits Transfer) 
and many of the online G2C, i.e. citizen-centric services by th e Government made available 
through the Government's portals , like services of Urban Local Bodies, MNREGA, 
Scholarships, Agriculture, etc. 
 
12

Further observation 
1.16 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.   
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.17 The Committee is of the opinion that improving the digital readiness of public 
servants and upskilling their ICT capacities is central to India’s digital transformation, 
especially in the Government sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends ISTM to impart 
training in digital technologies relevant to public servants such as e-office, basics of 
computer and internet, MS-office etc.. While developing such modules, ISTM may focus on 
tasks relevant to specific types of duties.                                                                               5.12 
Action Taken  
1.18 Several workshops/ courses relating to e-office, MS Office, MS- Excel, MS Power 
Point, Emerging Technology, Data Driven Decision Making, Statis tical Tools & Techniques, 
etc. are conducted by ISTM every year for the benefit of civil servants working in 
Ministries/Departments/Attached & Sub-ordinate offices/ PSUs/ State Level Organizations in 
both online and offline mode. During 2022-23, it is proposed to  conduct about 30 workshops 
on these topics. Details of such workshops are available on ISTM website. 
Further observation 
1.19 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/observation 
1.20 The Committee notes that Advanced Professional Programme in Public 
Administration, the flagship training programme of  IIPA, is for officers who have at least 10 
years of Group A service and of the rank of Di rector/Deputy Secretary in the Government of 
India or those holding equivalent posts. The Co mmittee feels that every public servant should 
have the leeway to assess his strengths and weaknesses, determine his training needs and 
strive to hone his skills as per the requiremen t, and, in this process, age, rank or work 
experience of the official should certainly not become a limitation. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends DoPT and IIPA to expand the scope of APPPA to cover public 
servants of all ranks.                                                                                                           5.18 
Action Taken 
 
1.21 Advanced Professional Programme in Public Administration (APPPA )  i s  a  t e n  
months’ programme, designed for mid-senior officers of the All India Services, Central 
Services, Defence Services, Technical Services and officers of State Governments. 
13

1.22 Presently, the officers should have at least 10 years of G roup ‘A’ (class-I) service and 
be of the rank of Director/Deputy Secretary in the Government o f India or holding an 
equivalent post for becoming eligible for APPPA course. The Pro gramme is also open for 
senior officers (Group ‘A’) from State Services. 
1.23  The suggestion of the Committee has been  noted. 
Further observation 
1.24 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires t h a t  t h e  s c o p e  o f  
Advanced Professional Programme in Public Administration (APPPA ) be expanded to 
cover public servants of all ranks.  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.25 It has come to the notice of the Committ ee that general etiquette and protocol are not 
followed by civil servants with respect to public representatives. The Committee recommends 
DoPT to formulate guidelines regarding general etiquette, protocol and observance of 
courtesy by civil servants in their dealings with Members of Union and State legislatures. The 
Committee recommends Civil Services Capacity Building Commission to incorporate this 
important aspect of behavioural skill training in its civil services capacity building 
programmes.                                                                                                                        5.22  
Action Taken 
1.26 This Department has requested Capacity Building Commission  to incorporate aspects 
of behavioural skill training in its Civil Services Capacity Bu ilding Programmes vide OM 
dated 5
th May, 2022. 
Further observation 
 
1.27 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committ ee recommends 
DoPT to furnish relevant guide lines/instructions issued regardi ng general etiquette, 
protocol and observance of courtesy by civil servants in their dealings with Members of 
Union and State Legislatures.  
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND  SERVICE MATTERS  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.28 The Committee is dismayed to note the indifferent response of the Central Information 
Commission. The Committee is concerned to state that CIC has taken one long year to 
apprise it that the information sought by it is available in its annual report. The Committee 
insists CIC to assess the effe ctiveness of the RTI Act and send a status report to it in three 
months time.                      6.32  
 
14

Action Taken  
1.29 The Central Information Commission has taken up with the C apacity Building 
Commission for a large scale intervention covering the operationalization of the RTI Act with 
reference to sensitizing all stakeholders so as to enable the C IC to elicit recommendations for 
improvement of the Act. The impact analysis study of the operat ion of the RTI Act will also 
be included as part of the large scale intervention. 
1.30 CIC has proposed for conducting study on the effectiveness  of RTI Act through 
premier professional institutes/ educational institutes/ consulting firms. 
Further observation  
1.31 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committ ee recommends that 
the findings of impact analysis study on the effectiveness of R TI Act proposed to be 
commissioned by CIC be furnished to it in due course.  
  
15

CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN 
BY THE MINISTRY 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.0 The Committee notes that the Department of Personnel and Training has utilized only 
77% of the funds allocated to it as on 31 st January, 2022. In view of Finance Ministry’s 
instructions imposing a ceiling limit on the expe nditure that can be incurred in the last 
quarter and last month (March), the Committee feels that it is unlikely that the remaining 
funds will be optimally utilized by the end of the ongoing fiscal year. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to identify the factors that restricted or hindered the utilization of 
funds and draw an action plan accordingly to improve the utilization of funds in future.   2.13 
Action Taken  
2.1 The main reason for under utilization of funds is on account of  Covid-19 pandemic in 
the first half of the Financial Year which hampered works and a ctivities of the Department 
and its offices. A conscious effo rt is being made to optimally utilize the allocated budget in 
FY 2022-23 and expenditure trends are being closely monitored. 
Further observation 
2.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.3 The Committee notes that CVC has not utilized the funds earmarked for advertising 
and publicity during 2021-22. Consequently, the amount of Rs. 50 lakh sanctioned in BE 
2021-22 towards advertising and publicity was dras tically reduced to 1lakh at RE stage. The 
Committee also notes that an amount of Rs. 10 lakh sanctioned for integrity index project was 
lying unutilized as the project could not be implemented. The Committee recommends CVC to 
make a constant endeavour to utilize the funds judiciously in the upcoming fiscal year to 
avoid any downward revision at RE stage. The Committee recommends CVC to spend the 
lion’s share of its resources on strengthening its surveillance.                                    2.38       
 
 
 
16

Action Taken 
2.4 Every year during Vigilance Awareness Week (VAW), Commission utilises the funds 
earmarked for Advertising and Publicity, to create awareness am ong the masses, through 
print media, for their involvement in eradication of corruption  from public administration. 
Due to COVID Pandemic and economy measures advised by the Depar tment of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance, advertisements were not issued during VAW 2021 (Department of 
Expenditure's Office Memorandum No. 7(2)/E.Coord/2020 dated 02. 09.2020 refers in this 
regard). Hence, the funds meant for advertising and publicity r emained unutilized due to 
these unusual circumstances. On account of ceiling in a RE 2021 -22, only a token amount of 
Rs. 1.00 lakh is kept at RE stage. 
(b) As regards, Integrity Index project, after completion of pilot phase of the project, based on 
the feedback received from the organisations who had participat ed in the pilot projects, 
Integrity Index Project has been kept in abeyance for the time being, resulting in the amount 
of Rs. 10 lakh remaining unspent. 
(c) Further, it is stated that a t RE stage, M/o Finance had red uced net allocation from Rs. 
38.67 crore to Rs 38.63 Crore and increased allocation under ‘S alary Head’ from Rs. 28.25 
crore to Rs. 30.46 crore. As such, the reduction of fund by Rs.  4.00 lakh in net allocation and 
increase in 'Salary Head' by Rs. 221 lakh (at RE stage) was met  by reducing funds in other 
sub-heads, including Advertising & Publicity and Integrity Index project. 
(d) As the situation arising due to COVID pandemic is normalising, the Commission is 
planning to increase its outreach activities. It has also start ed Regional Conferences of CVOs 
for better interaction to make the system of vigilance administration more effective. 
Further observation 
2.5  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6 As regards UPSC, the Committee notes that the amount sanctioned for ‘Professional 
services’ has been revised upwards from 
₹ 9.20 crore in BE 2021-22 to ₹ 10.25 crore at RE 
2021-22.The Committee has been informed that professional services cover charges for legal 
services and consultancy fees. The Committee notes that UPSC had spent about Rs. 10.25 
crore to defend the Court cases in which Commission is a party and towards consultancy 
fees. The Committee would like UPSC to justify the expenditure incurred on litigation. The 
Committee recommends the Government to look into this matter and take necessary steps to 
reduce the expenditure incurred on litigation. The Committee is of the considered view that 
Government should advise Ministries/Departmen ts to avoid being a compulsive litigant and 
17

that cases should be contested only after taking legal advice and every attempt should be 
made to pre-empt litigation at the point of origin itself.                                                2.42 
Action Taken 
 
2.7 The Budget Head 01.00.28 pertains to Payment for “Professio nal Services”, which 
includes (a) Payment to Advocates and, (b) Payment to Consultants. During the financial year 
2021-22, expenditure of Rs.10.25 crore was incurred under this head out of the budget 
allocation of Rs.10.25 crore in RE, which was enhanced from Rs. 9.20 crore in BE. However, 
this expenditure of Rs.10.25 crore was incurred not only to def end the Court cases, in which 
Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) is/ was a party but also  on Payment to 
Consultants appointed in the UPSC. Out of Rs.10.25 crore, Rs.8. 52 crore was incurred on 
Payment to Consultants and Rs.1.73 crore was incurred on defending various Court cases. 
2.8 The enhancement of budget at RE stage under the head “Profe ssional Services” was 
mainly for payment to various Consultants appointed in the Comm ission. Expenditure on 
payment to consultants increased in view of  payment of consult ancy fee to increased number 
of Consultants at enhanced rate in  accordance with Ministry of  Finance OM No.3-25/2020-
E.IIIA dated 9.12.2020. 
2.9 Details of expenditure incurred on litigation, it is mentio ned that the details of 
expenses towards Payment to Advocates under the budget head “01 .00.28-Professional 
Services” for the last 3 years are as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.10 The details of cases in the various courts across the coun try, wherein UPSC was made 
a party, for the last three years are as under:- 
Date 
(as on) 
Defen
ding 
cases 
Non-
defendi
ng 
cases 
Total no. of cases. 
31.12.2019 834 1304 2138 
31.12.2020 869 1307 2176 
31.12.2021 837 1253 2090 
 
Sl 
No
. 
Budget 
year 
Actual 
expenses (in 
crore rupees) 
1 2019-20 1.180 
2 2020-21 1.900 
3 2021-22 1.728 
18

2.11 The UPSC is contesting the court cases, wherever its polic ies, recruitment actions, 
norms etc are challenged. Unless such cases are defended forcef ully and effectively, many of 
the recruitment tests/ examinations/ advice, given on various matters/ issues, can be annulled/ 
set aside by the Courts. In the cases, where the Commission fee ls that substantive issue(s) 
challenged in the court pertains to a Ministry/ Department/ Uni on Territory, then the 
concerned Ministry/Department is requested to safeguard the int erest of UPSC. As such, 
every case is thoroughly assessed and thereafter a conscious an d considered view is taken to 
defend the case or to request the concerned Ministry/ Departmen t to safeguard the interest of 
the UPSC as well, while defending themselves. Looking at number  of cases being filed 
against UPSC, expenditure currently incurred on safeguarding it s views/ interests in courts 
across India seems to be reasonable.  
Further observation 
2.12 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.13 The Committee observes that th ere is a huge shortage of more than 1500 IAS officers 
in the country. The gap between the sanctioned strength and the in-position strength of IAS 
officers is as large as 104 in UP cadre, 94 in Bihar cadre and 87 in AGMUT cadre. The 
Committee is of the view that, bureaucracy deficit is, perhaps, compelling states to take 
recourse to such means as appointing non-cadr e officers to cadre posts, and continuing them 
in such posts beyond the permissible time limi t besides giving multiple charges to serving 
officers. The Committee believes that such measures would compromise the efficiency of 
administration. Therefore, the Committee recommends DoPT to increase the annual intake of 
IAS officers significantly keeping in view the evolving needs of Indian administration.       3.6 
 
Action Taken 
2.14 Government of India has constituted a Committee for recomm endation of determining 
the intake of Direct Recruit IAS officers every year through Ci vil Services Examination 
(CSE) from CSE-2022 to CSE-2030.The Term of Reference (ToR) of the aforesaid 
committee are as follows: 
(i) To ascertain the cadre gaps in the different state cadres of th e service vis-à-vis the 
current authorized strength of each cadre. 
19

(ii) To make realistic assessment of cadre deficit by adding number of IAS officers 
likely to retire on superannuation during next 10 years to cadr e gaps ascertained in 
point (i) above.  
(iii) To make assessment of the number of officers that would be requ ired over the next 
10 years to man the various senior positions in the state cadre s and central 
deputations duly taking into account:- 
(a) The large number of ex-cadre posts being operated by the various states in respective 
cadre structure of the IAS. 
(b) Cadre strength of state cadres likely to be revised.  
(c) Officers who may opt for deputation under Rule 6(2)(ii) of the IAS (Cadre) Rules, 1954 
OR may seek voluntary retirement for post retirement commercial employment 
otherwise as per present trend. 
(iv) To assess the status of utilization of the central deputation r eserve component of the 
IAS cadre strength at DS/Director level, including identifying problems, if any, 
administering the same and to suggest measures to redress such problems. 
(v) To assess the utilization of state deputation reserve. 
(vi) On the basis of all the above, suggest a recruitment plan for t he 2021-2030 duly 
suggesting the measures required to be taken in the immediate, medium as well as 
the long term. 
(vii) To review the status of incumbency of the officers agains t promotion quota of IAS and 
suggest measures for filling up all such vacant posts for due urgency. 
(viii) To identify various factors contributing to accumulation of large number of vacancies in 
the cadre strength of IAS both in direct recruitment as well as  promotion quota components 
and suggest means and measures to prevent them in future. 
(ix)  To review the existing policy framework for its adequacy in meeting the quantitative as 
well as qualitative requirement of manpower for the IAS, in kee p i n g  w i t h  t h e  e x i s t i n g  
demand of emerging administrative interventions in various fields 
Further observation 
2.15 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
2.16 The Committee desires that the recommendations of the Expe rt Committee 
constituted by the Government of India for determining the inta ke of Direct Recruit 
20

IAS officers through Civil Services Examination from CSE -2022 to CSE -2030 be 
furnished for its perusal. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.17 The Committee recommends DoPT to prominently publish the names of erring 
officers on its website. The Committee also recommends DoPT to furnish the names of 
defaulting officers along with details of action taken against each officer in a month’s time. 
                      3.22 
Action Taken 
2.18 Regarding the 32 IAS officers who have not filed IPRs for more than three 
consecutive years, it has been ascertained on the basis of info rmation received from 
concerned State Governments that out of 32 IAS officers, 20 IAS  officers have already 
retired/taken VRS/dismissed from  service. 3 IAS officers have e xpired, and 2 IAS officers 
are under suspension. VRS matter in respect of 1 IAS officer is  sub-judice in court and one 
IAS officer who had earlier submitted his resignation has now w ithdrawn the same. 3 IAS 
officers are on leave/unauthorized absent and action in this re gard is being taken by State 
Governments concerned. In respect of remaining two IAS officers , State Governments have 
been requested to take action against them for violation of Rul e 16(2) of AIS (Conduct) 
Rules, 1968. 
2.19 As per Rule 16 (2) of All India Services (Conduct) Rule, 1 968, every member of the 
Service shall submit an annual return in such form as may be pr escribed by the Government 
in this regard, giving full particulars regarding the immovable  property inherited by him or 
owned or acquired by him or held by him on lease or mortgage, e ither in his own name or in 
the name of any member of his family or in the name of any othe r person. Further, as per 
Rule 24(2) of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968, fai lure on the part of the 
members of the Service to comply with the requirements of the f iling of IPR on or before 31 
January of next year constitutes good and sufficient reason for  institution of disciplinary 
proceedings against them.  Hence, there are already provisions i n  A l l  I n d i a  S e r v i c e s  
(Conduct) Rules, 1968 to take disciplinary action against defaulting IAS officers. 
2.20 This Department has requested the concerned State Governme nts to take action 
against 32 IAS officers who failed to file IPR under Rule 16(2)  of All India Services 
(Conduct) Rules for the year 2021.  
2.21 DOPT besides denying vigilance clearance to erring IAS off icers, has issued a 
Gazette notification dated 30.12.2021 to make timely submission  of IPR by AIS officers as 
21

mandatory condition for grant of promotion to the next higher g rade of respective AIS, by 
way of amending the respective Pay Rules.   
2.22 The list of erring IAS officers who failed to submit IPR i s already available on the 
website of DOPT and is in public domain i.e. www.dopt.gov.in>IAS>IPR>List. 
2.23 Therefore, it is requested that the Committee may kindly c onsider treating the 
recommendations as implemented. 
Further observation 
2.24 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.25 The Committee is dissatisfied with the response given by DoPT that substituting the 
term ‘Central Government’ with ‘Union of India’ may be outside of its purview. The 
Committee is unhappy with this disrespectful and inconsiderate response of the Ministry. At 
this juncture, the Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to part V of the 
Constitution of India, entitled, ‘THE UNION’ which includes the Union Executive, the Union 
Legislature and the Union Judiciary. It is clea r that the founding fathers of our constitution 
treated these three wings as constituents of the UNION.                                                      3.25                    
2.26 Since the Ministry of Personnel Public Gr ievances and Pensions is the nodal agency 
for policy matters relating to personnel management  as per the Allocation of Business Rules, 
the Committee desires the Ministry to enlighten it whether the term ‘Central Government’ or 
‘Union Government’ was used at the time of framing of the Constitution.                          3.26              
Action Taken  
2.27 The matter was referred to Legis lative Department, Ministry of Law and 
Department of Legal Affairs with the following observations:  
i) Interpretation of the Constitution or genesis of the terms m entioned in the 
Constitution does not come under the Business allocated to DoPT  a s  p e r  
Allocation of Business Rules, 1961; 
ii)  Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the three organs of 
the Union (Executive, Legislatur e and Judiciary) are governed b y separate set 
of Rules framed under separate Articles viz. Article 309, Artic le 98 and Article 
146 respectively of the Constitu tion. The persons serving the t hree organs are, 
accordingly, governed by the Rules framed under the separate provisions of the 
Constitution and their service conditions are also not uniform. Combining them 
together will have wider implications which may go beyond the s cope of 
Business allocated to Department of Personnel and Training; 
22

iii)  All the service rules e.g. CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964; CCS  (CCA) Rules, 
1965; CCS(TS) Rules, 1965, CCS(L TC) Rules, 1988, CCS (Leave) Ru les, 
1972, Fundamental Rules, CCS(RP) Rules, 2016, TA Rules, etc. ha ve used the 
term ‘Central Government’. Rule 2 of the CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1 964 states 
that  “ The Government ” means the Central Government; and “ Government 
servant” means any person appointed by Go vernment to any civil service  o r  
post in connection with the affairs of the Union and includes a  civilian in a 
Defence Service; 
iv) The use of this term “Centra l Government” for the Governmen t of India is 
ubiquitous and is used in the common parlance to mean employees  serving the 
Union as per Part XIV of the Constitution. 
2.28 DoLA then informed that the  term ‘Centre’ or ‘Central Gove rnment’ is 
nowhere used in the Constitution. The makers of the Constitutio n specifically 
discarded it and instead used th e word ‘Union’. The members of the Constituent 
Assembly were very cautious of not using the word ‘Centre’ or ‘ Central Government’ 
in the Constitution as they intended to keep away the tendency of centralising of 
powers in one unit. The ‘Union Government’ or the ‘Government o f  I n d i a ’  h a s  a  
unifying effect as the message sought to be given is that the government is of all.  
 2.29 In this regard it is significant to mention though, the t erm 'Central Government' 
was not used at the time of framing of Constitution, in The Con stitution (Seventy-
third) Amendment Act, 1992 done in 2012, the terminology ‘Centr al Government’ 
was used. DoLA has also observed that the Union Legislature and  State Legislature 
identify their boundaries and are circumspect to not cross thei r boundaries when it 
comes to the subject matter on which laws are made.  
2.30  Taking corollary from the above observation of DOLA, it i s again emphasized 
that any initiative for regulating the service conditions of the Legislature and the 
Judiciary by the Executive would be tantamount to encroaching upon the powers 
vested in them. Moreover, it would also demolish the spirit of the Constitution.  
2.31 In view of the foregoing, DoPT submits that changing the n omenclature from   
‘Central Government’ to ‘Union Government’ categorically does n ot come under the 
purview of DoPT as per the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961.   
23

2.32 It is again emphasized that Recruitment and conditions of service of persons 
serving the three organs of the Union (the Executive, the Legis lature and the 
Judiciary) are governed by separate set of Rules framed under s eparate Articles viz. 
Article 309, Article 98 and Arti cle 146 respectively of the Con stitution. The persons 
serving the three organs are, ac cordingly, governed by the Rule s framed under the 
separate provisions of the Const itution and their service condi tions are also not 
uniform. As such, combining them together will have wider impli cations which is 
beyond the scope of Business a llocated to Department of Personn el and Training. In 
view of the above, it is requested that DRPSC may kindly drop t he above 
recommendations.   
Further observation 
2.33 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.34 The Committee takes note of a finding from the report of Seventh Central Pay 
Commission that the total number of federal/Union Government personnel per lakh of 
population in India and the US is 139 and 668 respectively. The Committee is of the 
considered view that the Union Governmen t should restructure and align its personnel 
requirement in line with its current and future challenges. In view of increasing role and 
responsibilities of the Union Government, the Committee recommends DoPT to make 
advanced projections and align its human resource  architecture so as to meet its future 
requirements. While doing so, the Department may attempt to increase the number of Union 
Government personnel per lakh  population.                                                                        3.30 
Action Taken  
2.35 As per the functional requirement, all Ministries/ Departm ents send proposal for 
creation of posts to Department of Expenditure. Resultantly, Sa nctioned Strength of Central 
Government employees has increased from 36,45,584 in 2014 to 40,04,941 in 2020.  
Further observation 
2.36 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.37 The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation offered by DoPT that posts 
manned through Central Staffing Scheme are of specialized executive nature and that it is not 
appropriate to draw officials from other wings of the Government. The Committee is of the 
view that this explanation is basically flawed as it is based on the assumption that officials 
serving other wings of the Union Government lack skills, competency and aptitude required 
24

for these posts. Also, when the officials of the executive wing can man certain posts in the 
legislative and judicial wings, why the reverse of the same is not possible. The Committee 
recommends DoPT to shun its assumption and open up possibilities for the officials of the 
legislative and judicial wings to serve the executive wing.                                                  3.31 
Action Taken  
2.38 The recommendation of the Committee relates to exploring possib ilities of legislative 
and judicial wing to be included in the CSS. This aspect has al ready been taken into 
consideration and views of the matter were conveyed on 14.06.20 21 which are reiterated. 
With regard to the observation of the Committee, it may be note d that this explanation speaks 
of only requirement of the skill, aptitude of the officers appo inted under Central Staffing 
Scheme and do not cause any aspersion on the ability of officia ls of other wings of the 
Government of India. The stand of the DoPT is based on the pref erence to officials having 
specialized executive skills and are delivering satisfactorily.  Inclusion of other non-
specialized service officers in the Scheme at this Stage may in fringe upon the basic structure 
of the scheme and may not be appropriate. 
Further observation 
2.39 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.40
 The Committee is of the opinion that COVID-19 has caused untold agony and 
insurmountable sufferings to many. The whole of India had come to a standstill, lives and 
livelihoods got disrupted and the student community  was also adversely affected.  Keeping in 
view the hardships faced by the student community during the first and second COVID 
waves, the Committee recommends the Government to change its mind and sympathetically 
consider the demand of CSE aspirants and grant an extra attempt with corresponding age 
relaxation to all candidates.                                                                                                 4.16 
Action Taken  
2.41 The issue of granting age relaxation and extra attempt to the candidates in Civil 
Services Examination (CSE) due to the COVID-19 pandemic had bee n brought before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India vide Writ Petitions filed by the  CSE aspirants. Based on the 
judgements passed by the Hon'ble Apex Court, the matter has ear lier been considered in this 
Department and it had not been found feasible to consider any c hange in the existing 
provisions regarding number of attempts and age-limit in respec t of the Civil Services 
Examination. 
25

2.42 The matter has been duly reconsidered by this Department i n the light of above 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee as well  as judgement passed by 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in WP(C) No. 92 of 2022 dated 31.03.2022.  After careful 
examination of the above issue, it has been decided by this Dep artment that the request of 
candidates for age relaxation and extra attempt in CSE cannot be accepted.  
Further observation 
2.43 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.44 The Committee is of the view that there is an inverse relationship between 
transparency and litigation. The greater the transparency, the lesser the litigation. The 
Committee recommends Staff Selection Commission to maintain the highest possible level of 
transparency so as to preserve the integrity of the recruitment process.                             4.20 
Action Taken 
2.45 The Staff Selection Commission (SSC) maintains high level of transparency in so far 
as sharing information with the candidates in respect of its ex aminations and related aspects 
are concerned.  Some of the major measures taken in this regard are as follows: 
(a) Answer keys of Objective Type Questions are finalized after  inviting 
representations from candidates.  
(b) Marks of the candidates are uploaded on the website of the SSC for the individual 
candidates.  
(c) Recently, SSC has started giving opportunities to candidate s for making 
corrections in their online applications. 
Further observation 
2.46 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.47 The Committee appreciates PESB for clearing a large number of backlog vacancies 
as speedily as possible. However, the Comm ittee is not happy with the representation of 
women in Board level posts in PSUs which it found to be acutely low. The Committee 
recommends PESB to apprise it whether the situation has arisen due to the shortage of 
women candidates competing for Board level posts or due to their not satisfying requisite 
eligibility conditions.                                                                                                             4.29 
 
 
26

Action Taken 
2.48 In this connection, PESB sought data from Standing Confere nce of Public Enterprises 
(SCOPE), an apex body of Public Enterprises, which has provided  information on number of 
Male and Female Executives in 110 Schedule A & B CPSEs (as on 1 6.03.2022) in the level 
of GM & above. As per the report, in Functional Director catego ry, the number of male 
Directors is 322 whereas the number of female Directors is 27. In the feeder pool i.e. from 
GM and above, the number of male employees is 10613 whereas the  n u m b e r  o f  f e m a l e  
employees is 808. The details are at Annexure - IV. 
2.49 As regards the Committee’s observations on eligibility con ditions and shortage of 
women candidates, it is to state that the eligibility condition s for both male and female 
c a n d i d a t e s  a r e  s a m e .  A s  p e r  t h e  S C O P E  r e p o r t ,  t h e  r a t i o  o f  M a l e : Female of Functional 
Directors in CPSEs is 12:1 whereas in the feeder level it is 13 :1. PESB is endeavoring to 
increase the number of female executives in Board level posts in CPSEs in the coming years. 
Further observation 
2.50 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
TRAINING INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.51 The Committee notes that, with the Grants- in-aid provided by DoPT and the revenue 
generated from training and research programmes, IIPA is hardly able to make both ends 
meet. Given this situation, IIPA is unable to appoint superior faculty, innovate, tie-up with 
world class institutions or modernize its training programmes. The Committee is of the view 
that budgetary constraints have restrained IIPA from appointing permanent faculty. The 
Committee, therefore, recomme nds DoPT to enhance the Grants-in-aid provided to IIPA 
significantly. The Committee also recommends IIP A to make its digital library, training 
modules accessible to general public.                                                                        5.17           
Action Taken 
2.52 DoPT has been providing support IIPA through funding for S alary, General and 
Capital expenditures to meet their activities and are not facing any budgetary constraints.  
2.53 IIPA presently engages Subj ect Matter Experts and Professi onal Consultants 
depending upon need of Capacity building programs as per market  situation, in addition to 
the regular faculty members. This ensures quality expertise and  helps in sustainability. IIPA 
also engages Visiting Faculty on project basis. 
2.54 IIPA has launched its new web-portal which is more compreh ensive, dynamic and 
having interactive features. Much of the IIPA Digital Learning Contents are available on its 
27

new website which is accessible to general public. IIPA library  c o n t e n t s  a r e  a l s o  a v a i l a b l e  
digitally on its website. 
Further observation 
2.55 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
 
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND SERVICE MATTERS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.56 The Committee is deeply concerned to not e that 73703 cases are pending with CAT. 
The Committee recommends CAT to put a Case Management system in place and prioritize 
the disposal of long pending matters first. The Committee feels that pendency of cases with 
CAT is invariably linked to its strength. The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that 
most Benches have just one Member. The Committee, in no uncertain terms, recommends 
DoPT to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest.                                                            6.14 
Action Taken  
2.57 With regard to pendency of cases, it is submitted the main  reasons for pendency of 
cases in CAT are as under:  
(i) S o m e  c a s e s  a r e  a d j o u r n e d  s i n e - d i e  d u e  t o  t h e  r e a s o n  t h a t  t h e  m atters have been 
subjudice before the Hon’ble Supreme Court/High Court. 
(ii) Some cases have been restored/remanded back by the Hon’ble Supreme Court & High 
Court after long time and these cases retain their original ins titution date in the 
Tribunal. 
(iii) Some cases were initially dismissed in default and later on restored. 
(iv) Some cases are pending due to reasons that the learned counsels  seeking time for 
filling reply/rejoinder. 
(v) Moreover, during Covid 19 pandemic period only those cases are listed for hearing 
where both the parties have agreed for hearing through video co nferencing. However, 
from 01.03.2022, notification with regard to resumption of phys ical hearing in all 
Benches of CAT has been issued.  
2.58 Regarding a Case Management system in CAT for prioritizing  t he  di sp o s a l  o f  l o ng  
pending matters first, it is submitted that Case Management Sys tem (CIS) is already 
functional in CAT wherein cases before courts are listed under different headings in order of 
case number with the oldest case at the top and latest one at t he bottom in the cause list. 
28

Further, Benches are also constantly being directed by the Hon’ ble Chairman to reduce the 
pendency of cases with special attention to be given to the dis posal of the cases pending for 5 
years or more. 
 2.59 Further, with regard to filling up vacant posts of Chairm an/ Members in CAT, it is 
submitted that the process of filling up said vacant posts has already been initiated with the 
constitution of Search-cum Selection Committee under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Judge of 
Supreme Court and issuance of vacancy circulars on 04.04.2022. The Hon’ble Committee has 
taken a series of meetings to decide the modalities of the selection process and to shortlist the 
candidates. As such, the issue of filling up the vacancies of M embers in CAT is under active 
consideration. 
Further observation 
2.60 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committ ee hopes that the 
vacant posts in CAT would be filled up at the earliest. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.61 The Committee notes that a large number of complaints are pending with CVOs. As 
per the annual Report of CVC, during the period Jan 2020 to Dec 2020, 569 complaints 
received by CVOs through CVC and 11693 complaints received directly by themselves are 
pending for more than the stipulated period of three months with them and some complaints 
are pending for over three years. The Committee would like CVC to apprise it as to why such 
a large number of complaints are pending with  CVOs and why the stipulated timelines are 
not being adhered to.                                                                                                            6.22           
Action Taken  
2.62 (a) Central Vigilance Commission has issued guidelines, sp ecifying the time limits for 
action on complaints. One month’s time has been given for takin g a decision whether the 
complaint involves a vigilance angle or not. Three months' time  has been stipulated for 
conducting investigation on complaints. However, it has been ob served that there are 
instances when there is a delay in bringing the complaint to a logical conclusion. As on 
3l.12.2020, 105 complaints were pending with the organizations concerned, for more than 3 
years, which were sent for Investigation and submission of Report. The Commission has been 
following up the same for early conclusion. 
(b) In order to ensure that action on complaints is taken withi n the stipulated time period, 
Commission has been taking up the matter with the authorities c oncerned in the respective 
organizations. 
29

(c) Before taking action on a complaint, confirmation/ verifica tion of identity of the 
complainant is required. It has been observed that sometimes, t he complainants take unduly 
long time to confirm that the complaint was made by them. This causes delay in taking the 
complaints to a logical end. 
(d) In case, detailed investigation is required to be done, obt aining relevant records and/or 
recording statements of the officials concerned takes a lot of time, due to which the 
submission of investigation report goes beyond the stipulated time limit. 
(e) The Commission, in order to monitor progress of all pending  complaints, has made 
specific provisions in the Quarterly Performance Report (to be submitted by CVO to the 
Commission every three months), to report all such complaints t o the Commission. The 
QPRs are now scrutinized in the Commission thoroughly and all C omplaints pending for 
action beyond the prescribed time limit are followed up constan tly with the organizations 
concerned. As a result, the overdue pendency is coming down. 
Further observation 
2.63 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.64 The Committee would like Lokpal to apprise it if the prosecution and inquiry wings 
have been constituted. The Comm ittee would also like to know if Lokpal had laid down the 
manner and procedure of conducting prelimi nary inquiry and investigation. The Committee 
recommends Lokpal not to reject any complaint involving allegations of serious nature on the 
technical ground that the complaint is not in prescribed format.                                         6.26 
Action Taken 
2.65 The Prosecution and Inquiry Wings have not yet been consti tuted.  However, cases 
are being referred to the Delhi Special Police Establishment (D SPE), the Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC) and other Agencies for Preliminary Inquiry and  Investigation where 
there exists a prima-facie case. Section 20(1)(a) allows the Lo kpal for ordering a preliminary 
inquiry against any public servant by its Inquiry Wing or any a gency
 (including the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment). 
2.66 Lokpal has laid down the procedure for preliminary inquiry  and the same is available 
on its website.  
2.67 Lokpal has been giving opportunity to the complainant to r e-submit the complaint in 
the prescribed format where the same is not initially received in the prescribed form.  Further, 
the Lokpal is hearing all complaints received by it, including those not received in the 
30

prescribed form at.  Necessary am endm ents to provide for consideration of such complaints 
have also been made in the circular laying down the procedure for dealing with complaints. 
 
Further observation 
2.68 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.69 The Committee is concerned to note that 96 out of 152 staff of CIC are appointed on 
contractual basis. The Committee would like CIC to recruit regular staff at the earliest. A 
closer look at the trend of pendency reveals that a large number of complaints/second 
appeals have piled up during the first and second COVID waves. The Committee would like 
CIC to apprise it about the average time taken fo r disposal of complaints/second appeals, 
monthly rate of disposal and average number of cases disposed per Information 
Commissioner during the last three years.                                                                            6.30 
Action Taken 
2.70 It is submitted that in pursuance to the observation of th e Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, the Central Information Commission has issued an adv ertisement on 24-3-2022 
calling for applications from the eligible candidates for filli ng up the vacant sanctioned posts 
on deputation basis. Further, CS Division, Department of Person nel &Training has also been 
requested to fill up the encadred vacant posts at the earliest. 
2.71 During the lockdown owing to the pandemic, Covid — 19, whe n most of the offices 
of CPIOs were either shut or skeleton staff was attending offic e and communication 
with the applicant/complainant & CPIOs was quite difficult, the  Commission adopted a 
new approach by introducing the concept of having hearings thro ugh audio mode in addition 
to video hearings. The Commission was able to dispose off cases as per data given below: 
S. 
No. Month 
2020-21 2021-22 
No. of 
Disposal 
No. of 
Disposal 
1 April 647 1747 
2 May 1278 1679 
3 June 1752 2462 
4 July 1655 2815 
5 August 1253 2557 
6 September 1264 2710 
7 October 1083 2027 
8 November 1056 2729 
31

9 December 1467 2834 
10 January 1614 2147 
11 February 1746 2364 
12 March 2202 2830 
 Total 17017 28901 
 
 
2.72 It may be mentioned here that the second appeals/complaint s registered in the 
Commission are disposed off on first come first serve basis  and priority hearing is accorded 
in deserving cases. 
2.73 No. of cases pending (as on yearend) for disposal during l ast three years is shown in the 
graph annexed at  Annexure-V.  Average Monthly rate of Disposal of Second Appeal / 
Complaint per IC and Average Monthly Disposal of Second Appeal / Complaint during last 3 
years is annexed at Annexure-VI. 
Further observation 
2.74 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
  
32

 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN FOR 
NOT ACCEPTING ITS RECOMMENDATIONS AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS. 
PERSONNEL  MANAGEMENT  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1 The Committee notes that 12 Central Group A services are awaiting cabinet approval 
and the cadre review proposals of 9 services are pending with the Cadre review Committee. 
The Committee hopes that the cadre review of these 21 services is completed at the earliest. 
In respect of the remaining 17 services, the Committee notes that respective cadre controlling 
authorities have either not submitted cadre revi ew proposals or there are dying cadre issues. 
The Committee recommends DoPT to take steps to expedite cadre review of these 17 services 
and ensure that the process is completed at the earliest and furnish a status note in this 
regard to the Committee. The Committee also recommends the Centre to undertake cadre 
review of posts designated as ‘Cadre posts’ exclusively earmarked for IAS officers in states. 
                    3.13  
Action Taken 
3.2 Issue of cadre review of Central Group ‘A’ Services is the subj ect matter of Cadre 
Review Division of this Department and its comments are as follows:-  
1.       For the 12 Services, wherein Cabinet approval is await ed, the concerned 
Ministry has already circulated the Draft Cabinet Note and this  Department has 
conveyed its no objection to the proposal. No action w.r.t. DoP T is pending in these 
proposals. 
2.       Out of 9 Services, observed by the Committee to be con sidered by the CRC, 1 
Service has already been considered by the CRC and the cases of  the other 8 Services 
are being expedited. 
3.      Out of remaining 17 Services, the cadre review proposals have been received for 
4 Services and are under examination. Further, 2 services under took exercise 
of creation of post/readjustment to meet the functional requirement and organizational 
need in 2019-20 and hence no comprehensive cadre review is requ ired at this stage. 
Further, in case of 3 services, due to conversion as PSUs/Corpo ratization these 
services may not require the com prehensive cadre review but cad re issues if any will 
be addressed.  For remaining 8 services, where cadre review pro posals are yet to be 
33

submitted, repeated reminders for moving the proposal have been  sent and meetings 
held with the concerned CCA. All these services are part of cal endar of cadre review 
of 2022 and it is expected that the proposal will get finalized within this year. 
3.3 In respect of IAS officers, it is stated that the Rule 4 (2) of  Indian Administrative 
Service (IAS) Cadre Rules, 1954 provides that the Central Gover nment shall ordinarily a t 
the interval of every five years, re-examine the strength and c omposition of each such cadre 
i n  c o n s u l t a t i o n  w i t h  t h e  S t a t e  G o v e r n m e n t  o r  t h e  S t a t e  G o v e r n m ents concerned and may 
make such alterations therein as it deems fit. Further, cadre R eview process is an opportunity 
with the states to reckon the strength of the cadres vis-à-vis current and future requirements 
keeping in view the administrative requirements of the States a nd strength of Cadre officers 
available and also to adjust the vacant/ temporary posts create d by the State Government to 
meet exigencies. Accordingly, cadre review proposal is submitte d by the concerned 
State/Cadre to this Department.   The cadre strength of each st ate/cadre is analysed by Cadre 
Review Committee (CRC) keeping in view the functional justifica tion, future administrative 
requirement, vacancy position and financial implications and a conscious decision is taken by 
the Committee members with regard to increase/decrease in the cadre strength of any cadre. 
Further observation 
3.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee re commends the 
Ministry to furnish the details of cadre review undertaken by t he Cadre Review 
Committee in respect of posts designated as ‘Cadre Posts’ exclu sively earmarked for 
IAS officers in states during the period 2012-2022. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.5 The Committee notes that, at present, there is no single nodal agency in the Central 
Government to monitor backlog reserved vacancies in various Ministries/Departments. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to designate Department of Personnel 
and Training as the nodal agency for this purpose. The Committee reiterates the 
recommendation made in its 106
th and 108 th Reports that the Mi nistries/Departments 
concerned may create a dashboard on their sites showing the details of backlog reserved 
vacancies and the progress made in filling th em up. The Committee further recommends that 
DoPT may create a similar Dashboard on its site and update it regularly as and when 
information regarding reserved vacancies is made available to it by concerned 
Ministries/Departments.                                                                                                        3.17 
 
 
34

Action Taken 
3.6 DoPT monitors the progress in filling up of backlog vacanci es for SCs, STs & OBCs 
with ten Ministries/ Departments, having more than 90% of the e mployees of Central 
Government. The 10 Ministries/ Departments are – Home Affairs, Railways, Revenue, 
Financial Services, Posts, Defence Production, Defence, Atomic energy, Education and 
Housing & Urban Affairs.  
3.7 The Department has already issued OM No. 43011/11/2016 – Es tt (Res), dated 
9.6.2022 requesting above mentioned 10 Major Ministries/ Departments to create Dashboards 
on their respective websites re flecting the details of the back log reserved vacancies for SCs/ 
STs/ OBCs (Annexure - I). NIC, DoPT, has also been requested to create similar dashboar d 
on the website of this Department which will show data of Minis tries/ Departments in 
isolated as well as collective manner. Besides, the dashboard o f DoPT will also reflect the 
status of representation of SCs, STs and OBCs in the posts and services of Central 
Government, as on 1.1.2020 and onwards, on yearly basis.  
Further observation 
3.8 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Govern ment should 
designate Department of Personnel and Training as the nodal age ncy to monitor 
backlog reserved vacancies in all Ministries/Departments of the Central Government. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.9 The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that a significant number of IAS 
officers are not filing Immovable Property Re turns every year. In fact, the Committee is 
surprised to note that there are 32 IAS officers who have not filed IPRs for more than three 
successive years. The fact that IAS officers are not filing IPRs for years points to a deeper 
malaise in the system. It also implies that ‘denial of vigilance clearance’ is no longer working 
as an effective deterrent. The Committee, ther efore, recommends DoPT to come up with a 
proposal in this regard and submit a status note to the Committee in a month’s time.        3.21 
Action Taken  
 
3.10
 Rule 16(2) of AIS (Conduct) Rules, 1968 makes it mandatory for AIS officers to file 
their Immovable Property Returns (IPR) every year by 31st Janua ry of the next year (as on 
1st January) for previous calendar year. Govt. of India Instruc tions dated 04.01.1994, under 
AIS (Conduct) Rules, inter alia, states that failure on the par t of the members of the Service 
to comply with the requirements of the aforesaid rules (i.e. fi ling of IPR), constitutes good 
and sufficient reason for institution of disciplinary proceedings against them. 
35

3.11 Further, with an objective to ensure timely submission of Immovable Property Return 
(IPR) by All India Services officers i.e. Indian Administrative  Service (IAS), Indian Police 
Service (IPS) and Indian Forest Service (IFS), the filing of IP R has been linked to the 
appointment of such officers to the next level of pay in the Pa y matrix. Accordingly, the 
respective pay Rules applicable to these officers viz. IAS (Pay) Rules, 2016, IPS (Pay) Rules, 
2016 and IFS (Pay) Rules, 2016 have been amended vide three Not ifications dated 30 th 
December, 2021 by inserting Note 4 in each of the pay rules ( Annexure - II). The said Note 
4 in respect of IAS officers reads as under: 
        “Note 4.- A member of the service shall file Immovable Property Return (IPR) 
for the previous year within the time frame specified for the purpose, i.e. 31st January, 
for being considered for appointment in the next level of pay in the pay matrix:  
         Provided that a member of service, who has not filed t he IPR for any of the year 
prior to coming into force of the Indian Administrative Service  (Pay), Amendment, 
Rules, 2021, shall file the same within such period, as may be laid down by the 
Central Government in this behalf, for being considered for app ointment in the next 
level of pay in the pay matrix.” 
Further observation 
3.12 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Minis try. The Committee 
recommends the Government of India to constitute an Expert Comm ittee to examine in 
detail the issue of non-filing of immovable property returns by IAS officers.  
 
RECRUITMENT INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.13 The Committee is of the view that Government should appoint an expert group or 
Committee to assess the impact of changes made in the scheme, p attern and syllabus of Civil 
services examination in the last ten years on the quality of re cruitment and administration at 
large. The expert group so constituted may assess if the presen t scheme of recruitment 
provides an equal opportunity to both English-medium educated u rban candidates and non-
english medium educated rural candidates. The expert group may also assess if the existing 
pattern of preliminary and mains examination has created a leve l playing field for all 
candidates irrespective of their academic background.                                                           4.7 
Action Taken  
3.14 The suggestions of the Hon’ble Committee has been communic ated to the Union 
Public Service Commission (UPSC). 
36

Further observation 
3.15 The Committee desires to be apprised about the decision ta ken by UPSC in this 
regard.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.16 The Committee notes that, as on date, 390 disciplinary cases are pending with UPSC. 
The Committee is of the view that administrative lag should be avoided at all costs and no 
official should be made to undergo mental agony and monetary loss due to administrative 
delays. The Committee recommends UPSC to take necessary remedial measures and expedite 
the disposal of pending disciplinary cases at the earliest.                                                   4.10 
Action Taken 
 
3.17 The disciplinary cases received and processed by UPSC sinc e 2015, year wise up to 
31.03.2022 is as per Annexure – III. 
3.18 Further, updated data in respect of cases where advice ten dered by UPSC was not 
accepted by the Government up to 31.03.2022 is as under: 
 
SN F.Y. Advice 
Letters 
issued during 
the F.Y. 
No. of non-
acceptance 
cases 
1 2018-19 493 06 
2 2019-20 447 05 
3 2020-21 433 02 
4 2021-22 535 00 
 
3.19 It may be noted that Commission’s advice was not accepted by the Government in 13 
cases during the period 2018-19 to 2021-22. 
3.20 The Commission has been able to reduce the pendency of dis ciplinary cases to 323 
cases at the end of Financial Year (F.Y.) 2021-22. There is a r eduction of nearly 20% as 
compared to pendency of 401 cases at the end of previous F.Y. 2020-21.  
3.21 Further, the Commission issued 535 advice letters during F .Y. 2021-22, which is the 
highest number of advice letters issued in the last 15 financia l years and 24% increase over 
the 433 advice letters issued in previous F.Y. 2020-21, despite  two waves of Covid-19 
37

pandemic during the F.Y. 2021-22. UPSC has made efforts at seve ral fronts and has taken 
multiple remedial measures like engaging experienced and retire d officers as consultants and 
also motivating existing officers to dispose of higher number of cases.  
Further observation 
3.22 The Committee appreciates the Department for striving hard  to bring down the 
pendency of disciplinary cases. T he Committee recommends the De partment to take 
measures to reduce the pendency further.   
Recommendation/Observation 
3.23 The Committee notes that Union Cabinet had given its approval to set up a National 
Recruitment Agency as far back as in 2020. The Committee also notes that NRA has utilized 
₹58.32 crore in 2021-22 and an outlay of ₹ 396 crore has been earmarked in BE 2022-23. 
However, NRA has not seen the light of the day yet. The Committee would like to be informed 
as to why NRA has not been operationalized yet. The Committee recommends DoPT to 
apprise the Committee by when NRA will become fully functional.                                     4.25 
Action Taken 
3.24 National Recruitment Agency  (NRA) has been made functional from LIC’s Jeevan 
Bharati Building at New Delhi. However, in order to conduct Com mon Eligibility Test 
(CET), there is need to finalize the syllabus, scheme of examin ation, fee structure, 
normalization, etc. for which an Expert Advisory Committee (EAC ) has been set up. The 
EAC will give recommendation and guidance on assessment, beside s technologies to be 
adopted for conducting the tests. Further, in order to build a digital platform for NRA, the 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) has submitted a project propo sal, which is under 
examination.  
3.25 There are 33 posts in NRA headquarters at New Delhi. Besid es Chairman and 
Secretary-cum-CoE, there are 31 posts at NRA HQ. 24 posts for R egional Offices have been 
created, which will be filled up on deputation basis. NRA is in  the process of filling up of 
these posts at various levels and the process of filling up of these posts is likely to be 
completed shortly. In view of the above, it is anticipated that  in next eight (8) to ten (10) 
months, NRA will be made functional.  
Further observation 
3.26 The Committee is unhappy to note that Common Eligibility T est has not been 
conducted yet. The Committee reco mmends National Recruitment Ag ency to 
operationalize it as soon as possible. 
 
38

TRAINING INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.27 The Committee is concerned to learn that ISTM is grappling with significant human 
resource deficit. The Committee has been appris ed that the shortage of faculty has arisen, 
due to non-availability of officers with requisi te eligibility conditions on deputation basis. 
The Committee reiterates that ISTM needs to reduce its dependence on deputed officials. It 
may recruit permanent faculty and also hire re tired officials who fulfil requisite eligibility 
conditions to overcome this problem. The Comm ittee also recommends ISTM to make its 
digital library, training modules accessible to general public.                                            5.11 
Action Taken 
3.28 ISTM has sanctioned faculty strength of 28, out of which 14 cur rently are in position. 
Efforts are being made to fill up all vacant posts as per provi sions of recruitment rules in 
consultation with UPSC etc. which is an ongoing process. The fi lling up of posts is regularly 
being monitored at higher level in the Department. 
3.29 While DoPT & ISTM have been making continuous and concerted eff orts to fill the 
vacant faculty posts through repeated advertisements/circulars,  still several of these posts 
could not be filled up due to lack of eligible candidates due l ack of applications for several 
faculty posts on account of provisions in existing RRs stipulat ing prior teaching / training 
experience/ qualifications.  
3.30 Proposals for amendment of Recruitment Rules is under cons ideration to make them 
more inclusive so that a wider field of candidates become eligi ble to apply for faculty posts. 
3.31 ISTM is creating facilities for the citizen to directly ac cess ISTM digital resources 
including training materials.  The proposed topics for digital resources include topics such as 
Right to Information (RTI), Grievance Redressal, Citizen Charte r, working with MS Office, 
Behavioural learning areas, Office Management, Handling MPs/VIP s references and other 
courses. 
3.32 ISTM’s  publications and handbooks such as Establishment R ules, Finance, 
Vigilance, Cabinet Notes, Manual of Officer Procedure, Right to  Information, Cyber 
Security, etc have been made available on the knowledge portal of ISTM website 
(www.istm.gov.in). These resources are freely accessible to any member of public. 
Further observation 
3.33 The Committee is concerned to note that ISTM has not been able to fill up 
vacant faculty posts due to lack of eligible candidates and on account of provisions in 
recruitment rules stipulating pri or teaching/training experienc e/qualifications. The 
39

Committee recommends DoPT to suitably amend RRs to enable a wid er field of 
candidates to apply for faculty posts. Besides this, DoPT may t rain the trainers i.e select 
candidates with prescribed qualifications and train them. 
 
 
INTEGRITY, VIGILANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND SERVICE MATTERS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.34 On the question of pendency, CBI in its written reply submitted that a total of 1025 
cases are pending investigation with it and out of them 66 cases are pending for more than 5 
years as on 31 st January, 2022. The Committee feels that  this pendency can be effectively 
reduced if the manpower requirements are ta ken care of.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Government to undertake Cadre restructuring of CBI at the earliest. The 
Committee also recommends that CBI should make efforts to reduce its dependence on 
deputation and strive to recruit permanent staff atleast upto the rank of Deputy 
Superintendent of Police. The Committee is of the view that delayed justice is no justice at all 
and cases cannot linger on without a definite closure for decades. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that CBI may prepare a roadmap for disposal of cases pending with them and 
inform the Committee accordingly.                                                                                         6.8 
Action Taken  
3.35 (i ) With regard to cadre restructuring of CBI, it is to be mentione d that a proposal for 
rationalization of strength in various grades of CBI is under examination. 
(ii) As regards the suggestions for r educing the dependence on deput ation and striving to 
recruit permanent staff, at least, upto the rank of Deputy Supe rintendent of Police, the 
notified Recruitment Rules, especially, of Investigating office rs i.e. from Sub-Inspector of 
Police to Additional Superintendent of Police in CBI are as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rank  Mode of Recruitment  
Additional 
Superintendent 
of Police (91 
posts) 
Filled 100% by 
promotion 
Dy. SP (301 
posts) Filled by 
80:10:10 
Promotion: 
Deputation: Limited 
Departmental 
Competitive 
Examination (LDCE) all 
through UPSC 
Inspector of 
Police (1024 
posts)  
Filled by 50:50 
Deputation/Absorption: 
Promotion 
Sub-Inspector 
(480 posts)  
 
Filled by 70:15:15 
Direct recruitment 
through 
SSC: Promotion :LDCE 
40

From the above, it may be seen that officers/officials are not only appointed through 
deputation, but also recruited through direct recruitment and p romotion as per provisions 
contained in the Recruitment Rules. It is to be mentioned furth er that departmental CBI 
officers play a very important role in investigations, but at t he same time, officers on 
deputation from States/CPOs/CAPFs /Banks etc, at various levels bring fresh and new ideas, 
based on their experience in different fields. The deputationis t officers are also aware of local 
laws and local conditions. Moreover, officers coming from diver se background bring in fresh 
ideas and varied skill-sets with them. The interaction of these  officers with those of direct 
recruit officers leads to enuncia tion of strategies and tactics  that have proved immensely 
successful in solving special types of cases. Hence, deputation  reserve has been provided at 
various levels. 
(iii) As regards the roadmap for disposal of cases pending with CBI, it is to be intimated that 
the following steps have been taken to improve quality of inves tigation, conviction 
percentage and disposal of cases from trial :- 
Steps taken to improve the quality of investigation - 
3.36 A good investigation is sine qua non for better prosecutio n in a court of law. For 
improving the quality of investigation, the following steps have been taken by CBI:- 
a. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Crime Manual have b een upgraded and 
updated, keeping in view the ch anging necessities, technologica l advancement, 
changing legal requirement and direction of the Courts. 
b. CBI has introduced a system of using ICTs for processing and  monitoring files 
electronically through Core Application Software (CAS), to ensu re that prompt and 
quality investigation is carried  out and suggestions / instruct ions by the senior 
formations are dissipated well in time to the Investigating Officers for compliance. 
c. For better coordination and enhancing the quality of investi gation, the practice of 
synergetic working of Executive Officers in tandem with law off icers has been 
introduced. 
d. Investigation reports are prepared in a detailed proforma, h ighlighting the relevant 
material collected and the admissibility of evidence thereof. 
e. The explanation of the accused during investigation is taken  and evidence collected 
to verify and rebut the defence of the accused. 
f. Scrutiny of investigation report is carried out by Law Offic er as well as senior 
formations to assess the quality of evidence for launching prosecution. 
g. While conducting investigation and submitting the final repo rt, a detailed Calendar 
of evidence is prepared, highlighting both oral and documentary evidence in detail. 
h. For building up of domain expertise of CBI officers, regular  training is being 
imparted to them at CBI Academy, Ghaziabad. During the year 202 1, 32 specialised 
training courses have been organized for 434 Investigating Offi cers of CBI for 
improving their skill and knowledge of investigation. 
i. Executive and Legal officers have been given access to the l atest legal data through 
Manu Patra, an online data base for legal research, so that the y may keep themselves 
41

abreast of the latest case laws and rulings passed by the Hon’b le Supreme Court and 
High Courts. 
j. An MoU has been signed by CBI with National Forensic Science  University 
(NFSU) Gandhinagar (Gujarat) to promote collaboration and facil itate advancement 
of knowledge on the basis of reciprocity and frequent interacti on. NFSU will assist in 
the training and capacity building of officers of CBI and suppo rt in strengthening its 
forensic capabilities. 
Steps taken to improve the conviction percentage and disposal of cases from trial – 
3.37 The following steps have been taken by CBI for improving t he conviction percentage 
and better disposal of cases from trial:- 
a. Committee with the Director of Prosecution (DOP) as member a nd involvement of 
other senior law officers has been constituted at Zonal level f or suggesting steps and 
preparing strategy for addressing and speeding up the trial of cases pending for over 
20 years. 
b. In other cases pending trial for less than 20 years, efforts  like pruning of witnesses, 
ensuring the appearance of witnesses in Courts of law and their  timely examination 
etc. are being made for expeditious disposal of cases from trial. 
c. Appropriate steps are being taken for vacating stay in cases , as per the parameters 
laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the matter of Asian R esurfacing of Road 
Agency Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation. 
d. The training programmes for law officers of CBI are being co nducted in 
coordination with the Law Universities for the enhancement of their capability. 
e. The concept of peer group learning is being promoted. 
f .  P r o s e c u t o r s  a n d  L a w  O f f i c e r s  o f  C B I  a r e  b e i n g  n o m i n a t e d  t o  attend the various 
training courses/ workshops conducted by the CBI Academy, Ghaziabad. 
g. Training has been organized on legal nuances of Forensic Inv estigation and 
Admissibility of Electronic Evidence and Meta Analysis in cases  under Investigation. 
Training was imparted by Law Faculty of Rashtriya Raksha Univer sity, Lavad 
(Gujarat) at CBI Academy and it was attended by 44 Law Officers  and Prosecutors of 
CBI. 
h. Monthly workshop of Director of Prosecution with the Law Off icers of CBI has 
been conducted, both physically as well as on virtual platform. 
i. Training need analysis for all the Law officers of CBI is be ing done to identify the 
areas for upgrading their knowledge and skills. 
j. A proposal is under process for organizing training programm es for prosecutors and 
Law Officers to be conducted by a reputed law institution 
 
Further observation 
 
3.38 The Committee notes that there is no provision for Direct recruitment of 
c andi date s above  the  r ank  of sub- Ins pe c tor  in CB I. T he  Committee recommends that 
there should be a provision for direct recruitment of candidates in the rank of Inspector 
of Police/Deputy Superintendent of Police. 
42

Recommendation/Observation 
3.39 The Committee desires to have details of number of cases/complaints registered with 
CBI year-wise, number of cases pending and the period for which they have been pending, 
number of cases pending investigation, number of cases pending trial, number of cases that 
have completed trial, percentage of conviction vis-a-vis acquittal in the Action Taken Note. 
The Committee would also like to know how many cases being investigated by CBI have been 
stayed by Courts.                                                                                                          
 6.9 
Action Taken  
3.40 CBI has registered the following number of cases during the yea rs 2012 
to 2021 :- 
Years  Number of cases 
registered 
2012 1048 
2013 1131 
2014 1174 
2015 1135 
2016 1047 
2017 1076 
2018 899 
2019 710 
2020 676 
2021 747 
 
3.41 As on 31.12.2021, 932 regular cases besides 50 preliminary  enquiries were pending 
under investigation/enquiry. Out of the said 932 regular cases,  490 cases were pending under 
investigation for over 1 year. 
3.42 As on 31.12.2021, the number of cases pending under trial was as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.43 As on 31.12.2021, the details of cases which ended in conv iction / acquittal were as 
under :- 
 
 
Years  Number of cases 
pending under trial 
2012 9734 
2013 9366 
2014 9243 
2015 9449 
2016 9429 
2017 9383 
2018 9254 
2019 9354 
2020 9757 
2021 10232 
43

Years  Number of 
cases ended 
in 
conviction 
Number 
of cases 
ended in 
acquittal 
 
2012 743 345 
2013 763 301 
2014 635 258 
2015 556 262 
2016 621 274 
2017 557 254 
2018 544 233 
2019 467 186 
2020 169 65 
2021 202 82 
 
3.44 As on 31.03.2022, 19 under investigation cases were stayed  by Hon’ble Supreme 
Court and High Courts. 
 
Further observation 
 
3.45  The Committee is concerned to note that there are cases p ending for more than 
20 years. Therefore, the Committ ee recommends that CBI should p ut a Case 
management system in place to track the progress of the case an d pursue it to its logical 
conclusion. This will not only expedite the disposal of cases b u t  w i l l  a l s o  e n h a n c e  
transparency and promote accountability in the functioning of CBI.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.46 The Committee notes with concern that se veral states have wit hdrawn their general 
consent to CBI. The Committee may be furnishe d with details of states that have withdrawn 
their General consent as on date and also whethe r such states have granted specific consent 
in certain cases. The Committee also desires to have details of number of cases in which the 
states have refused to give consent to CBI for investigation and number of cases in which 
specific consent has been given by states.                                                                            6.10 
Action Taken  
3.47 
Following 09 States have withdrawn their general consent to CBI  as on 
date :- 
i. Mizoram 
ii. West Bengal 
iii. Chhattisgarh 
iv. Rajasthan 
v. Maharashtra 
vi. Kerala 
44

vii. Jharkhand 
viii. Punjab 
ix. Meghalaya (since 09.02.2022) 
 
3.48 As on 31.03.2022, total 336 case specific requests were se nt to State Governments 
which have withdrawn their general consent to CBI for investiga tion of cases. Out of the said 
requests, consent has been granted in respect of 136 requests a nd 14 requests have been 
declined by the concerned State Governments. 
Further observation 
3.49 The Committee is concerned to note that 09 states have wit hdrawn their general 
consent to CBI.  The Committee feels that withdrawal of general  c o n s e n t  h a m p e r s  
seamless investigation of cases, especially those of complex na ture involving multiple 
agencies spread across many states and those involving foreign elements. The 
Committee desires to be apprised about the present status of the remaining 186 cases. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.50 The Committee notes that as many as 72 vigilance cases, including those involving 
serious allegations are pending sanction for prosecution beyond the stipulated time limit of 
three months. The Committee is strongly concerned to note that not granting sanction for 
prosecution within the stipulated time limit has become a routine affair. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends the Government to amend the relevant provisions and empower CVC 
to take necessary action in such cases where the competent authority fails to grant sanction 
for prosecution within stipulated time limit without valid reasons.                                      6.21 
 
Action Taken  
3.51 In this connection it is stated that the Prevention of Cor ruption Act, 1988 has already 
been amended vide the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Act, 2018 dated 26.07.2018. 
3.52 The matter of time limit for sanction for prosecution was considered in detail at the 
time of amendment of the PC Act. Various decisions of Hon’ble S upreme Court of India 
regarding sanction for prosecution within three months were con sidered. The Select 
Committee of the Parliament also exhaustively considered the am endment, undertaking a 
pan-India consultative exercise with a spectrum of stakeholders . On the basis of all these 
deliberations the relevant provision of Section 19 has been ame nded vide the aforesaid 
amendment of 2018. 
45

3.53 The statutory provision now provides that the appropriate Government or authority 
shall, after the the receipt of the proposal requiring sanction  for prosecution of a public 
servant under the sub-section, endeavour to convey the decision  on such proposal within a 
period of three months from the date of its receipt. Further, i t has also been provided that in 
case where, for the purpose of grant of sanction for prosecutio n, legal consultation is 
required, such period may, for th e reasons to be recorded in wr iting, be extended by a further 
period of one month. 
3.54 Thus, it may be seen that the aspect highlighted by the Ho n’ble Committee relates to 
implementation of statutory provisions of Section 19 of Prevent ion of Corruption Act, 1988, 
as referred to above. Adherence to the timeline by virtue of the amendment to the Act already 
has a force of law. 
Further observation 
3.55 The Committee notes that, as per the provisions of Prevent ion of Corruption Act, 
sanction for prosecution should be granted by the competent aut hority within a period 
of three months, which may be extended by a further period of o ne month. The 
Committee would like to know whether the Act or the Rules framed thereunder provide 
for any remedy in the event of sanction for prosecution not bei ng granted within the 
stipulated period. 
***** 
 
 
  
46

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MINUTES 
47

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
 
 The Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 10:30 A.M. on 05.12.2 022 in 
Committee Room No. 4, Block-A, P arliament House Annexe Ext. Bui lding, 
New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi -  Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(iv) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(v) Shri P. Wilson 
 Lok Sabha  
(vi) Smt. Veena Devi 
(vii) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(viii) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(ix) Shri Malook Nagar 
(x) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xi) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
48

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meet ing of the 
Committee. He apprised them that  the Committee will first consi der and adopt 
two reports and thereafter *    *    *. 
3. The Committee, then, conside red and unanimously adopted the 122nd 
Report on Action taken Report on 112 th Report on Demand for Grants (2022-
23) pertaining to the Department of Personnel & Training; and 1 23rd Report on 
Action Taken Report on 116th Report on Demand for Grants (2022- 23) 
pertaining to the Department of Justice. 
4. *      *     * 
5. The meeting adjourned at 11.00 AM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN  
5
th December, 2022                                                                         DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
49

.,~
A'r't'Y'l~~'-\~ 01..:r.
113019655/2022
No.43011/11/2016-Estt.(Res.-II)
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Department of Personnel and Training
*****
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
North Block, New Delhi.
Dated the June, 2022
Of
Subject: Recommendations/Observations contained in
the 112th Report on the Demands for Grants (2022-2023) of the
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice-reg.
The undersigned is directed to refer to this Department O.M. of even
number. dated 24.01.2022 and 24.03.2022, seeking comments on Para 3.17 of
the recommendations/observations contained in 'the 112th Report on the
Demands for Grants (2022-2023) of the Department related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice which
are reproduced below:
"The Committee notes that, at present, there is no single nodal agency
in the Central Government to monitor backlog reserved vacancies in various
Ministries/Departments. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Government to designate Department of Personnel and Training as the nodal
agency for this purpose. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made
in its 106th and loath Reports that the Ministries/Departments concerned
may create a dashboard on their sites showing the details of backlog reserved
vacancies and the progress made in filling them up. The Committee further
recommends that DoPT may create a similar Dashboard on its site and update
it regularly as and when information regarding reserved vacancies is made
available to it by concerned Ministries/Departments."
2. The recommendation of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee was one of the agenda items for discussion in the Workshop on
Backlogs Vacancies organised by DoPT on 31st May. 2022. In the
Workshop, all Ministries/ Departments conveyed their agreement with the
Recommendations on creation of dashboard.
3. Accordingly, the addressee MinistrieS/Departments ,are requested to create
a Dashboard on their respective websites, reflectirig the following
information:
Name of Ministry/Department-
DATA ON BACKLOG RESERVED VACANCIES AS ON 31.12.20 (1.1.20 )
SC ST DBC
vacancies Filled up unfilled' Vacancies Filled unfilled" vacancies Filled unfilled'
up up
* A separate para on the efforts made by each Ministry/Department to
fill up these backlog vacancies may also kindly also be uploaded on the
dashboard so created just below the table. 2-/- -) ~
50

- 2-
1/3019655/2022
4. Above information may also be uploaded on the Dashboard of this
Department so that Ministry/Department-wise, as also the consolidated data,
could be made available. A link for the same will be provided separately.
5. This issues with approval of s.ec:v-e.lC)y(_P) .
~,
(Debabrata Das)
Under Secretary to the Government of India
Tel: 23093307
To
l.The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block, New Delhi-llOOOl.
2.The Chairman, Railway Board, Rail Bhawan, New Delhi-11000l.
3. The Secretary, Department of Revenue, North Block, New Delhi-llOOOl.
4. The Secretary, Department of Defence, South Block, New Delhi-llOOOl.
5. The Secretary, Department of Defence Production, South Block, New
Delhi-11 0001
6. The Secretary, Department of Posts, Dak Bhavan, New Delhi-11000l.
7. The Secretary, Department of Financial Services, ]eevan Deep Building,
Parliament Street, New Delhi-110001. .-
8. The Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-
11000l.
9. The Chairman, Department ofAtomic Energy, Anushakti Bhavan,
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Marg, Mumbai-400 001.
10. The Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Nirman Bhavan, New
Delhi.
Copy to:
Shri Deepak Shirahatti, HOD & Technical Director.. NIC, DoPT, North Block, New
Delhi, with the request to create a similar dashboard on the website of this
Department which will show data of all the 10 individual Ministry/Department as
well as the data in consolidated manner. A link may be provided to the above­
mentioned ten Ministries/Departments to upload such data. Besides, consolidated
data on representation of SCs, STS, OBCs and EWSs, as available in the URL,
namely; rrcps.nic.in under 'Query/Reports' > 'View Output Report' > 'Ministry
including organisation' > 'Representation of SCs, STs, OBCs and EWSs' may also
be reflected separately on the Dashboard. The data may be uploaded for the year
2020, i.e., as on 1.1.2020, and onwards.
51

----- - ..--.--- .. ---------~--------------------
~~. it.101.- 33004/99 REGD. No.D.L.-33004/99
~I
I Q:he <!:JoLette of Jndia
m."3fr.-g)".~.-3-f. -3012 2021-2 322 66
CG-DL-E-30122021-232266
~
EXTRAORDINARY
'ifT1TI-~ 3~-~ (i)
PART II-Section 3-Sub-section (i)
~~~
PUBLISHED BYAUTHORITY
tt. 742]
No.742]
~~, "i~5:qRl<lI(,~ 30,2021~ 9,1943
NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 30,2021/PAUSA 9,1943
~,~~*ifllA"~
(~ *~fctm<r)
~
-;rt~, 30 RB~"l(, 2021
m.CfiJ.f.t916(31).- ~ mcfi"R, ~ ~"frcrr 31T~, 1951 (1951 CfiT61) cfi't'WU 3 c!iT
\3Lf'WU (1) WU ~ lI~ CfiT~ ~ gQ;,~ ~ cf;TB{'t'I{i -?r~lIT ~ ~ 1:f~, ~
Cf'l"frcrr(m)~, 2016 CfiTof\{~!(ITU'l~ ~~fu-c!:R<;;(Hrud ~~ t 31qfu.::--
1. (1) ~ ~ CfiTm~"i"fT11~ crrr"frcrr(m) ~!(ITU'lR<P1,2021 ~ I
(2) ir~ it~ >fCliT!(R·eft~ cp)~ ~ I
2. ~ Cf'l"frcrr(m)~, 2016 ~ f.n:n:i3 ~ \3qRZ{4O((1) it,f2.urur3 ~ 1:f~ of\{fqi)'t'{UI 1 -?r~
~, RltI Fc1rud f2.ururatcr:pnmfcI;<:rr~, 3lqfu.::--
~ 4-"frcrrCfiT~, m ~ it~ ~m"fd{ it~ ~fu-c!:fct:twfct;l:;~~,
~ CflSf~ fu-c!:~ "fMfufClCj{Un (an«t3lR) , ~ ~ ~ fu-c!:fClRlR!'!B+1Z{("1140(I ~ 'lflcr<,
3lqfu.:31 ~ (f9i", ~ ~ :
~ 00 CfiT~, ~ ~ Cf'l00 (m) ~!(rrU'l~, 2021 ~ ~ t?Rif ¥ fcR:ft
CflSfCfiTan«t3lR ~ <r@cfi'tt m irftcR:rit m ~~ "fd{ it ~ ~ fu-c!:fcr<m:~ ~
fu-c!:,~ fcI:;~ ~ ~ mcfi"R WU ~qcr fci:;<n\iIT~, ~ ~ ~ 'lflcr<\3ir~
~ i"I
['fiT.~. 11030/06/2021-~.~.~.-2(m)]
~cf.n:,\N~
7691 GI/2021 (1)
52

2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY [PART II-SEC. 3(i)]
f2:'c:tr0T:~~, ~ ~D'Jf1ft, ~'UR1JT, 'm'T II, <ig 3, ~ (i)it,m~ ti'wrrm.CfiT.f.=r.924(31),
~ 28 ffr&cR,2016 8U ~ fcnI;-.-rc;q ~ -dfi?i ~ tf£!n-urr~ ti'wrrm.CfiT.R.
573(31), ~ 12 ¥, 2017 8U fcF;.n1f<:fT~ I
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
(Department of Personnel and Training)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 30th December, 2021
G.S.R. 916(E).-In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 3 of the All
India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951), the Central Govemment, after consultation with the Govemments
of States concerned, hereby makes' the following rules further to amend the Indian Forest Service (Pay)
Rules, 2016, namely:-
1. (1) These rules may be called the Indian Forest Service (Pay), Amendment, Rules, 2021.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. In the Indian Forest Service (Pay) Rules, 2016, in rule 3, in sub-rule (1), after Note 3 and before the
Explanation 1, the following Note shall be inserted, namely:-
"Note 4.- A member of the service shall file Immovable Property Retum (IPR) for the
previous year within the time frame specified for the purpose, i.e. 31st January, for being
considered for appointment in the next level of pay in the pay matrix:
Provided that a member of service, who has not filed the IPR for any of the year prior to
coming into force of the Indian Forest Service (Pay), Amendment, Rules, 2021, shall file the same
within such period, as may be laid down by the Central Government in this behalf, for being
considered for appointment in the next level ofpay in the pay matrix.".
[F. No. 11030/06/2021-AI8-II (C)]
MANMEET KAUR, Dy. Secy.
Note: The principal rules were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3; Sub­
Section (i) vide number G.S.R. 924 (E), dated the zs"September, 2016 and last amended vide
notification number G.S.R. 573 (E), dated the iz"June, 2017.
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government ofIndia Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-I 10064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-I 10054, ~E~~O:KU''''''R§E.~=
53

Annexure - III
Year No. of No. of No. of No. of Total Balance
cases cases Advice cases 1/4)+(5) left at the
brought received Letters returned end of
forward at during sent during the the year
the the year during year due to
commence the year procedural
ment of the deficiencies
year
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
2015-16 149 546 492 91 583 112
2016-17 112 487 431 49 480 119
2017-18 119 582 372 66 438 263
2018-19 263 595 493 63 556 302
2019-20 302 578 447 47 494 386
2020-21 386 502 433 54 481' 401
2021-22 401 515 535 58 593~ 323
# Year impacted by covid-19 pandemic's first wave.
$ Year impacted by covid-19 pandemic's second and third waves.
54

~ \''"1 I '\ .
Details of Board Level ExecutivesIn 110CPSEs
SI. Schedule No. of Functional Ratio
No CPSEs Male Female Total (Male:
Female)
(Approx.)
1 A 64 209 20 229 10:1
2 B 46 113 7 120 16:1
Total A+B 110 322 27 349 12:1-----
Details of Below Board Level posts (General Manager and above) in 110CPSEs
,
51. Schedule No. of Male Female Total Ratio
No CP5Es (Male:
... Female)
-- (Approx.)
1 A 64 9583 767 10350 12:1
2 B 46 1030 41 1071 25:1
Total A+B 110 10613 808 11421 13:1
Annexure - I\L
55

'5Annexure-_ ~=::..:..-
No. of cases pending (as on year end) for disposal during last three years is shown in the graph
below:
---- ---- -- --
No. ofPending Cases
45000
40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
o As011 31-03-2022
38116
35178
As011 31-03·2020 As011 31-03-2021
56

_'.! ',
..
~b'bAnnexure'" \j 1
--Average Monthly rate of Disposal of Second Appeal/Complaint per IC and Average
MonthlyDisposal of SecondAppeal/Complaint duringlast 3 yearsis asbelow:
{soNo.
No.ofappeal!complaintcases
Particular disposed
IAverageMonthlyrateofDisposalofSecondAppeal! 206
K=omplaintperIe for2019-20 .
1 [AverageMonthlyDisposalofSecondAppeal!Complamtfor 1393
b019-20
!AverageMonthlyrateofDisposalofSecondAppeal! 198
~omplaintperICfor2020-21 .
2 IAverageMonthlyDisposalofSecondAppeal!Complamtfor 1418
~020-21
[AverageMonthlyrateofDisposalofSecondAppeal! 301
K=omplaintperICfor2021-22. .
3 IAverageMonthlyDisposalofSecondAppeal!Complamtfor 2408
12021-22
57