PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 12
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWELFTH REPORT
ON
THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 AUGUST, 2005)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 AUGUST, 2005)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 AUGUST, 2005)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 AUGUST, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005/BHADRA, 1927 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2005/BHADRA, 1927 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

45
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
TWELFTH REPORT
ON
THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH AUGUST, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH AUGUST, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005/BHADRA, 1927 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—13
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 15—27
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS—AT A G LANCE ..................................................................................... 28
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 29 —44
A. The Contempt and Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004 .............................................. 31—34
B. List of witnesses who appeared before the Committee ........................................ 35—36
C. Comments of the Department of Justice on points/objections raised
by individuals/organizations in their Memorandum submitted to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice over the introduction of the
‘Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004’. ................................................................ 37—44

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2005-06)
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Raashid Alvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Dr. P. C. Alexander
9. Vacant
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
12. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
13. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar
14. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
15. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
16. Shri Shailendra Kumar
17. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
18. Shri A.K. Moorthy
19. Shri Ram Chandra Paswan
20. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
21. Shri Brajesh Pathak
22. Shri Shriniwas Patil
23. Shri Harin Pathak
24. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
25. Shrimati M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
26. Shri Vishvendra Singh
27. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having
been authorised by the Committee, present its Twelfth Report relating to the Contempt of Courts
(Amendment) Bill, 2004*. The Bill seeks to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees,
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha referred** the Bill, as
introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 18th December, 2004 and pending therein, to the Committee
on the 14th December, 2004, for examination and report.
3. The Committee decided to issue Press Communique to solicit view/suggestions from
interested individuals/organisations/institutions on various provisions of the Bill.
4. In response to the Press Communique 23 memoranda containing the suggestions were
received by the Committee.
5. The Committee considered the Bill and heard the presentation by the Secretary, Department
of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice on the 22nd June, 2005.
6. The Committee heard oral evidence of 5 (list at Annexure ‘B’) eminent legal luminaries to
have better appreciation of the subject.
7. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it:—
(i) Background note on the Bill;
(ii) The Contempt of Courts Act, 1971;
(iii) The Report of the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution;
(iv) Legislative Department’s comments on the views/suggestions contained in the written
memoranda received from various organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on the
provisions of the Billl; and
(v) Comments of the Department of Justice on the views/suggestions tendered before the
Committee.
8. The Committee held 5 meetings to dispose of the Bill.
9. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on 23rd August, 2005.
10. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 23, 2005 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
* Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part-II, Section 2, dated the 1st December, 2004.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, (No. 41840) dated the 14th December, 2004.

1
REPORT
CONTEMPT OF COURT — DEFINITION:
WHAT IS CONTEMPT?
Contempt may be defined as any act which derogates thc dignity and authority of courts.
Oswald, in his celebrated treatise— “Contempt of Court” says that ‘Contempt of Court is so
manifold in its aspects that it is difficult to lay down any exact definition of the offence’. The
word has been defined in the Chamber’s Twentieth Century Dictionary as scorn, disgrace (law),
disregard of the rule, or an offence against the dignity of a court (with, of, for). Thus, any act
which significantly derogates the dignity and authority of the court or which tends to impede or
frustrate the administration of Justice, may be Contempt of Court.
1DEVELOPMENT OF THE LAW OF CONTEMPT IN INDIA
1926 ACT: —
2.1 The law relating to Contempt of Court has developed over the centuries as a means
whereby the courts may act to prevent or punish a conduct which tends to obstruct, prejudice or
abuse the administration of Justice, either in relation to a particular case or generally.
2.2 The rules embodied in the law of contempt of court are intended to uphold and ensure the
effective administration of justice. As Lord Simon said in A-G Vs. Times Newspapers Ltd., they
are the means by which the law vindicates the public interest in due administration of justice. The
law does not exist, as the phrase ‘contempt of court’ might misleadingly suggest, to protect the
personal dignity of the judiciary, nor does it exist to protect private rights of the parties or the
litigants. Lord President Clyde commented in Johnson Vs. Grant:
“The phrase ‘contempt of court’ does not in the least describe the true nature of the
class of offence with which we are here concerned. The offence consists in interfering with
the administration of the law; in impeding and perverting the course of  justice. It is not
the dignity of the Court which is offended – a petty and misleading view of the issues
involved – it is the fundamental supremacy of the law which is challenged.”
3. The present day conception of contempt of court is derived from the English Law. In India,
the codified law on this subject was first enacted in 1926 as Act No. 12 of 1926. Though the Act
could be regarded as a step in the right direction, yet it suffered from certain limitations. The Act
imposed specific limits as to the punishment which could be awarded in contempt cases. The
intention, no doubt, was to make these limits applicable, irrespective of whether the contempt was
that of a High Court itself or of a Court-subordinate to it. The Act, however, did not contain any
provision with regard to contempt of courts, subordinate to courts other than High Courts, that
is, the Courts subordinate to Chief Courts and Judicial Commissioners’ Courts. It was equally silent
with regard to powers of contempt of court of Judicial Commissioners. The Act also did not deal
with the extra-territorial jurisdiction of High Courts in matters of contempt.
4. In recent years, the Law of Contempt has been liberalized in both U.K. and the U.S.A. In
U.K. the statute has been amended on the recommendation of the Phillimore Committee to provide
for truth as a defence to a charge of contempt by scandalizing. In the U.S.A., the courts have
evolved a more liberal standard of ‘clear and present danger’ to the administration of justice.
1Contempt of Court: Justice J.D. Kapoor, Universal Law Publishing Company Pvt. Ltd. Ed. 2004.

2
Recently, the New York Times characterized the judgement of the U.S. Supreme Court on the
recounting of Florida votes in the recent Presidential elections as ‘corrupt’ and one which ‘stole
the election’. But no action was initiated for contempt because there was no clear and present
danger to the administration of Justice.
ACT NO. 32 OF 1952 :—
5. After achievement of independence, the Contempt of Courts Act of 1952 was enacted in
India. The Act repealed and replaced the 1926 Act. The Act of 1952 made two important changes,
by defining the expression ‘High Court’ to include Courts of Judicial Commissioners, making it
clear that those courts had power to punish contempt of Subordinate Courts also. Secondly, the
Act made it clear that the High Courts (including the Court of Judicial Commissioners) would have
jurisdiction to inquire into and try a contempt of itself or of any court Subordinate to it,
irrespective of whether the contempt is alleged to have been committed within or outside the local
limits of its jurisdiction, and irrespective of whether the person alleged to be guilty of the contempt
is within or outside such limits. But this Act also did not give any definite or clear definition of
the term ‘contempt’. This omission on the part of the legislative body was deliberate and the reason
behind it was to maintain the elastic character of the law, to enable it to cover a wide field for
its application by the courts.
5.1 It has been well said that the law of contempt is of ancient origin, yet of fundamental
contemporary importance. Traditionally, contempts are classified as being either criminal or civil.
They all share the common characteristic of constituting interference with the due administration
of justice, either in a particular case, or more generally as a continuing process.
5.2 One aspect of contempt deserves special mention, which ultimately restricts the
constitutional freedom of free speech. The preservation of free speech is also of the highest
importance in a democracy. The needs of fair administration of justice have to be reconciled with
the citizens freedom of speech and expression.
5.3 The pre-independence law of contempt was derived from the English Law which, however,
was coloured by the ancient institution of Monarchy and the courts being the Royal Courts of
Justice. After the advent of the Constitution, the prevalent law of contempt was increasingly
perceived as an anachronism.
5.4 The reflection of the new liberty of the citizens found its reflection in a Constitution Bench
judgment in B. R. Reddy Vs. State of Madras reported in AIR 1952 SC 149. The public
dissatisfaction with the rule that truth is not a defence to a charge of contempt attracted the
attention of the Judges. Of course, the facts of the case were rather gross. The accused was the
Publisher and the Managing Editor of a newspaper. In an Article he had attacked the integrity of
a City Magistrate, who was described as a bribe taker and being in the habit of harassing litigants
in various ways. He was said to have a broker through whom he negotiated the bribes. Even some
specific instances were cited. However, when charged with contempt, he made no attempt, either
to establish the truth of what he had stated or even to show that he had made the statement after
due care and caution. He admitted that he had acted on pure hearsay.
5.5 Mr. Justice Mukherjee had this to say—“If the allegations were true, obviously it would be
to the benefit of the public to bring these matters into light. But if they were false, they cannot
but undermine the confidence of the public in the administration of justice and bring judiciary
into disrepute. The appellant, though he took sole responsibility regarding publication of the article,
was not in a position to substantiate, by evidence, any of the allegations made therein. He admitted
that the statement was based on hearsay. Rumours may have reached him from various sources,
but before he published the article, it was incumbent upon him, as a reasonable man, to attempt

3
to verify the informations he received and ascertain, as far as he could, whether the facts
were true or mere concocted lies. He does not appear to have made any endeavour in this
direction. As the appellant did not act with reasonable care and caution, he cannot be said to have
acted bona fide, even if good faith can be held to be a defence at all in a proceeding for
contempt”.
5.6 It is obvious that the Constitution Bench did assume that truth was a complete defence,
though mere belief in truth was not expressly accepted as a defence. The Court did not decide
this because the facts disclosed absence of good faith.
5.7 It is true that later decisions have stuck to the traditional pre-constitution view. Eminent
text book writers like Mr. Seervai have criticised these later judgments as erroneous and per-
incuriam.
5.8 It must be borne in mind, however, that a powerful judgment of the High Court of Australia
had ruled decades ago that truth and bona fide belief in truth are doubtless valid defences to a
charge of contempt. This view of the law taken by the highest courts in Australia has worked well
and no damage has been caused to the administration of justice in that country. (R. Vs. Nicholls-
12 C.L.R. page 280).
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CONTEMPT
6. The following are the provisions of the Constitution having bearing on Contempt of
Court:—
(i) Article 19(1)(a) and 19(2);
(ii) Article 129 and entry 77 of List-I of the Seventh Schedule; and
(iii) Article 215 and entry 14 of List-III of the Seventh Schedule.
6.1 Article 19(1)(a) guarantees to all citizens the right to freedom of speech and expression.
Article 19(2) provides, inter-alia, that the right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) is subject to any law
imposing reasonable restrictions in relation to contempt of court. Article 129 and entry 77 of
list I of the Seventh Schedule pertain to Contempt of the Supreme Court. Article 129 reads as
under:—
“The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such
court, including the power to punish for contempt of itself”.
6.2 Similarly, Article 215 provides that every High Court shall be a court of record and
shall have all the powers of such a court, including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
Entry 14 of List-III of thc Seventh Schedule covers contempt of courts, other than the Supreme
Court.
Courts of Record
6.3 It may not be out of context to mention that during the Constituent Assembly Debates, in
relation to the present Article 129, Dr. Ambedkar explained that the words ‘Court of record’ were
used to define thc status of the court and as to the additional words he observed thus:
“As a matter of fact, once you make a court of record by statute, the power to punish
for contempt necessarily follows from that position. But, it was felt that in England, this
power is largely derived from the Common Law, and as we have no such thing as Common
Law in this country, we felt it better to state the whole position in the statute itself”
(Constituent Assembly Debates Volume VIII, PP . 378-383(302).

4
2REPORT OF THE SANYAL COMMITTEE
7. After the Constitution came into being, Articles 129 and 215 expressly declared the Supreme
Court and High Courts to be Courts of Record, possessing all the powers of such courts, including
the power to punish for contempt of themselves, at the same time enumerating, without any
qualifications, Contempt of the Supreme Court in entry 77 of List–I and Contempt of Courts other
then the Supreme Court, in entry 14 of List III of the Seventh Schedule. It was felt to have the
entire law on the subject observing that the law relating to Contempt of Courts till then was
uncertain, undefined and unsatisfactory and that in the light of the constitutional changes, many
changes had taken place in the country. Government, accordingly, set-up a committee in 1961,
headed by Shri H.N. Sanyal, Additional Solicitor-General of India.
7.1 The Committee was required:—
(i) to examine the law relating to contempt of courts generally, and in particular the law
relating to the procedure for punishment thereof;
(ii) to suggest amendments therein with a view to clarifying and reforming the law
wherever necessary; and
(iii) to make recommendations for codification of the law in the light of the examination
made.
7.2 Sanyal Committee went into almost every aspect and examined various judgements of the
High Courts and the Supreme Court and also of Foreign Courts, on the subject. The
recommendations which the Committee made, took due note of the importance given to freedom
of speech in the Constitution and of the need for safeguarding the status and dignity of courts and
the interests of administration of justice. The recommendations of that Committee were generally
accepted by Government, after considering the views expressed on those recommendations by the
State Governments, Union Territory Administrations, the Supreme Court, the High Courts and the
Judicial Commissioners. Based on those recommendations, Government brought the Contempt of
Courts Bill to replace and repeal the Act of 1952. The Objects and Reasons of the Bill read as
under:—
“It is generally felt that the existing law relating to Contempt of Courts is somewhat
uncertain, undefined and unsatisfactory. The jurisdiction to punish for contempt touches
upon two important fundamental rights of the citizens, namely, the right to personal liberty
and the right to freedom of expression. It was, therefore, considered advisable to have the
entire law on the subject scrutinized by a special committee. The Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971 (70 of 1971) is the product of the Report of that Committee.”
8. The Act of 1971 effected significant changes in procedure as well as in application of the
enactment. ‘Contempt of Court’ has been segregated into ‘Civil’ and ‘Criminal’ contempt with their
respective definitions, which the old Act did not contain. Though the old Act could not be held
ineffective in the absence of the definition of the term ‘Contempt’, this Act modified the definition
of ‘Contempt’ to a considerable extent.
8.1 Instances of publishing and distributing any matter, interfering or tending to interfere with
or obstructing or tending to obstruct the course of justice during pendency of the proceedings, if
there are reasonable grounds for believing that the proceedings were pending; fair and accurate
reporting of a judicial proceedings; fair criticism on merits of any case which has been heard and
finally decided, complaint or statement made in good faith against the presiding officer; fair and
2Extracts from Contempt of Court, Justice J.D. Kapoor. Pages 486, 487.

5
accurate report of judicial proceedings held in chambers or in camera, have been excluded from
the definition.
NEED FOR PLEADING TRUTH AS DEFENCE
A. Some Judicial Decisions
9. Defence of truthfulness or factual correctness has not been recognized in the law of
contempt. There are hardly any English or Indian cases in which such defence has been admitted
by the Judiciary. In Perspective Publication (P) Ltd. Vs. State of Maharashtra, (1971 Cr LJ 268
SC : Air 1971 SC 221), it was held that the words, ‘even if good faith can be held to be a
defence at all in a proceeding for contempt’ show that the Supreme Court did not lay down
affirmatively that good faith can be set up as a defence in contempt proceedings. H.M. Seervai,
celebrated authority on the Constitution of India, has opined that as justification is a complete
defence to an action for libel, it should be complete defence to a petition for ‘Contempt of Court’.
But it has not received unanimous judicial support in India, England, U.S.A. Canada and Australia.
9.1 In AIR 1935 All 38 Tushar Kanti Ghosh, Editor (wire), AIR 1935 CAL 419 (FB), an attempt
was made by the contemner to call evidence to prove his allegations, but the court refused to call
the witnesses and held:
“......... there can be no justification of Contempt of Court. Even assuming that the
writer of a manifesto believes all he states therein to be true, if anything in the manifesto
amounts to contempt of court, the writer is not permitted to lead evidence to establish the
truth of his allegations” .
9.2. In Advocate General Vs. Seshagiri Rao, (AIR 1966 AP 167 : 1966 Cri LJ 647) it was held
that:—
“It is not permissible to a contemner to establish the truth of his allegations as the
arraignment of the justice of the judges excites in the minds of the people a general
dissatifaction with all judicial determinations and indisposes their mind to obey them and
that is very dangerous obstruction to the course of justice. In our view, the contemner does
not occupy the position of a defendant in a libel action who could plead justification.
9.3 Similarly, in Kadir M.G. Vs. K.N. Jaitley, (AIR 1945 ALL 67 P. 68) the court held:—
“every attempt to justify must constitute a view offence of contempt committed in the
very face of the court,”
9.4 In another case, namely State Vs. Editors of Eastern Times and Projatantra, (AIR 1952
Orissa 318 P. 34) the court held:—
“The place of justification which is a good defence in an ordinary action for libel,
cannot be applicable in an action for contempt.”
9.5 An identical view was taken by the court in Md. Vamin Vs. O.P. Bensal, 1982 Cr LJ 322
(Raj) when it held:—
“A defence of truth or justification is not available to the publisher of a newspaper
in proceedings for the Contempt of Court.”
B. View of the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution on
Contempt of Court – for introduction of truth as defence.
10. Keeping in view the judicial decisions not allowing truth as defence to a charge of contempt
of court under the existing provisions of the 1971 Act, the National Commission to Review the

6
Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) recommended introduction of ‘truth’ as defence in matters
of Contempt of Court, by way of amendment to the Constitution of India. The Commission
considered that a mere legislation by the Parliament by amending the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
alone may not suffice, because the power of the Supreme Court and the High Courts to punish
for contempt is recognised in the Constitution.
10.1 The Commission submitted its Report to Government in 2002, making the following
recommendations with regard to Law of Contempt:
A proviso be added to Article 19(2) of the Constitution as under:—
“Provided that, in matters of contempt, it shall be open to the court to permit a defence
of justification by truth on satisfaction as to the bona fides of the plea and it being in public
interest.”
10.2 The Commission, while giving justification on the above recommendation, observed as
follows:
“Judicial decisions have been interpreted to mean that the law as it now stands, even
truth cannot be pleaded as a defence to a charge of contempt of court. This is not a
satisfactory state of law. Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution guarantees to all citizens the
right to freedom of speech and expression. Article 19(2) of the Constitution saves
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of freedom. Therefore, Article 19(2) of the
Constitution will not save any law in relation to contempt of court,  if it impinges upon the
right to freedom of speech and expression, unless the restrictions are reasonable and are in
public interest. If the restrictions that operate upon such rights are unreasonable, they will
stand annulled by the operation of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. A total embargo
on truth as justification may be termed as unreasonable restriction. It would, indeed be
ironical if, in spite of the emblems hanging  prominently in the court halls, manifesting the
motto of ‘Satyameva Jayate’, in the High Courts and ‘Yatho dharma statho jaya’ in the
Supreme Court, the courts could rule out the defence of justification by truth. The
Commission is of the view that the law in this area requires an appropriate change.”
C. View of the Secretary, Department of Justice
11. The Secretary, Department of Justice, while deposing before the Committee, stated that the
existing provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 had been incorporated in various judicial
decisions to the effect that truth could not be pleaded as a defence to a charge of contempt of
court. Therefore, the existing provisions contained in the said Act were found to be not entirely
satisfactory. Section 13 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 already provided certain
circumstances under which contempt was not punishable. It was, therefore, proposed to substitute
the said section by this limited amendment. He also apprised the Committee of the report submitted
by the National Commission to Review Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) to Government,
recommending that it shall be open to the Court to permit a defence of justification by truth upon
satisfaction as to the bona fides of the plea and it being in public interest. Further, the Commission
had said that a mere legislation by Parliament by amending the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 might
not suffice because the power of the Supreme Court, and the High Courts to punish their contempt
was recognized in the Constitution. On this question, the then Attorney General of India had opined
that an amendment to thc Constitution would be lengthy and a time-consuming process. If thc Act
was suitably amended to provide the defence of truth in a contempt action, the same would
introduce fairness in procedure and meet the requirement of Article 21. It was unlikely that the
Supreme Court and the High Courts would act in disregard of a statutory provision which might,
in essence, subserve the requirement of fairness and reasonableness. Thus, he had stated that there

7
was no need to embark upon the exercise of amending the Constitution. The Contempt of Courts
Act could be appropriately amended and a provision might be made to provide that in matters of
contempt, justification by truth shall be permitted by courts.
11.1 Reacting to the apprehensions of some Members of the Committee whether the proposed
amendment in the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 would be recognized by the Judiciary, the
Secretary replied that Attorney-General had gone into the long history of the Indian Judiciary and
his entire premise was built on the fact that the higher judiciary—the Supreme Court and the High
Courts, are known for their fairness and reasonableness. Secondly, two major safeguards, one that
the ‘truth’ has to be said in public interest and two it has to be bona fide truth, will prevent a
person from saying anything recklessly and misleading the courts and will definitely hold a
contemner liable for contempt of  court.
D. The Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004
12. Having regard to the above considerations, Government introduced the Contempt of Courts
(Amendment) Bill, 2004 in Lok Sabha. On 1st December, 2004. Statement of Objects and Reasons
appended to the Bill States as under:—
“The existing provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 have been interpreted
in various judicial decisions to the effect that truth cannot be pleaded as a defence to a
charge of contempt of court.
The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution has also, in its
report, inter alia, recommended that in matters of contempt, it shall be open to the Court
to permit a defence of justification by truth.
Government has been advised that amendments to the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971,
to provide for the above provision, would introduce fairness in procedure and meet the
requirements of Article 21 of the Constitution.
Section 13 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 provides certain circumstances under
which contempt is not punishable. It is, therefore, proposed to substitute the said section,
by an amendment.
The Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
the 8th May, 2003 and the same was referred to the Department Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs for examination and report. The Committee considered
the said Bill in its meeting held on the 2nd September, 2003. However, with the dissolution
of the 13th Lok Sabha, the Bill lapsed. This Bill has been re-introduced with modifications
of a drafting nature.”
VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS OF EXPERTS ON THE BILL
13. The Committee received several memoranda containing suggestions on various provisions of
the Bill. To be enlightened further on the issues involved, the Committee heard the views of the
Chairman, Executive Committee, Bar Council of India, the Chairman, Press Council of India,
Justice (Retd) Shri R.K. Mahajan, Shri Shanti Bhushan and Shri Prasant Bhushan, Advocates in the
Supreme Court of India.
13.1 The suggestions put forward on the Bill and the views expressed by the witnesses during
the course of their deposition are summarised below:
(i) accused should be given reasonable opportunity to defend himself according to law,
to respect the bona fides of the plea in course of natural justice;

8
(ii) a proviso should be inserted to section 13 of the Principal Act to the effect that for
any critical, analytical, objective and fair comment on the court proceedings made by
the media, based on the reasonably believable sources, the media persons shall not
attract contempt proceedings;
(iii) there should be inserted a proviso to section 13 of the Principal Act, namely:—
‘that any comments made by any person and published, regarding the conduct of a
presiding judge of a court, which does not interfere with the official functioning of
the Court and which is a true fact, found on reasonable ascertainment, shall not
attract contempt proceedings.’
(iv) cases of contempt should not be tried by courts but by an independent commission
of concerned district;
(v) the words ‘bona fide’ and ‘in public interest’ should be deleted from the proposed
amendment to section 13 of the Principal Act;
(vi) Contempt of Courts Act should be amended to remove words, ‘scandalizing the court
or lowering the authority of the court’ from the definition of criminal contempt and
further make it clear that unless it is established that the publication, even though
incorrect, is not in good faith and is malafide, will not constitute contempt of court;
(vii) it is desirable to include a provision that a contempt should be heard by a different
Judge;
(viii) there should be a code of conduct and policing system for judges, so as to ensure
that the safeguards of contempt of court may be exercised, keeping in view the
judiciary as an institution and not for judges as persons;
(ix) there is no need for the proposed amendment as it aims at protecting the Ministers
and other officials of Government from their disobedience;
(x) the law of contempt should be subjected to the rights and freedom guaranteed to the
citizens under the Constitution of India;
(xi) the suggestion of the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution
for insertion of a proviso to Article 19(2) of the Constitution be given effect to;
(xii) the words ‘the court may permit’ occurring in the proposed sub-clause (b) of section
13 of the Principal Act should be deleted; and
(xiii) no proceedings should be initiated for contempt of court against members and office
bearers of the Bar Councils and the Bar Associations of respective Courts, unless the
committee of a minimum of 75 members, comprising two Judges sitting or retired,
two office bearers of the Bar and one public representative, prima facie, comes to the
conclusion that a contempt is made out.
13.2 The views/suggestions received from experts were forwarded to the Ministry of Law and
Justice for comments. The views/suggestions in brief and the comments of the Ministry are given
in the Annexure ‘C’.
13.3 After taking into consideration the views expressed by the witnesses and suggestions
received on the proposed amendment to the Principal Act, the Committee finds it necessary to
address the following issues arising out of the proposed amendment, which have been dealt with
in the succeeding paras:—

9
(a) whether an amendment to the Constitution will be necessary to give effect to the
element of truth as defence in contempt proceedings or a statutory provision, as
proposed, will fulfil the requirement; and
(b) if truth is allowed to be pleaded in defence in contempt proceedings through the
proposed legislation, will it be likely to be struck down or ignored by the higher
judiciary?
14. As regards the necessity for amendment of the Constitution, the Committee notes that the
Attorney-General of India, when being consulted by Government on the question whether
amendment of the Constitution would be necessary to give effect to the proposed amendment,
introducing an element of truth as defence in contempt proceedings, opined as under:—
“The reason why the NCRWC recommended amendment of the Constitution was
because of the inherent powers of contempt vested with the Supreme Court and the High
Courts under Articles 129 and 215 of the Constitution which are independent of the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 [hereinafter referred to as the Act]. The Supreme Court has
taken the view in Pritamlal Vs. HC of Madhya Pradesh, [(1993) 1 Suppl. SCC 529] that
its power of contempt cannot be restricted and trammeled by any ordinary legislation,
including the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act. [see also (1981) 1 SCC 723]. The
High Courts and the Supreme Court have exercised contempt powers despite the limitation
of one year prescribed by the Contempt of Courts Act.
Amendment of the Constitution will be a lengthy and time-consuming process. If the
Act is suitably amended to provide the defence of truth in a contempt action, the same
would introduce fairness in procedure and meet the requirement of Article 21. It is unlikely
that the Supreme Court and the High Courts will act in disregard of a statutory provision
which, in essence, sub-serves the requirement of fairness and reasonableness.
After considering all the aspect, I am of the view that there is no need to embark upon
the exercise of amending the Constitution. The Contempt of Courts Act may be
appropriately amended and a provision may be enacted to provide that in matters of
contempt, it shall be open to the Court to permit a defence of justification by truth on
satisfaction as to the bona fides of the plea and it being in public interest.”
14.1 The Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice), in its background note submitted
to the Committee, informed that the Department was also in agreement with the above view that
even though desirable, an amendment to the Constitution of India would be a lengthy and
complicated process. The proposed defence of ‘truth’ in matters of contempt can be provided in
the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
14.2 The Committee observes that the National Commission to Review the Working of the
Constitution had emphatically recommended for amendment to the Constitution for introduction of
justification by truth in defence in contempt proceedings. The Commission took this view,
considering the inherent powers derived by the Supreme Court and High Courts from Articles 129
and 215, respectively, of the Constitution. These Articles empower the Supreme Court and High
Courts to initiate proceedings for contempt of themselves. However, the then Attorney-General of
India, on being consulted by Government on this issue, rendered his advice in favour of amending
the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, instead of amending the Constitution for this purpose. As
clarified by the Secretary, Department of Justice during the coursc of his deposition before the
Committee, the opinion of the Attorney-General was based on the fact that the Supreme Court and
High Courts maintain the well established precedent of fairness and reasonableness and also that
the defence of truth being introduced through the proposed legislation provides two safeguards for
the courts, namely, the truth has to be bona fide and it has to be in the public interest. These

10
two key elements would prevent a person from saying anything recklessly against the judiciary or
from misleading the courts. Thus, the higher judiciary would not come in the way of the proposed
amendment.
14.3 The Committee at this stage wishes to confine its examination to the questions raised in
Para 13 (3) (Supra) and does not find it necessary here to comment on insertion of the terms
‘bona fide’  and ‘public interest’, as the Committee has dealt these issues in succeeding Paras. The
Committee notes that a majority view has emerged in favour of the proposed amendment.
14.4 The Committee is of the view that the defence of truth being introduced by the
proposed legislation is a right step, taken in the right direction, considering the sentiments
and interest of the larger section of society. Nevertheless, apprehensions expressed by
Members in the light of Supreme Court’s decision in Pritam Lal’s case can also not be
overlooked, and thus amendment of the Constitution appears to be desirable in future.
However, any decision in this regard may be taken by Government, seeing the experience
of enforcement of the proposed legislation. The Committee hopes that the higher judiciary
will give due regard to this statutory provision by maintaining the principles of fairness and
reasonableness, they are known for.
14.5 Another issue, apart from those discussed above, relates to the question as to who will sit
to decide Contempt of Court? Will the same judge against whom allegations have been made sit
in his own cause? This question has been addressed in the light of the views expressed by some
Members as well as the witnesses, that the whole exercise of introducing the defence of truth
would be futile and meaningless if contempt is not heard by a different judge. The Committee
observes that the courts are guided by their procedures which they follow in the facts and
circumstances of each individual case, and it is the belief of the Committee that contemner
would be getting full opportunity to make his defence and the principle of natural justice
would not be violated in following such procedure.
15. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 28th July, 2005, took up clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill.
CLAUSE-2
16. Clause–2 seeks to substitute the existing provisions of section 13 of the Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act). Section 13 of the Principal Act reads as
under:—
“13 Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force :—
(a) No Court shall impose a sentence under this Act for a Contempt of Court unless
it is satisfied that contempt is of such a nature that it substantially interferes, or
tends substantially to interfere with the due course of Justice;
(b) The Court may permit, in any proceedings for contempt of court, justification by
truth as a valid defence if it is satisfied that it is in public interest and the
request for invoking the said defence is bona fide” .
16.1 The Committee considered the proposed amendment in the light of the suggestions received
and the views expressed by the witnesses. The Committee notes that there has been consensus for
deletion of the words ‘public interest’ from clause (b) of Section 13. It has been argued that if
these words are allowed to be part of the statute, there would be an additional burden on the
contemner to prove or establish that the statement which he believes to be true is in public interest
also. This will render the whole proposed legislative scheme redundant and defence given to an
accused will be taken away.

11
16.2 The Department of Justice, when asked to comment on the suggestion for deletion of the
words ‘public interest’, explained the following position:—
“Granting ‘truth’ as an absolute defence may lead to additional problems in certain
circumstances. Judiciary may, then, be unduly criticized by different quarters claiming truth
as defence. This will put undue pressure on the Judges and their verdict could be ridiculed
upon in public and, thus it would cause undue interference in the administration of Justice.”
16.3 On another occasion, the Department of  Legal Affairs, submitted the following reply on the
above issue:
“Under the first exception to Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), it is not
defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it is for the public
good. In other words, the right to disclose truth against anyone can be allowed only for
the public good. Under the proposed Bill, the expression public interest has been used
instead of public good. We do not find much difference between the import of both these
words. The only difference between these provisions seems to be that under section 499 of
IPC, one can take truth as a defence without any permission of the court. Under proposed
clause 2 of the Bill, prior permission of the court for invoking truth as a valid defence
will be required. This, however, aims at drawing a proper balance between the  requirement
to maintain the unhampered functioning of the judiciary and the publication of truth for
the public cause. However, it is a matter of policy.”
17. The Committee does not find the contention of Government convincing. It is of the
view that if the term ‘in public interest’ is retained in the proposed amendment, there
would be an extreme restraint imposed on the contemner and unless he establishes truth
in the public interest, court will not allow him to proceed further. Thus, the restriction or
limitation imposed on the defence of truth would virtually defeat the objective of the
proposed legislation. The  Committee, therefore, recommends deletion of the words ‘in public
interest’ from clause (b) of the proposed amendment to section 13.
18. The Committee observes that Sections 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the Principal Act provide
for matters which do not hold a person guilty of contempt of court. In a sense, these
provisions are all exemptions against contempt. Section 8 deals with defence and Section 12
provides punishment for contempt of court. Section 13 provides that contempts will not be
punishable in certain cases. ‘Interpretation of this Section’ implies that unless contempt is
of such a nature that it substantially interferes or tends substantially to interfere with the
due course of justice, a person cannot be held guilty of contempt. The proposed amendment
is based on the two elements, one imposing sentence or lessening of punishment which pre-
supposes that contempt has been committed and secondly the defence of truth on
satisfaction of its being bona fide and in public interest, burdens the contemner to establish
or prove that whatever he states is believed to be true and the truth is bona fide and is
in public interest. This does not seem to be within the spirit of the Bill. However, if the
proposed defence of truth is reflected or inserted suitably as one of the exemptions or
defences under section 8, it would give the contemner an additional help, because he may
plead the defence of truth and may not be held punishable.
18.1 Subject to above, the clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 1, ENACTING FORMULA AND TITLE
19. Clause 1, the enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which were
of consequential or drafting nature, namely, the figure ‘2004’ and the words and ‘fifty-fifth’ to be
substituted by the figure ‘2005’ and the words ‘fifty-sixth’, respectively.

12
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS
20. During the course of deliberations on the Bill, a Member of  the Committee (Shri Ram
Jethmalani) made detailed observations on thc subject which are reproduced below:—
“The present Bill before the Committee is an attempt to bring the law in conformity
with constitutional liberty and the public interest in disclosure of truth. It is not in public
interest to push matters under the rug and prevent the light of truth from  illuminating the
corridors of judicial power.
Eminent witnesses almost unanimously tried to persuade us to delete from the
definition of criminal contempt, class of contempt, described in Section 2(c)(i) of the 1971
Act in the following words:
‘Scandalises or tends to scandalise, or lowers or tends to lower the authority of any
court;’
The strength of this suggestion was not impressionable. It is felt that this change must
wait for sometime. However, the witnesses themselves suggested that if for some reason, the
Committee does not approve of this radical proposal, it should, as  a compromise, at the
very minimum recommend that Section 13 (2)  of the Bill should be reframed as hereunder
indicated:
A slight change may be made in both the sub-sections (1)  and (2) of section 13 of
the Act. The words ‘impose a sentence’ may be deleted and the words ‘adjudge a person
guilty’ may be substituted in their place. Courts often adjudge a person guilty but refrain
from imposing a sentence. Even that causes great damage to a person in reputation and
otherwise. Even a .finding of guilt should be prevented when no appreciable injury to
administration of justice is  caused by the conduct of the contemnor.
Section 13(1)  should, therefore, read as under:
‘Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no court
shall adjudge a person guilty under this Act for a contempt of court, unless it is satisfied
that the contempt is of such a nature that it substantially interferes, or tends substantially
to interfere with the due course of justice’ .
In 13  (2) will read as under:
‘No one shall be held guilty of contempt of court by making or publishing any
statement relating to a Judge or court which is true or which he, in good faith,
believes to be  true.
Explanation : Nothing will be believed in good faith unless it is believed with due
care and caution’ .
The question that has been raised before us is whether the changes which we  have
mentioned above require an amendment of the Constitution, since the Supreme Court derives
its power to  punish for contempt from Article 129 of the Constitution and the High Courts
derive their power from Article 215 of the Constitution? We are satisfied that no
constitutional amendment is necessary. What is necessary is that Parliament must make it
clear that the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 will apply to the Supreme
Court, as well as to the High Courts, in the exercise of their power under the two
Constitutional Articles mentioned above.
In Section (1) of the Act, sub-section (3) should be added, reading as under:—

13
‘The provisions of this Act shall apply to the Supreme Court of India and to the High
Courts in exercise of their respective powers and jurisdiction under Article 129 and Article
215 of the Constitution of India’ .
We have indicated that the whole law of contempt is the restriction of the
constitutional right of the citizens guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. Any
restriction imposed upon this right will be void unless sanctioned by Parliament in exercise
of its legislative power under Clause (2)  of Article 19.  If Parliament enacts that the
maximum punishment for contempt shall be three months’ imprisonment, it would be plainly
absurd that either the Supreme Court or the High Courts should sentence a person to life
imprisonment or even a day longer than three months. If the Act is not binding on these
two Courts, the whole Act will be a futile exercise of legislative power of Parliament,
because it is only these two courts which can punish for contempt. We have  no doubt that
the courts will feel bound  by the legislation, but if a different view is taken by the courts,
there will be time enough to amend the Constitution”.
21. The Committee is of the view that Government may appropriately address these
concerns.

MINUTES

17
XXXIX
THIRTY-NINTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd June, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Dr. P. C. Alexander
4. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar
7. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
13. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Secretary and Home Secretary
2. Shri Devdas Chhotray, Additional Secretary
3. Shrimati Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary
II. Representative of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary

18
III. * * *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Justice to the meeting
and requested him to make a presentation on the Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill 2004.
3. The Secretary, Department of Justice apprised the Committee that the power of courts to
punish for contempt of itself is part of sovereign power and was regulated under the Contempt
of Courts Act, 1971. This Act was enacted on the basis of the recommendations of the Committee
constituted in 1961 under the Chairmanship of late Shri H.N. Sanyal, the then Additional Solicitor
General of India.
4. The Secretary informed the Committee that the National Commission to Review the Working
of the Constitution (NCRWC) had recommended that Article 19 (2) of the Constitution be amended.
In the Report, it had inter-alia recommended that in matters of contempt, it should be open to the
Court to permit a defence of justification by truth on satisfaction as to the bona fide of the plea
and it being in public interest. Therefore, the Government felt that Section 13 of the Contempt of
Courts Act, 1971, which already provided certain circumstances under which contempt was not
punishable might be amended suitably in accordance with the recommendation of NCRWC.
5. Members raised some points which were clarified by the Secretary.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
6. * * *
7. The witnesses answered the queries raised by the Hon’ble Members.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
8. The Committee adjourned at 1.17 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matters.

19
XL
FORTIETH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 5th July, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Dr. P.C. Alexander
5. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
I. WITNESSES
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Bharadwaj, Chairman, Executive Committee, Bar Council of India
2. Shri S. Radhakrishnan, Secretary, Bar Council of India.
3. Justice A.K. Srivastava, Secretary General, Association of Retired Judges of Supreme
Court and High Courts of India;
4. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Retired Officer of Indian Administrative Service;
5. Shri Syed Shahabuddin, Former Member of Parliament.
II. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shrimati Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary
2. Dr. P. K. Seth, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Bar Council of India to the
meeting and requested to make a presentation on the Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2003.
3. The representatives apprised the Committee that Article 215 of the Constitution dealt with
the Contempt of Court and as a result thereof the Supreme Court and the High Courts had
sufficient powers to punish for contempt of the Courts then there appeared to be no justification
19

20
in further conferrring the Judiciary with the power through the present legislation by giving the
scope to interpret the words ‘bonafide’ and 'public interest'? They were of the view that these two
things should be deleted.
4. However, some Members were of the view that mere deletion of these two words would
not be a solution rather there should bc proper definition of the words proposed in the Legislation.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. Other witnesses also expressed their views on the various provisions of the Bill
(The witnesses then withdrew).
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

21
XLI
FORTY-FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M on Thursday, the 14th July, 2005 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
6. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
11. Shri A.K. Moorthy
12. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
I. WITNESSES
1. Justice G.N. Ray, Chairman, Press Council of India, New Delhi
2. Justice R.K. Mahajan, Retd. Judge, Allahabad High Court, Shimla
3. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
4. Shri Prashant Bhushan, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
5. Shri Hardev Singh, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
6. Shri Arvind P. Datar, Senior Advocate, Madras High Court and President, Revenue Bar
Association, Tamil Nadu
7. Shri Chittaranjan Satapathy, Member, Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Mumbai
21

22
8. Shri V .S. Jayakumar, Advocate, Chennai
9. Shri K.H. Kazi, President, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Bar Association, Mumbai
II. Representative of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary
III. Representative of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shrimati Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary
IV. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.P. Aggarwal, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
V. Representative of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. The Committee reviewed the progress of its examination of the Contempt of Courts
(Amendment) Bill, 2004 and the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions
of Service) Amendment Bill, 2005. It also decided to take up for consideration the Action Taken
Replies on the 85th Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs on “Laws’ Delays: Arrears in Courts”, in the context of action taken/being taken by the
Government in the field of “Judicial Reforms”, and discussed the issues concerning it. The
Members were of the view that it would be in the fitness of things if the Committee could interact
with the Chief Justice of India and Judges of the Supreme Court, in the light of the issues before
it, to the extent they impact upon the functioning of the higher judiciary. The Committee felt that
such interaction would help it for fuller and better appreciation of the constraints in the efficient
functioning of the country’s judicial system, especially the budgetary provisions for the Supreme
Court, and to suggest ways and means for improvement. The Committee, accordingly, proposed
to visit the Supreme Court Complex, sometime during the first week of August, 2005, for
interaction with the Chief Justice of India and Supreme Court Judges, on the issues directly
concerning the higher judiciary, which was a critical area in the study of “Judicial Reforms”. It
accordingly authorised its Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for grant of
permission to its proposed visit and interaction.
3. The Committee then took up for further consideration the Contempt of Courts (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 and heard the views of the witnesses including the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions. Members raised some queries and sought clarifications on the issues/
aspects pertaining to the Bill from them. The Chairman requested them to send further information,
if any, which, in their opinion, could help the Committee to formulate its views on the Bill.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee, adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
28 July, 2005.
*** Relate to some other matters.

23
XLII
FORTY-SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 28th July, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
10. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
11. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
15. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V . K. Duggal, Secretary (Justice) and Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. P. K. Seth, Joint Secretary
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri T. K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri B. A. Agarawal, Additional Secretary
23

24
3. Shri V . K. Bhasin, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
4. Shri N. K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
III. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri R. L. Meena, Secretary
2. Shri K. D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2. The Committee took up the Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004 for clause-by-
clause consideration. After some discussion the Committee adopted clause 2 of the Bill, clause 1,
Enacting formula and the Title of the Bill were also adopted.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.35 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matter.

25
XLIII
FOURTY-THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 2nd August, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
7. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
11. Shri Vijay Kumar Malhotra
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered its draft Tenth Report on the High Court and Supreme Court
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2005, draft Eleventh Report on the
National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004 and draft Twelfth Report on the Contempt of Courts (Amendment)
Bill, 2004. After some discussion the Committee adopted the Reports.
3. The Committee adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.
25

26
I
FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 23rd August, 2005, in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq.
8. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri A.K. Moorthy
11. Shri Shriniwas Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed Members to the first meeting of the newly
constituted Committee. Referring to the contribution made by the Members as well as the
Secretariat/staff in disposing of record business of the Committee, which was able to present
eleven Reports to Parliament, the Chairman expressed satisfaction and happiness over its
performance during the last one year. He sought cooperation of members in the smooth and
effective conduct of business of the Committee in future also.
3. The Committee then took up for further consideration its Draft Twelfth Report on the
Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the
same with some minor changes/modifications.
4. The Committee decided to present the Report alongwith Evidence to Rajya Sabha and lay
the same in the Lok Sabha, on 29th August, 2005 and authorised its Chairman to cause
presentation/laying of the same in both the Houses.
26

27
*** Relate to some other matters.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Committee adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again on the l2th September, 2005.

RECOMMENDATION—AT A GLANCE
14.4. The Committee is of the view that the defence of truth being introduced by the
proposed legislation is a right step, taken in the right direction, considering the sentiments
and interest of the larger section of society. Nevertheless, apprehensions expressed by
Members in the light of Supreme Court’s decision in Pritam Lal’s case can also not be
overlooked, and thus amendment of the Constitution appears to be desirable in future.
However, any decision in this regard may be taken by Government, seeing the experience
of enforcement of the proposed legislation. The Committee hopes that the higher judiciary
will give due regard to this statutory provision by maintaining the principles of fairness and
reasonableness, they are known for.
14.5. The Committee observes that the courts are guided by their procedures which they
follow in the facts and circumstances of each individual case, and it is the belief of the
Committee that contemner would be getting full opportunity to make his defence and the
principle of natural justice would not be violated in following such procedure.
17. The Committee does not find the contention of Government convincing. It is of the
view that if the term ‘in public interest’ is retained in the proposed amendment, there
would be an extreme restraint imposed on the contemner and unless he establishes truth
in the public interest, court will not allow him to proceed further. Thus, the restriction or
limitation imposed on the defence of truth would virtually defeat the objective of the
proposed legislation. The Committee, therefore, recommends deletion of the words ‘in public
interest’ from clause (b) of the proposed amendment to section 13.
18. The Committee observes that Sections 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the Principal Act provide
for matters which do not hold a person guilty of contempt of court. In a sense, these
provisions are all exemptions against contempt. Section 8 deals with defence and Section 12
provides punishment for contempt of court. Section 13 provides that contempts will not be
punishable in certain cases. Interpretation of this Section implies that unless contempt is
of such a nature that it substantially interferes or tends substantially to interfere with the
due course of justice, a person cannot be held guilty of contempt. The proposed amendment
is based on the two elements, one imposing sentence or lessening of punishment which pre-
supposes that contempt has been committed and secondly the defence of truth on
satisfaction of its being bonafide and in public interest, burdens the contemner to establish
or prove that whatever he states is believed to be true and the truth is bonafide and is in
public interest. This does not seem to be within the spirit of the Bill. However, if the
proposed defence of truth is reflected or inserted suitably as one of the exemptions or
defences under section 8, it would give the contemner an additional help, because he may
plead the defence of truth and may not be held punishable.
18.1 Subject to above, the clause is adopted.
21. The Committee is of the view that Government may appropriately address these
concerns.
28

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-A
Bill No. 87 of 2004.
THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
A
BILL
further to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Contempt of Courts (Amendment)
Act, 2004.
2. In the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, for section 13, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time
being in force,—
(a) no court shall impose a sentence under this Act for a
contempt of court unless it is satisfied that contempt is of such
a nature that it substantially intereferes, or tends substantially
to interfere with the due course of justice;
(b) the court may permit, in any proceeding for contempt
of court, justification by truth as a valid defence if it is satisfied
that it is in public interest and the request for invoking the said
defence is bonafide.”.
31
Short title.
Substitution of
new section
for section 13.
Contempts
not punishable
in certain
cases.
70 of 1971.

32
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The existing provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 have been
interpreted in various judicial decisions to the effect that truth cannot be pleaded
as a defence to a charge of contempt of court.
2. The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution
(NCRWC) has also in its report, inter alia , recommended that in matters of
contempt, it shall be open to the Court to permit a defence of justification by
truth.
3. The Government has been advised that the amendments to the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 to provide for the above provision would
introduce fairness in procedure and meet the requirements of article 21 of the
Constitution.
4. Section 13 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 provides certain
circumstances under which contempt is not punishable. It is, therefore, proposed
to substitute the said section, by an amendment.
5. The Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was introduced in
the Lok Sabha on the 8th May, 2003 and the same was referred to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs for
examination. The Hon’ble Committee considered the said Bill in its meeting held
on the 2nd September, 2003. However, with the dissolution of the 13th Lok
Sabha, the Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2003 lapsed. It is proposed
to re-introduce the said Bill with modifications of a drafting nature.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve above objects.
H.R. BHARDWAJ
N
EW D ELHI;
The 18th October, 2004.
32

33
33
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE C ONTEMPT  OF C OURTS A CT, 1971
(70 OF 1971)
* *** *
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, no court shall impose a sentence under this Act
for a contempt of court unless it is satisfied that the contempt is
of such a nature that it substantially interferes, or tends substantially
to interfere with the due course of justice.
* *** *
Contempts
not punishable
in certain
cases.

34
34
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
(Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice)

35
ANNEXURE-B
LIST OF WITNESSES
WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
Sl. No. Name of Witnesses Date of Hearing
12 3
1. I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, 22.06.2005
Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Secretary and Home Secretary
2. Shri Devdas Chhotray, Additional Secretary
3. Shrimati Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary
II. Representative of the Department of Legal Affairs,
Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary
2. I. Witnesses 05.07.2005
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Bharadwaj, Chairman, Executive Committee,
Bar Council of India
2. Shri S. Radhakrishnan, Secretary, Bar Council of India
3. Justice A.K. Srivastava, Secretary General, Association of Retired Judges of
Supreme Court and High Court of India
4. Shri Abhimanyu Singh, Retired Officer of Indian Administrativc Service
5. Shri Syed Shahabuddin, Former Member of Parliament
II. Representatives of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shrimati Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary
2. Dr. P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary
3. I. Witnesses 14.07.2005
1. Justice G.N. Ray, Chairman, Press Council of India, New Delhi
2. Justice R.K. Mahajan, Retd. Judge, Allahabad High Court, Shimla
3. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
4. Shri Prashant Bhushan, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
5. Shri Hardev Singh, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
6. Shri Arvind P. Datar, Senior Advocate, Madras High Court and President, Revenue
Bar Association, Tamil Nadu
35

36
12 3
7. Shri Chittaranjan Satapathy, Member, Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Mumbai
8. Shri V .S. Jayakumar, Advocate, Chennai
9. Shri K.H. Kazi, President, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Bar Association, Mumbai
II. Representative of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary
III. Representative of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shrimati Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary
IV. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.P. Aggarwal, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
V . Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
4. I. Representatives of the Department of Justice, 14.07.2005
Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V .K. Duggal, Secretary (Justice) and Home Secretary
2. Shrimati Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department,
Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri B.A. Agarawal, Additional Secretary
3. Shri V .K. Bhasin, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
4. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
III. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs,
Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary

37
ANNEXURE-C
37
COMMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT  OF JUSTICE ON POINTS/OBJECTIONS RAISED
BY INDIVIDUALS/ORGANIZATIONS IN THEIR MEMORANDUM SUBMITTED
TO THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE OVER THE
INTRODUCTION OF THE ‘CONTEMPT OF COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004’
Sl. Name of Comments/Suggestions Resp onse of Government
No. Organization/
Individual
12 3 4
1. Prahladrai L. From the perspective study of the Once a case is admitted in the
Avasatthi existing constitutional position it would Supreme Court or the High
be proper to replace the proposed Court, its hearing is decided as
amendment by following words: per the rules and procedures
“Provided that the accused shall be framed under the law. Every
given reasonable opportunity to defend individual gets reasonable
himself according to law to respect the opportunity to defend himself as
bona fides  of the plea in course of per the procedures established
natural justice.” by law.
2. Shri B.K. Following changes may be made in the Under the existing provisions,
Gururaja existing Section 13 of the Contempt of fair criticism of the conduct of
Rao, Courts Act, 1971: a judge, the institution of the
Advocate Provided that any critical, analytical, judiciary and its functioning
objective and fair comment of court may not amount to contempt if
proceedings made by the media based on it is made in good faith and in
the reasonably believable sources in the public interest. Thus, what is,
usual functioning of the media sought to be protected through
persons shall not attract contempt the Contempt Act is not the
proceedings. criticism against judiciary, but
Provided further that any comments made disrespect of the judiciary and
by any person and published, regarding the administration of justice.
conduct of a presiding judge of a court, The defence of ‘truth’ as provided
which does not interfere with the official in the proposed Amendment Bill,
functioning of the court and which is a 2003 will give further protection
true fact found on reasonable against the fair criticism.
ascertainment, shall not attract contempt Granting ‘truth’ an absolute defence
proceedings. may lead to additional problems
in certain circumstances.
Judiciary, may then be unduly
criticized by different quarter
claiming truth as defence. This
wil1 put undue pressure on the
Judges and their verdict could

38
12 3 4
be ridiculed upon in public and
thus it would be a direct
interference in the administration
of Justice.
3. Vinod H. Cases of contempt should not be tried by There is no intention to amend
Brahmbhatt, courts but by an independent commission the existing scheme of the Law
Advocate and of concerned district. of Contempt of Courts. Only an
Shri R.K. additional defence of truth is
Thapa, Gen. proposed to be provided to the
Secy. All contemnor through the Contempt
India Tantri of Court (Amendment) Bill, 2004.
and Patrakar This defence of truth wil1 be
Sangh available subject to the satisfaction
of the court as to the bona fides
of the plea, and it being in public
interest, which would be the
safeguard to avoid misuse of
the provision.
4. Dr. Rao In the proposed Bill, in clause b of The National Commission to
V .B.J. Section 13, the word may be replaced by Review the Working, of the
Chelikani shall and the word bona fides  and in Constitution (NCRWC) in its
public interest be deleted. report recommended that a
proviso be added to article
19(2) of the Constitution as under:—
“Provided that, in matters of
contempt, it shall be open to the
Court to permit a defence of
justification by truth on
satisfaction as to the bona fides
of the plea and it being in public
interest.’’
The Government has gone by
the words and phrases
recommended by the NCRWC
and proposes to add the
recommended proviso in the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
instead of article 19(2) of the
constitution.
Granting ‘truth’ as an absolute
defence may lead to additional
problems in certain
circumstances. Judiciary, may
then be unduly criticized by
different quarter claiming truth
as defence. This will put undue
pressure on the Judges and their

39
12 3 4
verdict could be ridiculed upon
in public and thus it would
cause undue interference in the
administration of Justice.
5. Shri Prashant The All India Convention on Judicial Any allegation against a court or
Bhushan, Corruption and Judicial Accountability in a Judge which is capable of
Member, its meeting in August, 2003 resolved that: lowering the authority of the
Committee Court constitutes a contempt
on Judicial Contempt of Courts Act be amended to of court. Fair criticism of the
Accountability remove “scandalizing the court or lowering conduct of a judge; the institution
the authority of the court”, from the of the judiciary and, its
definition of criminal contempt and further functioning may not amount to
make it clear that unless it is established contempt if it is made in good
that the publication, even though incorrect, faith and in public interest. Thus,
is not in good faith and is malafide, it will what is, sought to be protected
not constitute contempt of Court. through the Contempt Act is not
the criticism against judiciary,
but disrespect of the judiciary
and administration of justice.
The courts are entrusted with
extraordinary powers of punishing
those who indulge in acts,
whether inside or outside the
courts, which tend to undermine
the authority of law and bring it
in disrepute and disrespect by
scandalising it.
Thus, the phrases “scandalizing
the court or lowering the authority
of the court” may not be removed
from the Contempt of Court Act.
The addition of defence of
justification by truth as provided
in the proposed Bill will further
protect fair and genuine criticism
of the judiciary.”
6. Shri V .K. In the proposed Bill, in clause b of Granting ‘truth’ as an absolute
Bhardwaj, Section 13 the word bona fides and in defence may lead to additional
Chairman, public interest be deleted, alternatively, it problems in certain circumstances.
Executive should be “bonafides of the plea” or it Judiciary, may then be unduly
Committee, being “in public interest” the word “and” criticized by different quarter
Bar Council should be deleted. So it would be either claiming truth as defence. This
of India bonafides or in public interest. will put undue pressure on the
Judges and their verdict could
be ridiculed upon in public and
thus it would be a direct
interference in the administration
of Justice.

40
12 3 4
It is desirable to include a provision “a The principles of natural justice
contempt should be heard by a different require that one should not be a
judge” judge in his own case. However,
the, Court is guided by its own
procedure to be followed in the
facts and circumstance of each
individual case and to see that
the contemner is getting full
opportunity to make his defence
and the principle of natural
justice is not violated in following
such procedure.
7. Prof. N. The power to punish for contempt of Although contempt may include
Jamaludheen, court is a safeguard not for Judges as defamation of a Judge, yet an
Member, person but for the function which they offence of contempt is something
Tamil Nadu exercise i.e. the judiciary as institution. A more then mere defamation and
State code of conduct and policing system for is of a dif ferent character . When
Consumer Judges had to be settled fast. the act of defaming a judge is
Protection calculated to obstruct or interfere
council with the due course of justice
or proper administration of law,
it would certainly amount to
contempt.
Under the existing set up, the
Chief Justice of India has the
competence to receive complaints
against the conduct of a Judge
of the Supreme Court. Similarly,
a Chief Justice of the High
Court has the competence to
receive complaints against the
conduct of a Judge of his Court,
and, when he receives any, he
would consider whether the
allegations deserve to be closely
looked into. In some recent cases,
the Chief Justice of India has
set up inquiry committees under
In-house procedure to deal with
cases of deviant behaviour of
Judges.
However, a proposal for setting
up of a National Judicial Council
under the Chairmanship of the
Chief Justice of India to look
into the complaints received

41
12 3 4
against the Judges of High
Courts and the Supreme Court
is also under examination in
consultation with the Chief
Justice of India.
8. Shri Manoj The present amendment is uncalled for. It Under the existing law and as
Kumar Roy, is aimed to protect the Ministers and other per various court ruling, ‘truth’
Advocate Officials in Government from their willful is not allowed by the Courts as
Calcutta disobedience. a def ence by the contemnor.
Some, of the Courts ruling on
this concept are given below;
“Every attempt to justify
must constitute a new offence
of contempt, committed in the
very face of the Court” (Kadir,
M.G. vs. K.N. Jaitly, AIR 1945
All.67 p.68)
“The plea of justification
which is a good defence in an
ordinary action for libel cannot
be applicable in an action for
contempt” (State vs. Editors of
Eastern Times and Prajatantra,
AIR 1952 Orissa 318 p.341)
“A defence of truth or,
justification is not available to
the publisher of a newspaper in
proceedings for the contempt of
court” (Md. Yamin vs. O.P. Bensal,
1982 Cr. LJ322(Raj.)
In view of  the above position,
it was felt that the existing
provisions contained in the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
are not entirely satisfactory.
Necessary amendment is
accordingly proposed through
the instant Bill.
9. Mathai M. The law of contempt would be subject to The spirit underlying Article
Paikeday, Sr. the rights and freedoms guaranteed to the 19(1)(a) (freedom of speech)
Advocate citizens under the Constitution of India. The must have due play but we cannot
Constitution has provided to a certain overlook the provisions of the
extent, freedom of speech and expression second clause of the article.
as fundamental right under Article 19. While it is intended that there

42
12 3 4
should be freedom of speech
and expression, it is also intended
that in the exercise of the right,
contempt of court shall not be
committed.
No person can flout the mandate
of law of respecting the courts
for establishment of rule of law
under the cloak of freedom of
speech and expression guaranteed
by the Constitution. Such a freedom
is subject to reasonable, restrictions
imposed by any law. Where a
provision, in the law, relating
to contempt impose reasonable
restrictions, no citizen can take
the liberty of scandalising the
authority of the institution of
judiciary.
Freedom of speech and
expression, so far as they do
not contravene the statutory
limits as contained in the
Contempt of Courts Act, are to
prevail without any hindrance.
The Law of Contempt of Courts is basically The law of contempt has been
to protect the courts and the Judges and enacted to secure public respect
not the public. and confidence in the judicial
process. The traditional confidence
in courts that the justice will be
administered to the people, is
sought to be protected by
proceedings in contempt. The
object obviously is not to
vindicate the judge personally
but to protect the public against
any undermining of their
accustomed confidence in the
institution of the judiciary.
10. Justice G .N. Supports the proposed Bill. However, The NCRWC had considered that
Ray (Retd.) the suggestion made by the National a mere legislation by the Parliament
Chairman, Commission, Viz. defence of truth be by amending the Contempt of
Press inserted in Article 19(2) of the Courts Act, 1971 alone may not
Council Constitution of India that provides for suffice because the power of
of India reasonable restrictions being imposed in the Supreme Court and the High
the fundamental right of freedom of Court to punish for contempt is

43
12 3 4
speech and expression should be taken recognized in the Constitution.
into consideration.
The opinion of the then Learned
Attorney General for India was
obtained in this matter, who
opined that amendment of the
Constitution will be a lengthy
and time consuming process. If
the Act is suitably amended to
provide the defence of truth in a
contempt action, the same would
introduce fairness in procedure
and meet the requirement of
Article 21. It is unlikely that the
Supreme Court and the High
Courts will act in disregard of a
statutory provision which in
essence sub-serves the requirement
of fairness and reasonableness.
Thus, there is no need to
embark upon the exercise of
amending the Constitution. The
Contempt of Courts Act may
be appropriately amended, and a
provision may be enacted to
provide that in the matters of
contempt, it shall be open to the
Court to permit a defence of
justification by truth on
satisfaction as to the bona fides
of the plea and it being in public
interest.
The Government was in agreement
with the above view that even
though desirable, an amendment
to the Constitution of India
would be a lengthy and
complicated process. The proposed
defence of ‘Truth’ in matters of
contempt can be provided in the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
11. Shri K.C. In the proposed clause (b) of Section 13, As already replied, granting
Mittal, the words “the court may permit” and “if ‘truth’ an absolute defence may
Advocate it is satisfied that it is in public interest lead to additional problems in
and the request for invoking the said certain circumstances. Judiciary,
defence is bonafide” shalI be deleted. may then be unduly criticized
by different quarter claiming

44
12 3 4
truth as defence. This will put
undue pressure on the Judges
and their verdict could be
ridiculed upon in public and
thus it would be a direct
interference in the administration
of Justice.
No proceeding shall be initiated for contempt Presently, there is no intention
of court against the members and office of the Government to amend the
bearers of the Bar Councils and the Bar existing scheme of the Law of
Association of respective courts unless Contempt of Courts. Only an
the committee of a minimum of 5 members additional defence of truth is
comprising of two judges, sitting or retired, proposed to be provided to the
two bearers of the Bar and one public, contemnor through the proposed
representative prima facie  comes to the Contempt of Court (Amendment)
conclusion that a contempt is made out. Bill, 2004.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.