PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 42
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
FORTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN TH
THE 30  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON "CONSTRAINTS 
BEING FACED BY KENDRIYA BHANDAR"
th 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 NOVEMBER, 2010)
th 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 NOVEMBER, 2010)
th 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 NOVEMBER, 2010)
th 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 NOVEMBER, 2010)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (SAKA)NOVEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
FORTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE 30 TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON “CONSTRAINTS
BEING FACED BY KENDRIYA BHANDAR”
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 th NOVEMBER, 2010)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 th NOVEMBER, 2010)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-83

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—9
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 1 1—14

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Amar Singh
8. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
9. Shri O.T. Lepcha
10. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
12. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
13. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Dr. Monazir Hassan
16. Shri Arjun Munda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
19. Shri Bhajan Lal
20. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
21. Ms. Meenakshi Natarajan
22. Shri Devji M. Patel
23. Shri Harin Pathak
24. Shri Lalu Prasad
25. Shri S. Semmalai
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
28. Shri Manish Tewari
29. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
30. Adv. P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty Second Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirtieth Report of this Committee on “ Constraints
being faced by Kendriya Bhandar”.
2. The Thirtieth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 23
rd October, 2008.
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action Taken
Replies on the Thirtieth Report of the Committee on 14 th July, 2010 . The Committee considered
the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 16 th November, 2010.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
JAYANTHI NATARAJAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairperson,
16th November, 2010 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations of the Department
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its
30th Report on “Constraints Being Faced by Kendriya Bhandar”. The Report was presented to
Rajya Sabha and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 23
rd October, 2008.
2. The Action taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned
Report. These replies have been categorised as follows:
Chapter – I  – The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry
(paras 16, 17, 18, 21, 23, 24, 25 and 26 of the Report). The Committee is pleased to note that
the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as contained in the said paras.
Chapter – II – The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
for now in view of the replies given by the Ministry (para 20 of the Report). The Committee is
convinced with the explanations advanced by the Ministry and does not wish to pursue them as
of now.
Chapter – III – The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not
accepted replies given by the Ministry (paras 19 and 22 of the Report). The Committee expresses
its concern for not accepting its recommendations of the Committee contained in the said paras
and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations in respect of these
recommendations.
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 30
th Report, the ATRs furnished
by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions, Department of Personnel and Training
and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been dealt with in the succeeding
Chapters.

2
CHAPTER–I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Recommenda tion/observation
1. The Committee feels that Kendriya Bhandar retail stores are rendering very useful
services not only to the Government employees and their families but also the poor people
residing in the periphery of Government colonies and for that purpose, Kendriya Bhandars
were allotted accommodations from the Government pool in the residential colonies. These
days when the price rise and inflation is at its peak, the Kendriya Bhandars are giving the
much desired relief to the Government employees and other common man. The Committee
therefore, recommends that the Kendriya Bhandar should be allowed to continue
functioning from their outlets in the Government residential colonies in larger public
interest which is the fundamental of a welfare State like ours. [Para 16]
Action Taken Reply
1.1. Ministry of Urban Development conveyed the decision of the Cabinet Committee on
Accommodation in its meeting held on 26.10.2005 to Kendriya Bhandar that market rate of licence
fee is to be charged from Kendriya Bhandar with effect from 1.12.2005. Further, Kendriya Bhandar
should vacate these units in a phased manner over a period of three years. The matter had been
under correspondence with the Ministry of Urban Development. The matter has been discussed in
a meeting held in the Ministry of Urban Development ong.12.2009 at Secretary’s level. Ministry of
Urban Development has agreed to allow Kendriya Bhandar to continue functioning from their
existing outlets on payment of market rent.
The Committee’s Further Observatio n
1.2. The Committee appreciates that Ministry of Urban Development has  agreed to allow
Kendriya Bhandar to continue functioning from their existing outlets. However, the Committee
would like the Ministry of  Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions to assess whether it is
financially feasible for Kendriya Bhandar to make payment of rent to  Ministry of Urban
Development as per market rate. Accordingly, the Committee would appreciate that the Kendriya
Bhandar is not levied  Market rent, but is charged license fee at flat rate so that the institution
which is not functioning on a commercial basis and is serving the social  cause as well is not
financially overburdened to a breaking point.
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee also feels that Kendriya Bhandar is providing useful services to its
major clientele i.e. Government employees, the products are below market prices and are
of highest quality. Hence, effort should be in the direction of promoting and preserving
these units rather than closing, because closing will not serve the purpose. The Committee
therefore, recommends that Government should make an all out effort in the direction of
promotion of these units. (Para 17)
2

3
Action Taken Reply
2.1. Keeping in view the avowed objectives of cooperative movement to ensure supply of goods
and services to the consumers at the most economical and competitive prices, Government has
allowed special dispensation for purchase of stationery and other articles by the Ministries/
Departments etc., from Kendriya Bhandar. The Office Memorandum includes that Ministries/
Departments are permitted to make purchases at their discretion of all items required for office
consumption upto Rs.1 lakh on each occasion directly from Kendriya Bhandar National Consumer
Co-operative Federation without calling for quotations. The validity of the O.M has been extended
upto 31.3.2012. The sales turnover of Kendriya Bhandar has increased to Rs.306.86 crores during
2008-09 as compared to the sales of Rs.253.04 crores during the 2007-08. Department of
Personnel and Training has written to Delhi Development Authority regarding allotment of land to
Kendriya Bhandar for their corporate office.
Committee’s further observation/recommendation
2.2. The Committee is pleased to note that the Department of Personnel  and Training has
taken adequate steps to promote and popularize the services being provided by the Kendriya
Bhandar. The Committee desires the Department to continue to explore other innovative steps/
measures to  preserve and promote the Kendriya Bhandar. The Committee would like the
Department to pursue seriously with the Ministry of Urban  Development in the matter of
allotment of the land for corporate office of Kendriya Bhandar and it may be apprised of the
developments/outcome  thereof.
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee further feels that Kendriya Bhandar is a welfare project of the
Central Government and is operating under the aegis of the Ministry of Personnel, PG &
Pensions. It is providing good quality grocery, consumer and household items at reasonable
prices to the Government employees and the lower income segment of the society. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that such a society which is working for the benefit of
the common people should not be asked to vacate their present units rather the
Government should provide all necessary assistance to the Kendriya Bhandar since they are
fulfilling the daily household needs of thousands of Government employees every month.
(Para 18)
Action Taken Reply
3.1. As per the decision taken in the meeting held on 9.12.2009, the Ministry of  Urban
Development has agreed to  allow Kendriya Bhandar to continue functioning from the existing
outlets on payment of  market rent.
Committee’s further observation/recommendation
3.2. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Kendriya Bhandar has been allowed to
continue in their existing outlets. The Committee, however, has its apprehensions on the
charge of market rent for the accommodation by the Government. The Committee feels that
the charge of Market rent for accommodation might affect adversely the financial viability of
Kendriya Bhandar which is not functioning on commercial basis. Therefore, the Committee
would appreciate that till the Kendriya Bhandar moves into independent outlets on the line of
the ‘Mother Dairy’ they may be charged a monthly license fee at the rate as recommended
by it.

4
Recommendation/observation
4. The Committee feels that the residential and office accommodations utilized by
Kendriya Bhandar have been allotted to them, consequent upon the decision of the Union
Cabinet in the year 1963. Moreover, they are not requesting for new allotments rather what
they are pleading for its retention of existing retail outlets. The Committee feels that a
welfare project run by the Government sustains in today’s competitive environment only
when the organization is protected/looked after well by the mother but if the mother start
giving step motherly treatment to a child whom it had nurtured for 30 years the survival
becomes difficult. The Committee therefore recommends that the Kendriya Bhandar should
be allotted land in the Central Government colonies by the Ministry of Urban Development
at economical cost for construction of retail stores (on the same lines as Mother Dairy) and
after the construction of the retail stores they may be asked to surrender the Government
Accommodations in a phased manner. [Para 21]
Action Taken Reply
4.1. Ministry of Urban Development has agreed that Kendriya Bhandar will identify suitable lands
in the Government colonies so that the same can be permitted for constructing and setting up their
outlets on the same lines as in case of Mother Dairy outlets. Further, Kendriya Bhandar would
vacate the existing accommodation as soon as lands are identified and appropriate structures are
constructed within a fixed time schedule.
Committee’s further observation/recommendation
4.2. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Urban Development  is in agreement with
the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee impresses upon the DoPT to actively
pursue with that Ministry  so as to expedite the process of identification of suitable lands for
setting up the outlets of Kendriya Bhandar in Government residential areas and also decide a
time bound schedule for the construction of required infrastructure after land is allotted to
them. The Committee desires to be  informed of the progress of action in this regard
Recommendation/observation
5. The Committee desires that both the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances &
Pensions and the Ministry of Urban Development should discuss the issue threadbare and
take necessary steps together so that as a relief Kendriya Bhandars are allowed to function
from their existing Government pool residential and office accommodation. [Para 23]
Action Taken Reply
5.1. A meeting was taken by Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development with Secretary,
Department of Personnel and Training regarding Kendriya Bhandar on 9.12.2009. It has been
decided to allow Kendriya Bhandar to continue functioning from their existing outlets.
Committee’s further observation/recommendation
5.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/observation
6. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Urban Development had taken this step

5
because of the judgment given by the Apex court in the Shiv Sagar Tiwari case, which laid
down the principle that residential units must be used for residential purposes and since the
Kendriya Bhandar activities are not of a residential nature this decision had to be taken
at the level of the Cabinet Gommittee on Accommodation. The Committee feels that though
the Hon’ble Supreme Court had given its verdict in a particular case. The point that who
should be the ‘user of premises’ is a matter of policy and it is the Government, not the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, which decides that policy. So, the Government can certainly take
a fresh policy decision that a certain percentage of residential premises can be used for
such activities and that policy is final. The Committee therefore recommends that
Government should as early as possible bring forward a new policy that a certain percentage
of residential premises could be used for such activities as are being carried by Kendriya
Bhandar. [Para 24]
Action Taken Reply
6.1. The accommodation issue of Kendriya Bhandar has been sorted out in the meeting held on
9.12.2009 in the Ministry of Urban Development as indicated against para 16 and para 21.
Committee’s further observation/recommendation
6.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee feels that if these Kendriya Bhandars are closed, the people who are
working there will lose their jobs and there will be unemployment. The Government
employees and members of the general public who are patronizing the Kendriya Bhandar
will be deprived of quality products on cheaper prices and this will be a set back to the
cooperative movement of the nation. The Committee therefore recommends that the
Kendriya Bhandars should be protected and Government should start thinking in terms of
extending their services to other areas. [Para 25]
Action Taken Reply
7.1. Government has permitted, inter alia , Ministries/Departments to make purchases at their
discretion of all items required for office consumption upto Rs.l lakh on each occasion directly
from Kendriya Bhandar/National Consumers Cooperative Federation without calling for quotations.
The validity of the Office Memorandum has been extended upto 31.3.2012. Kendriya Bhandar is
taking action for opening retail stores in Delhi Government employees residential colonies. A retail
store has been opened in Dilshad Colony in collaboration with Bhagidari Cell of Government of
NCT of Delhi. Further, Kendriya Bhandar is one of the partners in the Jan Aushadhi project of
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers under which good quality generic medicines at reasonable
prices are offered to the common man.
Committee’s further observation/recommendation
7.2. The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry to  popularize and promote
the services provided by the Kendriya Bhandar. The Committee, however, hopes that the Ministry
would continue with  their efforts to see that the Kendriya Bhandar expands and grows further so
that more and more people are able to avail of the services being  provided by it. The Committee
appreciates the new role assumed by the Kendriya Bhandar in joining hands with the State

6
Governments in the  implementation of its welfare programmes in the consumer sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Kendriya Bhandar needs to be protected and promoted
by Government.
Recommendation/observation
8. The Committee also feels that in today’s world when things are growing at rapid pace
there is an urgent need for the Government to plan/keep enough space for public utility
services at residential area/complex. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government should earmark certain space for the public utility services in the upcoming
areas/localities/residential complexes so that the people can take benefit of these facilities.
[Para 26]
Action Taken Reply
8.1. Ministry of Urban Development in the meeting held on 9.12.2009 has agreed that Kendriya
Bhandar will identify suitable lands in Government colonies for setting up the outlets on the same
lines as in case of Mother Dairy outlets.
Committee’s further observation/recommendation
8.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.

7
7
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Urban Development should
either return the 16 Nos. of surrendered accommodations to Kendriya Bhandar or
alternatively it should immediately provide alternative accommodations to Kendriya Bhandar
in lieu of the surrendered accommodations at nearby location. [Para 20]
Action Taken Reply
1.1. The accommodation issue of Kendriya Bhandar was considered in a meeting held on
9.12.2009 in Ministry of Urban Development. Regarding return of 16 Nos. of surrenders
accommodations or to provide alternative accommodations to Kendriya Bhandar in lieu of the
surrendered accommodations, it is stated that Kendriya Bhandar has not pressed for restoration of
16 Nos. of surrendered accommodations.
Committee’s Further Observation
1.2. he Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the Ministry ould be taking up the
restoration of the surrendered accommodation or any alternative accommodation in lieu thereof
with the Ministry of Urban evelopment at an appropriate time to strengthen the Kendriya
Bhandar.

8
8
CHAPTER – III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN ESPECT OF WHICH
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee also recommends that Kendriya Bhandar may be directed to make
payment of monthly license fee at flat rates equivalent to that payable by a Government
employees occupying the Government residential accommodation plus the average monthly
house rent amount (which is otherwise applicable to the Government employees of that
category). The market rent should be waived off and instead a monthly licence fee at flat
rates should be prescribed on Kendriya Bhandar. [Para 19]
Action Taken Reply
1.1. The accommodation issue of Kendriya Bhandar was considered in the meeting held on
9.12.2009 in the Ministry of Urban Development. Ministry of Urban Development has agreed to
allow Kendriya Bhandar to continue functioning from their existing outlets on payment of market
rent. Further, Ministry of Urban Development has intimated that market rent as fixed by the
Directorate of Estates is 5 to 6 times lower than the actual market rent. As such, even if Kendriya
Bhandar pays the market rent as fixed by the Directorate of Estates, from time to time, a
substantial element of subsidy will still remain in the operations of Kendriya Bhandar.
The Committee’s Further Observation
1.2. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry of Urban Development has agreed to
allow Kendriya Bhandar to continue functioning from their existing outlets on payments of
market rate. The Committee also takes note of the plea of the Ministry of Urban Development
that market rent as fixed by the Directorate of Estate is 5 to 6 times lower than the actual
market rent which Kendriya Bhandar may easily pay at prescribed rate without compromising
with its other expenditures. However, the intriguing question is whether Kendriya Bhandar is
capable to bear the financial burden caused by the decision of Ministry of Urban Development
in this regard. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Urban Development should review
their decision of charging market rent from the Kendriya Bhandar.
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee further feels that the Kendriya Bhandar is the welfare face of the
government and Government of India is holding more than 78% shares in the society then
why not the Kendriya Bhandar should have their own permanent building to carry out day
to day office work. It has also come to the notice of the Committee that the Kendriya
Bhandar had requested the Ministry of Urban Development to provide land for the
construction of its building in the year 2004 and the issue is pending till date. The
Committee expresses its displeasure to note that no concrete decision has so far been taken
with regard to providing land for construction of building for Kendriya Bhandar inspite of
the considerable time that has already lapsed. The Committee, therefore, recommends that

9
the Ministry of Urban Development should vigorously pursue the matter and ensure that
the vacant Government land should be allotted to the Kendriya Bhandar for construction of
its building without further delay. The Committee also recommends that Kendriya Bhandar
should be allowed to retain the existing office accommodations by paying rent equivalent to
that payable by post Offices etc. (Public utility departments), till such time suitable land
at economical rates is allotted to Kendriya Bhandar for construction of its own office.
[Para 22]
Action Taken Reply
2.1. Ministry of Urban Development has conveyed to Kendriya Bhandar that land for
construction of office building for Kendriya Bhandar is not available. Therefore, it is not possible
to allot land to Kendriya Bhandar for constructing an office building. However, Ministry of Urban
Development has agreed that the existing office accommodation may be retained by Kendriya
Bhandar on payment of market rent.
Committee’s Further Observation/recommendation
2.2. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry of Urban development.
Though the Committee understands that temporarily there may be non-availability of land for
the office of Kendriya Bhandar, it does not mean that no land can be arranged for the purpose
in future. Possibilities of allotment of land in this regard may therefore be explored in future.
The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions to
pursue with the Ministry of Urban Development so that whenever there is availability of suitable
land, it should be allotted to Kendriya Bhandar for the construction of their office. Further, the
Committee also has reservations over the charging of market rent from the Kendriya Bhandar
for their office accommodation as such heavy charges may seriously affect the institutions’
viability and continuance, which is functioning with a service motto and not for profit or
commercial gains.

MINUTES

13
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thuesday, the 16 th November, 2010 in Room No. ‘62’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
3. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
4. Shri Shailendra Kumar
5. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
6. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
7. Shri S. Semmalai
8. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
9. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
10. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
11. Adv. P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
*** Relates to some other matter.

14
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
Consideration and adoption of draft 42nd Report and * * *
8. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration its 42 nd Report *   *   * on the “Action
Taken Replies of the Government on the recommendations/observation contained in the 30 th Report
of the Committee on “Constraints being faced by Kendriya Bhandar” and adopted the Report.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the discussions was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 4.44 P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.