PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 25
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, 
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
OF THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/V AISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-49

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—40
CHAPTER –I Overview of the Ministry ..................................................................... 1—4
CHAPTER –II Overall Assessment of the Demands for
Grants of the Ministry .......................................................................... 5—10
CHAPTER –III Major initiatives, policies and schemes of
the Ministry . ........................................................................................... 1 1—25
CHAPTER –IV Central Bureau of Investigation ........................................................... 26—29
CHAPTER –V Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration ........................................................................................ 30—31
CHAPTER –VI Recruitment agencies ............................................................................ 32—34
CHAPTER –VII Central Vigilance Commission .............................................................. 35—37
CHAPTER –VIII Central Information Commission ......................................................... 38—40
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 41—48

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Shri Tarlochan Singh
9. Vacant
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
15. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
25. Shri Vishvendra Singh
26. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report
on its behalf, do hereby present this Twenty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
pertaining to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training;
Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances; Secretary, Union Public
Service Commission; Special Director, Central Bureau of Investigation; Chairman, Staff Selection
Commission; Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission and Director, Lal Bahadur Shastri National
Academy of Administration in its sitting held on 25th March, 2008.
3. The Committee, while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the
following:—
(i) Presentations made by the representatives of the Ministry;
(ii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2008-09;
(iii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Union Public Service Commission for the year
2008-09;
(iv) Explanatory Notes on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) received from the Ministry;
(v) Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 2007-08;
(vi) Annual Report of the Union Public Service Commission for the year 2006-2007;
(vii) Annual Report of the Central Vigilance Commission for the year 2006;
(viii) Annual Report of CBI for the year 2007;
(ix) Annual Report of Staff Selection Commission for the year 2006-07;
(x) Annual Report of Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie
for the year 2006;
(xi) Annual Report of Kendriya Bhandar for the year 2006-07;
(xii) Annual Report of Indian Institute of Public Administration for the year 2006-07;
(xiii) Annual Report of Central Information Commission for the year 2005-06;
(xiv) Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice contained in
its Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry; and
(xv) Written replies furnished by the Ministry on the Questionnaires prepared by the
Secretariat.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its sitting held on 24th April, 2008.

(iv)
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
24th April, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice

1
REPORT
CHAPTER–I
OVERVIEW OF THE MINISTRY
1. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, under the overall charge of the
Prime Minister, assisted by a Minister of State and two Secretaries, who are being assisted by one
Special Secretary, two Additional Secretaries, four Joint Secretaries and other supporting officers
and staff is the coordinating agency of the Central Government in all personnel matters pertaining
to recruitment, training, career development, staff welfare and the post-retirement dispensation. The
Ministry has also evolved to work towards the promotion of responsive, people-oriented and
modern administration and executes its functions through its three Departments, namely:—
(i) The Department of Personnel and Training;
(ii) The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances; and
(iii) The Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare.
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
2.0 The Department of Personnel and Training headed by a Secretary acts as the formulator
of policies and the watchdog of the Government to ensure that certain accepted standards and
norms pertaining to recruitment, regulation of service conditions and deputation of personnel as
well as other related issues, as laid down by it, are followed by all Ministries/Departments by
issuing guidelines to the Ministries/Departments and monitoring the implementation of these
guidelines.
2.1 The Department also advises all organisations of the Central Government on issues of
Personnel Management, has the direct responsibility of being the cadre controlling authority for the
Indian Administrative Service (IAS) and the Central Secretariat Service (CSS), operates the Central
Staffing Scheme under which suitable officers from All India Services and Group ‘A’ Central
Services are selected and then placed in posts at the levels of Deputy Secretary/Director and Joint
Secretary, on the basis of tenure deputation and also deals with cases of appointment to the posts
of Chairmen, Managing Directors, full time functional Directors/Members of the Boards of
Management of various Public Sector Undertakings/Enterprises, Corporations, Banks and Financial
Institutions. It also looks into the assignments of Indian experts to various developing countries.
2.2 Department of Personnel and Training has the following six- divisions:
(i) Establishment Officer;
(ii) Services and Vigilance;
(iii) Establishment;
(iv) Administrative Tribunal and Administration;
(v) Training; and
(vi) Central Services.
2.3 The Department also has under its administrative control four attached offices, namely:

2
(i) Staff Selection Commission (SSC) : Set up by a Resolution of the Government and
is entrusted with conducting of examinations for recruitment of lower grade staff in
Central Ministries/Departments etc.;
(ii) Institute of Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM):  Provides induction as
well as in-service training to members of the Central Secretariat Service;
(iii) Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie:
Responsible for providing induction training to recruits of the Indian Administrative
Service and other All India Services and Central Services; and
(iv) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) : Deals with investigation’ and prosecution
in corruption cases against public servants, private persons, firms and other cases of
serious crimes.
2.4 The other offices under the administrative control of the Ministry are:
(i) Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) –  a constitutional body responsible for
conducting examination for appointment to the higher civil services and civil posts
under the Union Government including recruitment to the All India Services. UPSC is
created under Article 315 of the Constitution of India. The Commission’s charter of
duties is given in Articles 320 and 321 of the Constitution. In brief, it is the duty of
the Commission to conduct examinations for appointments to services of the Union
and to advise Central Government on all matters relating to framing of recruitment
rules, method of recruitment and the principles to be followed in making promotions
and transfers from one service to another. The Commission is also required to be
consulted in respect of disciplinary matters affecting a civil servant including appeals
and memoranda filed by individual Government servants. Article 322 of the
Constitution envisages, inter-alia, that the expenses of the UPSC including salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to members and staff of the Commission shall be
‘charged’ on the Consolidated Fund of India;
(ii) Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) –  a statutory body empowered to inquire or
cause an inquiry or investigation on a reference made by the Central Government. It
is also empowered to exercise superintendence over the vigilance administration of the
various Central Government Ministries, Departments and organizations;
(iii) Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) – a statutory quasi-judicial body set up to
look into the grievances exclusively of public servants so as to avoid delay in redressal
of their grievances;
(iv) Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) –  a body set up by a resolution of the
Central Government with the objective of evolving a sound managerial policy for the
Central Public Sector Enterprises and, in particular, to advise Government on
appointment to their top management posts; and
(v) Central Information Commission (CIC) –  a statutory body set up as per provision
in the Right to Information Act, 2005 responsible for the implementation of the Act
by exercising powers conferred to it under Section 18 of the Act.
2.5 The Department of Personnel and Training is the nodal agency for four registered societies
set up for the welfare of Government employees and their families. These societies are:—

3
(i) The Central Civil Services Cultural and Sports Board – an autonomous body set
up with the purpose of promoting cultural and sports activities among Government
servants;
(ii) Grih Kalyan Kendra – an autonomous body set up with the objective of taking up
various activities for welfare of Central Government employees and their dependants;
(iii) Kendriya Bhandar – a welfare project of the Government of India set up in 1963
for the benefit of Central Government employees, their families and other customers;
and
(iv) Civil Services  Officers Institute – set up with the objective to provide prompt
welfare of the officers of the Civil Services and to bring them together in order to
secure complete integration of the services and to build a corps of officers imbibed
with the spirit of co-operation in all aspects of Civil Services.
2.6 Joint Consultative Machinery
A well structured machinery which is in place for joint consultation between the Central
Government and its employees for promoting harmonious relations and securing the greatest
measure of cooperation between the Central Government and the general body of employees in
matters of common concern. The objective is to increase the efficiency of public services along
with the well-being of the employees.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
3. The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances headed by a Secretary is
the nodal agency of the Government of India for policy, co-ordination and monitoring of
administrative reforms including e-governance and administering Central Secretariat Manual of
Office Procedure by way of acting as facilitator to improve Government functioning. It also acts
as the nodal Department for redressal of public grievances relating to the States in general and
those pertaining to Central Government agencies in particular to provide improved services to the
people. The Department endeavours to document and disseminate successful good Governance
Practices by way of providing financial assistance to State Governments/UT Administrations, audio-
visual media, publications, conducting series of Regional Conferences on Excellence in Public
Service Delivery etc. It also undertakes activities in the field of international exchange and co-
operation to promote public service reforms by soliciting its membership in the Commonwealth
Association for Public Administration (CAPAM), Toronto (Canada) since 1997 and also with the
International Institute of Administrative Services (IIAS), Brussels (Belgium), signing a Memorandum
of Understanding on co-operation in the field of Civil Services, Personnel Management and Public
Administration with Government of Malaysia on 14th May, 2001 and playing a key role in the
setting up of India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) W orking Group on Public Administration (WGPA)
which started working in August, 2006 to facilitate the exchange of best practices in public
administration, and engaging with various visiting delegations in connection with issues relating to
the purview of the Department. The mission of the Department is to act as a facilitator, in
consultation with Central Ministries/Departments, States/UT Administrations, Organisations and
individuals, to Improve Government functioning through process re-engineering, organization and
methods and public grievance handling, and by promoting modernization, Citizen’s Charters, award
schemes, e-governance and best practices.
DEPARTMENT OF PENSIONS AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE
4. The Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare set up in 1985 is the nodal

4
Department of the Government of India for formulation of general policy on pension and other
retirement benefits, as also for redressal of grievances relating to retirement benefits. The
Department is responsible for streamlining the pension administration system in the Government of
India for greater convenience and welfare of the pensioners and concerned with formulation and
implementation of rules relating to pension and pensionary benefits of Central Government servants.
It has also in the recent past taken upon itself to streamline all Ministries/Departments officials’
handling pension matters in order to securitize them and monitoring the redressal/disposal of
pension related grievances through CPENGRAM module of the Pensioners’ Portal.

5
5
CHAPTER–II
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY
5. The Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry have been presented to Parliament under
the following Demand numbers:—
Demand No. 71 : Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions — Rs. 443.00 crore.
Demand No. 78 : Union Public Service Commission — Rs. 77.81 crore.
5.1 The Non-Plan and Plan, Revenue and Capital and Charged and V oted break-up of the total
budgetary projections of the Ministry for the year 2008-09 are as given in the following table:—
Budget Estimate (2008-09) at a Glance
(Rs. in crore)
Demand No. Total Plan Non- Revenue Capital Charged V oted
Plan
71-Ministry 443.00 138.00 305.00 386.99 56.01 17.27 425.73
of Personnel,
Public
Grievances
and Pensions
78-Union 77.81 – 77.81 77.81 – 77.81 –
Public
Service
Commission
5.2 The above mentioned table reflects that out of the total allocation of Rs.443.00 crore in
Demand No. 71, Rs.17.27 crore is charged and the balance of Rs.425.73 crore is voted. Further,
out of the total allocation of Rs.443.00 crore, Rs.305.00 crore is in the category of Non-Plan
allocation and the remaining Rs.138.00 crore is Plan allocation. Similarly, Rs.77.81 crore as
Non-Plan allocation which is charged has been allocated to UPSC.
5.3 The enhanced Non-Plan outlay of Rs.29 crore from Rs.276 crore in BE (2007-2008) to
Rs.305 crore in BE (2008-2009) has been stated by the Ministry as due to normal increase in pay
and allowances (Rs.13.02 crore), increase in the Examination and Selection related expenditure of
the Staff Selection Commission (Rs.6 crore), expenditure on a newly commenced activity–
Mandatory Training of CSS Officers’ (Rs.7.50 crore including Rs.3.50 crore for payment of
salaries of around 400 newly recruited Assistants who are to undergo 6 months foundation course
in ISTM) and minor increase under other heads.
5.4 The enhanced Plan outlay of Rs.48 crore from Rs.90 crore in BE (2007-08) to Rs.138
crore in BE (2008-09) has been made for new Plan schemes proposed to be commenced in the
year 2008-09 (Rs.23 crore including token provision of Rs.1 crore each for 2 new schemes),
enhanced provision for construction activities and other infrastructural development projects
(Rs.16.50 crore) and minor increases under other ongoing schemes.

6
DEMAND NO. 71
5.5 Break up of the allocation of Budget under Demand No.71 is as given in the table
below:
(Rupees in crore)
Revenue Capital T otal
V oted Charged V oted Charged
Plan 91.00 0 47.00 0 138.00
Non- 287.72 8.27 0.01 9.00 305.00
Plan
TOTAL: 378.72 8.27 47.01 9.00 443.00
5.6 Demand No. 71 consists of budget provisions in respect of the following Departments/
Offices/Organisations/Schemes:—
(i) Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT);
(ii) Staff Selection Commission (SSC);
(iii) Secretariat General Services – which includes the following Departments:—
(a) Department of Personnel and Training;
(b) Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances; and
(c) Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare.
(iv) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)-including Interpol and Coordination Wing;
(v) Grants-in-aid to the Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA);
(vi) Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA);
(vii) Institute of Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM);
(viii) Other training schemes;
(ix) Central V igilance Commission (CVC)-( Charged);
(x) Lok Pal;
(xi) Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB);
(xii) Central Information Commission (CIC);
(xiii) Capital Outlay on Police;
(xiv) Capital Outlay on Public Works; and
(xv) Loans and advances to the State Governments towards payment of House Building
Advances to the All India Service Officers
5.7 Major Head-wise break up of Demand No. 71 is as shown in the table below:

7
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. Description as Major BE (2007-08) RE (2007-08) BE (2008-09)
No. shown in the Head
Expenditure
Budget V ol. II Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total
Plan Plan Plan
Revenue
Section
1. Secretariat - 2052 15.50 39.67 55.17 16.16 34.20 50.36 27.36 45.45 72.81
General
Services
2. Administration 2014 0.00 25.86 25.86 0.00 27.08 27.08 0.00 27.84 27.84
of Justice
3. Public Service 2051 0.00 24.43 24.43 0.00 25.48 25.48 0.00 32.08 32.08
Commission
4. Police 2055 1.70 132.78 134.48 1.70 145.28 146.98 4.14 136.48 140.62
5. Other 2070 44.30 44.25 88.55 39.10 48.20 87.30 59.50 54.14 113.64
Administrative
Services
T
OTAL: 61.50 266.99 328.49 56.96 280.24 337.20 91.00 295.99 386.99
Capital
Section
6. Capital outlay 4055 11.00 0.01 11.01 11.00 0.01 11.01 26.00 0.01 26.01
on Police
7. Capital outlay 4059 17.50 0.00 17.50 4.00 0.00 4.00 21.00 0.00 21.00
on Public
Works
8. Loans and 7601 0.00 9.00 9.00 0.00 9.00 9.00 0.00 9.00 9.00
Advances to State
Government
T
OTAL: 28.50 9.01 37.51 15.00 9.01 24.01 47.00 9.01 56.01
GRAND T OTAL: 90.00 276.00 366.00 71.96 289.25 361.21 138.00 305.00 443.00
5.8 The Department-wise Plan and Non-Plan outlays included in the budget estimates are as
under:—
Department of Personnel and Training
5.8.1 The proposed Non-Plan outlay is for Rs.36.54 crore in BE (2008-09) against Rs.32.42 crore
in BE (2007-08). The Department has assigned the proposed enhancement of Rs.4.12 crore on
account of normal increase in ‘Salaries’ (Rs.1.10 crore), enhancement in provision for ‘Welfare
Activities’ viz. Grants-in-aid assistance to Civil Services Officers’ Institute (Rs.l.70 crore),
provision for ‘Renovation/Modernization of Office’ and the Departmental Canteen and minor
increase under other heads.
5.8.2 The percentage-wise break up of the Non-Plan outlay is 46.81% for payment of ‘Salaries’,
37.85% for ‘Welfare Grants’ and the remaining 15.34% for other establishment related expenses
like payment of ‘Wages, OTA, Medical Treatment, Travel Expenses, Office Expenses, Repair/
Renovation’ and ‘Other Minor Works’, payment for’ Professional Services’, ‘Publication’ etc. Non-

8
Plan provision of Rs.43 lakh has also been included for payment of salaries and other allowances
to employees of the Departmental Canteen of DoPT.
5.8.3 The proposed new Plan outlay of Rs.10 crore has been made for meeting the expenditure
on ‘Propagation of Right to Information Act’ intended to provide wide publicity about the
provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 as per the provision in Clause (a) of sub-section
(l) of Section 26 of the RTI Act. The Department has informed the Committee that as per the
media plan received from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting towards the cost of media
publicity of the Right to Information Act, the annual liability of this Ministry on this account comes
to Rs.21 crore including publicity through AIR, DA VP, PIB etc. The Planning Commission has
approved an outlay of Rs.10 crore in BE (2008-09) so as to enable this Ministry to commence the
activity and it is anticipated that the balance requirement may be provided at RE stage.
Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare
5.8.4 The proposed Non-Plan provision of Rs.1.74 crore in BE (2008-09) has been enhanced by
Rs.59 lakh, as against Rs.1.l5 crore in BE (2007-08). The bulk of the provision to the tune of
Rs.52 lakh is for payment of ‘Salaries’ and Rs.l lakh cash under new heads like ‘Wages, Foreign
Travel Expenses, Other Administrative Expenses and Professional Services’ which were
necessitated due to formation of a full-fledged Department of Pensions and Pensioners’ Welfare.
This accounts for 78.45% of the provision for salaries and the remaining 21.55% for other
establishment related expenses.
5.8.5 Plan Outlay of Rs.36 lakh has been proposed in BE (2008-09) against Rs.55 lakh in BE
(2007-08) under the scheme ‘Pensioners’ Portal’ to develop and maintain a Web-based Pensioners’
Portal, a Mission Mode Project under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP). The Department has
furnished to the Committee that it envisages that the Portal will have two components viz. (a) Non-
interactive component containing updated information on Pension rules and instructions issued
thereunder and database of pensioners; and (b) Interactive component for registering grievances
and monitoring their redressal that will also have the facility of enabling retiring employees to check
their pension sanction process and to bring into notice any defects of delays therein. The portal
has been envisaged on a three-tier system viz. Grass root level, Intermediate level, and Nodal level.
5.8.6 The Department has further informed that separate Object Heads for each item of
expenditure included under the scheme Pensioners’ Portal like ‘Salaries’, ‘Travel Expenses’, ‘Office
Expenses’, ‘Advertising and Publicity’, ‘Professional Services’, ‘Grants-in-aid’ and ‘Other Charges’
have also been proposed so as to classify the expenditure under each item of expenditure.
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
5.8.7 The marginal increase in Non-Plan outlay of Rs.46 lakh to Rs.5.65 crore in BE (2008-09)
against Rs.5.19 crore in BE (2007-08) has been assigned to meet expenditure on conduct of ‘Civil
Service Day, PM’s award, Chief Secretaries Conferences’ etc. Slight increase under ‘Office
Expenses’ has also been sought for furnishing the offices of senior officers as this office has since
become a full-fledged Department. 60.21% of the budget provision is projected for ‘Salaries’;
24.78% for meeting expenditure on holding the ‘Civil Service Day, PM’s award’ and other activities
and the remaining 15.01 % for Other Establishment related expenses like payment of ‘Wages, OTA,
Medical Treatment, Travelling Expenses, Office Expenses’ etc. and payment of contribution
(Membership fee) to international bodies like International Institute of Administrative Services
(IIAS) and Commonwealth Association for Public Administration (CAPAM).
5.8.8 Enhanced Plan outlay from Rs.12.00 crore in BE (2007-08) to Rs.15 crore in BE
(2008-09) has been assigned to projects like ‘Modernisation of Government. Offices’, ‘Pilot

9
Projects on Administrative Reforms’ including promotion of e-governance, fostering of Good
Governance, learning from success, Sevottam, international cooperation including an Externally
Aided Project component of Rs.7.00 crore under the Department for International Development
(DFID) project for ‘Capacity Building for Poverty Reduction’.
5.8.9 The Department has justified the Plan Outlay for ‘Setting up of Administrative Reforms
Commission’ that has been reduced from Rs.3.00 crore in BE (2007-08) to Rs.2 crore in BE
(2008-09) as the Commission is likely to submit its final recommendations within the timeframe.
Information Technology
5.9 A separate Non-Plan provision of Rs.50 lakh in BE (2007-08) enhanced to Rs.109 lakh in
BE (2008-09) has been projected for upgradation of Information Technology standards of all the
3 Departments under the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions with a view to
equip the offices with latest and fastest computers and accessories in order to fasten the services
delivery.
DEMAND NO. 78
5.10 Demand No.78 pertains to allocation for the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC). This
budgetary allocation is Charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
5.11 A statement indicating the BE and RE (2007-08) and BE (2008-09) in respect of Demand
No. 78 is given in the accompanying table:—
(Rs. in crores)
BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09
72.12 72.12 77.81
5.12 The variations between BE (2007-08) and BE (2008-09) and RE (2007-08) and BE
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and of UPSC in percentage
terms are given below:—
Comparative Analysis
(Rs. in crore)
Demand No. Actuals BE RE BE V ariation Variation
(2006- (2007- (2007- (2008- between BE between RE
07) 08) 08) 09) (2007-08) and (2007-08) and
(2008-09) BE (2008-09)
71 - Ministry of 283.17 366.00 361.21 443.00 +77.00 +53.20
Personnel, Public (+21.03%) (+14.53%)
Grievances and
Pensions
76 - Union Public 63.55 75.12 75.12 77.81 +2.69 +2.69
Service (+3.58%) (+3.58%)
Commission
5.13 The Committee observes that the budgetary allocation for the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has increased from Rs. 366.00 crore in 2007-08 to

10
Rs.443 crore in the current year, reflecting a hike of Rs.77.00 crore, i.e., 21.03% increase
over the previous financial year, whereas for UPSC, it has increased from Rs.75.12 crore to
77.81 crore reflecting a hike of Rs.2.69 crore i.e., 3.58% increase over the previous
financial year. The Committee expects that this enhanced allocation would be optimally
utilised. Out of the total budgetary allocation of Rs.443 crore, Rs.305 crore is devoted to
Non Plan expenditure. A minimum sum of Rs.138 crore has been allocated for various Plan
schemes/programmes of the Ministry. The Committee notes that this Ministry is the nodal
agency for wide ranging crucial matters like personnel policy, recruitment, training,
administrative reforms, public grievances and pensions and in the absence of adequate
facilities and infrastructure, it practically becomes impossible to render these services.
Hence it is of the opinion that this Ministry has a very vital role to play in formulating as
well as implementing the Plan schemes in these fields, for which infrastructure and assets
are to be created. Therefore, the Committee feels that more focus should be given on Plan
expenditure.
5.14 In the Detailed Explanatory Note furnished by the Ministry on Demands for Grants
(2008-09), it has been stated that the final Plan Outlays for the Eleventh Plan has not been
communicated by the Planning Commission. Further, it has been stated that though the Plan Outlay
proposed by the Ministry is Rs.862.42 crore, the tentative allocation given by the Planning
Commission is only Rs.506.00 crore.
5.15 The Committee desires that since this Ministry is responsible for implementation of
major schemes pertaining to training, capacity building, civil services reforms, improvement
and upgradation of facilities in CBI, modernization of offices, administrative reforms etc.,
adequate funds should be allocated to the Ministry, so that developmental activities do not
suffer due to lack of resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that at the RE
stage, the Ministry should conduct a stringent review of its expenditure and accordingly
make commensurate estimate and that the schemes and projects should, in no way be
affected on account of insufficient funds.
5.16 As regards the proposed new Plan Outlay for the ‘Propagation of Right to
Information Act’, the Committee notes with disappointment that a meager amount of Rs.10
crore which is less than half expected of the annual liability of the Ministry of Rs.21 crore
has been approved by the Planning Commission. The Committee understands that the
beginning of every fresh Plan requires a greater chunk of the proposed expenditure.
Furthermore, the effective and immediate pr opagation of Right to Information Act is the
urgent need of the hour and the Government should take all out efforts to implement the
proposed scheme at the shortest time possible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
enhancement of this outlay may be proposed by the Ministry to enhance this allocation at
least upto 75% of the annual liability of the Ministry in the form of Supplementary Grant
in order to enable work in this direction in earnest.
5.17 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Government to hasten the
services delivery system of the three Departments of the Ministry by way of doubling the
provision for Information Technology and equipping its offices with latest and fastest
computers and accessories. It, therefore, would appreciate to be apprised of the status of
computerization of these offices and utilization of the funds at the time of giving Action
Taken Replies.

11
11
CHAPTER–III
MAJOR INITIATIVES, POLICIES AND SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY
The All India Services (Performance Appriasal) Rules, 2007
6. According to the Annual Report of the Ministry, with a view to improving the performance
evaluation and appraisal of all senior civil servants for better human resource management, for the
first time, the Annual Confidential Roll (ACR) Rules were replaced by the All India Services
(Performance Appraisal) Rules, 2007. The new format of performance appraisal for the All India
Service Officers, which is an interactive method of evaluation in which the officers being appraised
and the Officer appraising, are both involved, is based on the recommendations of the Surendranath
Committee and brings in a great degree of transparency and objectivity into this process.
6.1 The Ministry, in its presentation before the Committee on Demands for Grants (2008-09),
highlighted the salient features of Performance Appraisal Report (PAR) as full disclosure, annual
medical health check-up for all officers above the age of 40, preparation of a work plan in
advance, numerical grading, financial, moral and intellectual integrity and constitution of Referral
Board to decide representations of the officers.
Annual Health Check-up for All India Service Officers
7. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, with a view to bringing greater health
consciousness among the officers, which would be conducive to greater efficiency and also reduce
the costs of illness to the Government, a comprehensive annual health check-up has been made
mandatory for all the All India Service Officers.
7.1 T he Committee appreciates such initiatives of the Ministr y. It is pleased to note that
maintaining a healthy working environment and ensuring the welfare of employees are
accorded top priority by the Ministry. It hopes that the Ministry would assess the feedback
on implementational aspects of the above mentioned initiatives and take necessary follow
up action. The Committee recommends that similar welfare initiatives may also be explored
by the Government in case of other officers and employees as well.
Stability of tenure of the All India Service Officers
8. In the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has been stated that the stability of tenure of the
All India Service Officers, especially in the States, has been a subject of concern for a long time
now and that frequent and arbitrary transfers of Officers before completing a reasonable tenure on
any post has always been considered as a major reason for the declining standards of
administration. With a view to bringing in a degree of stability and transparency in the matter of
appointments and transfers, the relevant All India Service Rules have been amended for the first
time providing a minimum tenure of two years for all cadre posts in a place, except the post of
Chief Secretary and equivalent and the necessary notifications are under issue.
8.1 The Government has also stated in its reply furnished to the Committee that in addition to
the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka, the notifications for fixing
minimum tenures of cadre posts of IAS for six more cadres i.e., for Andhra Pradesh, AGMUT,
Jharkhand, Sikkim, Nagaland and Orissa have been issued. Further, notifications for the States of
Haryana, Chhattisgarh, Uttaranchal and Manipur-Tripura are under issue.

12
8.2 The Committee was apprised by the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training while
tendering oral evidence on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) that if any officer has to be
transferred before the fixed two year tenure, a Committee headed by the Chief Secretary in the
State will have to record in writing the reasons for orders and then only the transfer would take
place. He also stated that once this is notified and made into a rule, the State Governments would
start implementing it because they are as responsible as the Central Government. He further stated
that if and when it is not implemented, the officers concerned or any citizen can challenge in a
Court of Law and then the State will find it difficult to defend its case. He also informed the
Committee that as far as the Chief Secretary is concerned, his Department has not been able to
pursue with the State Governments and that a dialogue is continuing with them in this regard.
8.3 The Committee records its appreciation on this initiative of the Ministry and is of
the opinion that this would increase their self confidence and ensure that the officers get
sufficient time to master the situation at the workplace which in turn, would improve
efficiency in management.
Mid career training for All India Service Officers
9. The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that with an objective to train the officers
at various stages of their career, to enhance their horizon of knowledge and learning and to equip
them in the discharge of their duties in a better and efficient manner, a mandatory Mid Career
training programme consisting of Phase III, IV and V , has been introduced for IAS officers. The
IAS (Pay) Rules have been amended to make the completion of the relevant phase of training a
mandatory requirement for further promotion and benefits at the relevant stages in an officer’s
career. The various phases of the training are being conducted in collaboration with top of the line
international Universities and similar provisions are being finalized for the IPS and IFS officers.
9.1 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has envisaged such training
programmes. It hopes that such training would boost their self confidence and ensure that the
trainees hone their skills and capabilities and that modern management techniques are infused
into governance by the trainees. The Committee recommends that training programmes should
be visualized in such a manner that it should enhance the morale, knowledge, accountability,
democratic compulsions in delivery system and productivity of the trainees.
9.2 The Committee feels that time is a powerful segmentation variable for the
Government service as it is the only ‘objective’ dimension on which the citizen can gauge
quality of governance. It recommends that punctuality, duration, availability, speed of
response and speed of innovation in delivery system are to be inculcated during the in-
service training.
Cadre strength of IAS
10. The Committee notes that as on 1st January, 2008 the authorized cadre strength of IAS
officers is 5460 whereas the number of officers in position is 4761. On the other hand, the
Committee understands that many IAS officers are either opting for voluntary retirement or
resigning, as a result of which there is crunch of IAS officers in many States.
10.1 T he Committee is perturbed to note the vacancies prevailing in this cadre. Since
civil servants form the permanent structure and backbone of administration and are
involved in mooting innovative ideas and projects, vacancies in this cadre will certainly
hamper administrative efficiency. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its recommendation
that all out efforts should be made by the Ministry to ensure that the vacancies in this
cadre are filled timely. Moreover, applying the principle of reduction of number of officers/
posts should not be applied in the present context.

13
Cadre review
11. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the periodical review of the structure of a
regularly constituted service/cadre is an important cadre management function. It attempts to bring
about congruence between functional needs of the Organization as well as the legitimate career
aspirations of the members of the Service. The main thrust of cadre review is on manpower
projections and recruitment planning on scientific lines aiming at rationalization of the cadre
structure of the Service in order to achieve the objectives of improved efficiency, morale and
effectiveness of the cadre.
11.1 The Committee recommends that cadre review should be made in such a way as to
remove the deficiencies which exist in the Service and that the Ministry should ensure that
it satisfies the functional, structural and personnel considerations of the Service.
11.2 In the reply furnished by the Ministry to the questionnaire on Demands for Grants
(2008-09), it has been stated that a comprehensive proposal regarding amendment to CSS Rules/
Regulations was forwarded to the UPSC and that the UPSC has raised some queries in this regard
which are being examined in consultation with the Establishment Division of the Department. It has
also been stated that the team of Officers constituted in the Department of Personnel and Training
to look into issues affecting cadre management of the CSS, met thrice. But the Team could not
accomplish the task assigned to it and its deliberations also remained inconclusive and the terms
of the reference of the Team are still under active consideration of the Government.
11.3 The Committee takes note of the reply and recommends that the team of officers
constituted to look into the issues affecting cadre management of CSS should appreciate the
urgency of the issue and arrive at a logical conclusion at the earliest. It also recommends
that the terms of reference of the team should be finalized without further delay. The
Committee desires that it should be apprised of the outcome of the exercise.
11.4 The Committee is of the opinion that in the modern democratic globalised
governance, ‘service and delivery systems’ are time based and that the colonial days of
delaying the process are irrelevant in this century. The issue of time can be a threat to a
service because a service in this fast changing world has ‘no shelf life’.
Compassionate appointment
12. The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that on a demand raised by the Staff Side
in Standing Committee of the National Council (JCM) for review of the compassionate appointment
policy, DoPT has reviewed the policy and relaxed the method of calculation for existing ceiling of
5% for compassionate appointment by calculating 5% on total Direct Recruitment vacancies arisen
in a year (excluding technical posts) in respect of group ‘C’ and’ D’ posts prior to optimization.
12.1 The Committee appreciates this policy of the Ministry and recommends that the
Ministry should ensure that the policy of compassionate appointment is implemented in all
Ministries/Departments in letter and spirit, as recommended by this Committee in its 23rd
Report on Government’s Policy of Appointment on Compassionate Ground.
The Public Services Bill
13. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Government is committed and accordingly, has
been taken, to bring in a Public Services Bill to provide a statutory basis for the regulation of the
Public Services in India, as enshrined in Article 309 of the Constitution of India, to regulate the
appointment and conditions of the Public Servants, to lay down and review the fundamental values
of Public Services, the Public Services Code of Ethics, Public Service Management Code, to establish
Public Services Authority for facilitating review and proper development of Public Services and in

14
order to develop Public Services as a professional, neutral, merit based and accountable instrument
for promoting good governance and better delivery of services to the citizens.
13.1 The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry and hopes that the
confidence of the public at large upon the administration would be bolstered once the Bill
is enacted and its provisions are enforced. It is optimistic that such a legislation would
ensure better implementation of popular policies of the Government.
Toning of State Public Service Commission
14. In the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has been stated that while addressing the Chief
Secretaries of States on 20.7.2006, the Prime Minister had, inter alia, drawn the attention to the
reports of the malfunctioning of some of the State Public Service Commissions and that the State
Governments were emphasized that the object of any process of selection for entry into public
service is to secure the best and most suitable persons for the job, avoiding patronage and
favouritism and that the Members in the State Public Service Commissions (PSCs) play a crucial
role in this regard. It was further stated that State Governments were advised to ensure that their
PSCs are manned by competent, honest and independent persons of outstanding ability and high
reputation who command the confidence of the people and who would not allow themselves to be
deflected by any extraneous considerations from discharging their duty of making selections based
strictly on merit, with transparency.
14.2 The Committee desires that the Ministry should put in place an effective mechanism
to ensure that State PSCs which are the main recruiting agencies at the State level, should
be free from the shackles of nepotism and favouritism and function independently and in
a transparent manner.
Minority Welfare
15. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, in pursuance of the Prime Minister’s new 15
point Programme for welfare of minorities, guidelines in the direction of measures to give special
consideration to minorities in recruitment had been issued. In pursuance of the Sachar Committee
recommendations on posting of Muslim Police personnel in than as and Muslim Health personnel
and Teachers in Muslim concentrated areas, the concerned Ministries were advised to implement
the recommendations and issue appropriate guidelines for the purpose. Necessary action for
sensitization of Government functionaries, especially field staff is also taken by the Training
Division. The State Governments have also been requested to implement the above recommendation
of the Sachar Committee
15.1 The Committee takes note of the action taken in this regard’ and recommends that
the recommendations of the Sachar Committee should be analysed in detail and proper
Quarterly review mechanism should be chalked out to ensure that the recommendations of
the Committee are implemented in letter and spirit. Moreover, the 15 point programme
should be propagated in “minority living habitats” and assembly places.
Liaison Officers
16. The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that in each Ministry/Department, the Deputy
Secretary in-charge of administration or any other officer at least of the rank of Deputy Secretary
is appointed to act as Liaison Officer in respect of matters relating to the representation of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in all establishments and services under the administrative
control of the Ministry/Department who will also be responsible for ensuring due compliance, by
the subordinate appointment authorities, of the orders and instructions pertaining to the reservation
of vacancies in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other benefits admissible to

15
them. Each Ministry/Department is supposed to have a Cell within the Ministry/Department under
the direct control of the Liaison Officer to assist him to discharge his duties effectively. In offices
under the control of Head of Department also, a Liaison Officer is nominated for work relating to
representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who have also been made responsible for
reservation matters relating to Physically Handicapped and ex-servicemen. Orders were issued on
6-3-1997 for appointment of separate Liaison Officers in each Ministry/Department for looking into
the matters concerning reservation for Other Backward Classes also.
16.1 The Committee acknowledges the initiative and is of the opinion that the liaison
officers should be suitably equipped with the provisions of reservation policy and resources,
to ensure due compliance with the policy of reservation.
Social Corporate Responsibility i.e., Implementation of Reservation Policy and Special
Recruitment Drive for SCs/STs/OBCs/PH
17. The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that as per the various provisions of the
Constitution, the Government has issued various instructions providing for reservation in services for
the members of the Scheduled Castes (SCs), the Scheduled Tribes (STs) and the Other Backward
Classes (OBCs) in direct recruitment. There is no provision of reservation in promotion for OBC
candidates. Section 33 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and
Full Participation) Act, 1995 (PWD Act) provides that every appropriate Government shall appoint in
every establishment such percentage of vacancies not less than three per cent for persons or class
of persons with disability of which one per cent each shall be reserved for persons suffering from
(i) blindness or low vision, (ii) hearing impairment and (iii) locomotors disability or cerebral palsy;
in the posts identified for each disability: Section 32 of the Act requires the Government to identify
posts in establishments which can be reserved for the persons with disability.
17.1 The Annual Report goes on to state that the Government has been very sensitive to the
protection of the interests of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in general and to their
adequate representation in Services in particular. The Government had, accordingly, launched a
Special Recruitment Drive to fill up the backlog reserved vacancies of the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes.
Special Recruitment Drive launched in August 2004
for filling up backlog vacancies of  SC/ST
Category Mode Backlog Identified Filled up to
29.02.2008
DR 11770 9054
SC
Prom. 18241 17722
DR 14588 1 1392
ST
Prom. 16246 15276
DR 26358 20466
Total
Prom. 34487 32998
G
RAND T OTAL 60845 53,444
(DR+Prom)

16
17.2 As per the reply to the questionnaire on Demands for Grants (2008-09) furnished by the
Ministry, there are 13,163 vacancies in promotion quota for which candidates for promotion were
not available even in the extended zone of consideration. Thus, there were 34,487 vacancies in
promotion quota which could be identified. Out of these 32,998 vacancies have been filled. In DR
quota, 20,446 vacancies have been filled up. It may be seen that out of 60,845 backlog vacancies
(DR quota + Promotion quota) which could be filled up, 53,444 vacancies have been filled up.
Thus 87.84% ‘of vacancies which could be identified have already been filled up.
17.3 The Committee fails to understand why only 87.84% of vacancies could be filled up
so far. The Committee observes that it is a Constitutional obligation and that Ministries/
Departments should take up the issue on top priority basis. The Committee holds the view
that unless the backlog is nil, the tall claims of benefits of reservation reaching out to the
beneficiaries will remain unfulfilled. It strongly feels that administrative lapses/lackadaisical
attitude should not be the reason for closing the doors of appointment on the entitled
classes. The Committee recommends that the Ministries/Departments should comprehend
the gravity of the situation and take affirmative action, in this regard. The Secretary, DoPT
should supervise the filling up of backlog vacancies of SCs, STs, OBCs and PH annually. If
possible, he should take up the matter with his counterparts and report to the Government.
17.4 The Committee feels that due to proper implementation of reservation policy in
education, large number of people in the reserved classes are eligible for Government jobs.
It is an irony that when they are well educated and competent for Government jobs, doors
are closed on them for unknown reasons. The Committee recommends that the roadblocks
in the proper implementation of reservation policy should be examined threadbare and
measures should be taken on war footing to remove the hurdles. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to take all possible steps to indulge co-operation of all Ministries/
Departments in this regard,  expeditiously.
17.5 The Committee desires that it should be informed of the latest steps taken in this
regard, particularly the steps taken for monitoring the problem of backlog and clearing the
same by respective Ministries, Departments, Public Sector Enterprises and other
Organisations of the Central Government.
OBC vacancies
18. The Committee was informed by the Secretary, DoPT while deposing on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) that a Group of Ministers had been set up to recommend on the question of
filling up the backlog of OBC vacancies and that it had submitted its report. He apprised the
Committee that the report of Group of Ministers will be placed before the Cabinet for appropriate
decision.
18.1 The Committee is pleased to note the action taken with regard to filling up of
vacancies of OBCs and would like to impress upon the Ministry that concrete steps should
be taken to implement the recommendations in the report of GOM and inform this
Committee of the outcome thereof.
Special Casual Leave for Person with Disabilities
19. According to the Annual Report of the Ministry, orders were issued for granting special
casual leave for not more than 10 days in a calendar year to Central Government employees with
disabilities as defined in the Persons with disabilities (Equal Opportunities Protection of Rights and
Full the Participation) Act, 1995 for participating in Conferences/Seminars/Trainings/Workshops
related to disability and development related programmes organized by National and State Level
agencies.

17
19.1 The Committee takes note of the interest shown by the Ministry in the welfare of
disabled employees and welcomes such a step.
Backlog of reserved vacancies of physically handicapped people
20. During the interactions held by the Committee with various Ministries/Departments at
various parts of the country during 2007, while examining the subject “Backlog of reserved
vacancies of Physically Challenged People”, the Committee could gather that many Ministries/
Departments have consistently failed to fill up the vacancies/posts in the reserved handicapped
quota. Many of them have not even identified the posts which can be earmarked under this quota.
20.1 The Committee is deeply concerned about such apathy to the rights of the
handicapped people. It takes strong exception to such insensitive tendencies. It is of the
strong view that in a welfare State like ours, such callous attitude is unpardonable. The
Committee strongly recommends that urgent steps should be taken to ensure that the
vacancies in the handicapped quota should be identified and filled up within a period of six
months, in all Ministries/Departments and their PSEs and Organisations.
20.2 The Committee invites the attention of the Government to certain grievances of the
colour blind people, submitted to the Committee, in which they have highlighted the apathy
of the Government towards their employment opportunities. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should take note of such cases of persons with uncommon disabilities and
take necessary action urgently. It wishes to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Placement System
21.0 In the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has been stated that to make the ‘placement system’
more transparent and efficient, a software has been developed which generates panels of names,
for vacancies under the Central Staffing Scheme, by matching the experience profile, educational
qualifications and training profiles of the officers with the job requirement of the post. For the
purpose, an Online Application Form has been introduced for the Central Staffing Scheme from the
year 2008. The officers can apply online, giving details of their experience, educational
qualification, trainings etc. which are later, matched when placement to a particular Ministry is
considered. Each officer can also give 3 preferences for his posting to the Ministries depending
on his area of interest and experience. The software also takes into account the preferred Ministry/
Department that the officer may like to work in.
21.1 It has also been stated that efforts are on to provide an interface of this software to all
the State Governments and the Cadre Controlling Authorities of the Group ‘A’ Services so that they
can even validate the application forms, give vigilance and cadre clearance etc. online. This would
save time and bring in efficiency in the system by capturing, in real time the data of officers for
placement in the Central Government. The system should also speed up the process of placements
so that the officers coming to the Government of India on deputation can get more time to shift
and take care of other requirements for settling down.
21.2 While recording its appreciation on the initiative of the Ministry for transparent and
efficient ‘placement system’, the Committee is of the view that the true essence of the
initiative will lose its sheen if delayed in its operation, in view of the advancement of
technology. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such initiatives should be made
workable at least within a quarter of a financial year of its initiation.
Introduction of Experience Code Directory
22. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Career Management Section of the office of

18
the Establishment Officer is responsible for maintaining a database of all IAS officers and such
officers of others Services who are on Central Deputation. This database captures each officers’
profile including the areas of ‘experience’ that he/she has acquired over the years, and is reflected
in the officers’ Executive Record Sheet. This data contained in the Cadre Management Division,
especially pertaining to the experience profile of officers is, at times crucial, as it is used for
selecting names of suitable officers for various Foreign Assignments and other important
assignments in the Government. An exercise was conducted in which the experience ‘fields’
available in the code directory were rationalised to make them more topical and relevant to the
current requirements. The ‘old’ and the ‘new’ code directory of ‘experience’ fields were placed on
the website of the Department. Suggestions from officers across the board were called for. The
relevant suggestions were considered, and the changes incorporated. The existing database ‘of all
the officers was then converted as per the newly formulated experience Code Directory.
22.1 The Committee acknowledges this initiative of the Ministry and desires that
transparency should be ensured in the selection and non-selection of a candidate with the
specific reasons provided for that.
ACC Vacancy Monitoring System
23. The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that to make the ACC (Appointments
Committee of the Cabinet) V acancy Monitoring System more effective, an Online Web Based
Monitoring Software was designed to ensure timely submission of proposals for appointments to
the posts requiring approval of the ACC. The A VMS (ACC Vacancy Monitoring System) has been
made available to all the Ministries/Departments so that they can keep a close watch on the
vacancy position and take timely steps to send proposals to the Secretariat of the Appointments
Committee of the Cabinet.
23.1 The Committee is pleased to note the initiative of the Ministry and opines that in
selection and non-selection of a candidate, transparency should be the mode and specific
reasons should be given for the same.
Gender Issues
24. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the Department of Personnel and Training
(DoPT), Government of India and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) jointly
implemented a Capacity Building Project for Civil Services during the mid nineties and it had four
broad objectives. One of the objectives concerned issues of women in Civil Services.
24.1 The UNDP assisted Project aimed at providing a technical support to review career
development, placement and utilization of women in higher public service, particularly at decision
making levels and setting up an institutional mechanism to examine women’s issues in Civil Service
regulations.
24.2 The final Workshop of the Cadre Controlling Authorities (CCA) was held in New Delhi on
October 14-15, 1998. The recommendations of this Workshop were compiled by LBSNAA,
Mussorie and were circulated by Department of Administrative Reforms to all the Ministries/
Departments/CCAs. They were requested to review the recommendations with a view to identifying
their own working environment and rules, etc. and review them to remove Gender bias and make
them Gender friendly/neutral.
24.3 Based on the Project Report, a Focal Point was set up in DoPT at the Desk of DS/ACC
in 1998 which was transferred to Department of AR and PG for some time and is now located
in CR Division. The Focal Point was to operate through a network of nodal point to be located
in various Ministries/Departments.

19
24.4 As a follow-up action of the post-Project scenario, it was decided in June, 2000 to form
a Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (P) to review Rules and Regulations by
Ministries/Departments/CCAs to remove, Gender bias; give adequate publicity to enable women to
enter Government Service; Introduce Training Programmes on Gender sensitization by all CCAs, as
well as activities originated by the Focal Point.
24.5 At a meeting of Steering Committee held on 6-11-2000, tentative minimum agenda was
formulated. At the next meeting of the Steering Committee, a 12 point minimum agenda which can
be implemented quickly and six in phase II, of long duration was finalized. A reporting mechanism
was also devised to report/monitor action taken by the concerned Departments/CCAs.
24.6 Special steps have been taken to ensure that women officers get adequate representation in
the training programmes of the DoPT. To ensure that women officers get adequate representation
in the higher echelons of management, attention is paid to their cases during empanelment of
officers of is rank to include women officers.
24.7 To facilitate posting of couples in the same station, it has been approved that in case of
a woman officer, whose husband is posted under the Government of India, the’ cooling off period
may be waived upto six months so that she may get a posting at the station where her husband
is posted.
24.8 The Committee takes note of the activities undertaken under this Project. It is of
the opinion that at the stage of formulation/framing of policies, programmes and schemes
by the Ministry, women should be given adequate representation.
Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT)
25. During the presentation made by the Secretary, DoPT on 25th March, 2008 before the
Committee, he stated that 103 organisations have been brought under the purview of CAT.
25.1 The Committee hopes that more Government employees will be benefited by this
step and that it will ensure the welfare of those officials who are the back bone of
administration.
25.2 The Committee could gather that many Ministries/Departments do not implement
judgments of CAT. It is of the view that non-implementation of judgements/decisions of
CAT defeat the very purpose for which they were established. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should ensure that the objective of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985
under which the CAT was created is realized through a monitoring mechanism in place
which will receive all the judgments/orders passed by CAT and then seek the status of
implementation from the respective Ministries/Departments etc. within a time frame and a
para, thereof shall be given in the Annual Report of the Ministry, so that a clear picture
emerges in this regard.
Capacity Building and Awareness Generation for Right to Information and implementation
of the Act
26. The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that in partnership with United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), a comprehensive approach has been taken under the Capacity
Building Programme on Access to Information to operationalize the Right to Information Act, 2005.
The project aims to work in two districts each in all States in India to enhance the capacities of
Government officials as information providers, of citizens as information seekers, and a range of
actors to facilitate the sharing of information. Nearly 3900 participants have been trained under the
project. The project has created a bank of RTI manuals and guides. Almost all States have

20
translated the RTI Act and Manuals/Guides into the local languages. Mass awareness activities have
been undertaken in various States through various media modes including more than 7 lakh
pamphlets, brochure and posters, 100 radio programmes, 900 television adverts/shows and 300
kalajathas/road shows/puppet shows. It has brought important stakeholders together on different
platforms to discuss and deliberate on key issues. The project has enabled an online knowledge and
networking hub on RTI through a web-enabled portal- www.rti.org.in. This portal is one of its kinds
in the country and provides a wide range of information and networking opportunities for RTI
practitioners and citizens.
26.1 The culture of secrecy in the working of the Government has been replaced by the system
of transparency by enacting the Right to Information Act. In order to ensure effective
implementation of the provisions of the RTI Act, 2005 the Government has issued instructions
requiring all public authorities to update records, improve infrastructure and bring out necessary
manuals as provided in the Act; designate the first appellate authorities alongwith the Public
Information Officers and publish their particulars; comply with the provisions regarding suo-motu
disclosure; and create a central point within the public authority to receive applications for
information and appeals. Government has also published a Guide for the guidance of persons, who
want to seek information under the Act.
26.2 In the reply to the questionnaire on Demands for Grants (2008-09) furnished by the
Ministry, it has been stated that the Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity had launched
a campaign in 2006 for propagating awareness about the Right to Information Act and that further
steps have also been taken up in the matter. The Department of Personnel & Training has issued
a guide for information seekers vide O.M. No.1/8/2007-IR dated 8.11.2007.
26.3 All the State administrations have been requested to get the guidelines translated into the
regional language(s) and give wide publicity to these guidelines. Besides, the State Governments and
Union Administrations have been requested to involve the Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)
working in the States to spread awareness about the Act. A number of NGOs like the Centre for
Good Governance (CGG), Hyderabad; Yashwant Rao Chavan Academy of Public Development
(YASHDA), Pune as national implementing agency and Participatory Research in Asia (PRIA) have
undertaken awareness generation programmes in different States with the support of Government.
26.4 The Committee appreciates the initiatives and commitment of the Ministry in this
regard. It would like to recommend that adequate publicity should be given to the RTI Act
and the guidelines issued in this regard in the electronic and print media and more so in
regional newspapers, periodicals also so as to create awareness amongst all sections of the
society, media and civil society organisations at the regional, grass root and panchayat level.
The Committee hopes that such efforts will give an impetus to the campaign for access to
information and will ensure greater participatory governance. At the same time, Committee
desires that appropriate steps should be taken to minimize, rather eradicate the chances of
misuse of the provisions of the RTI Act, both at the general public and Governmental
levels.
26.5 The Comm ittee opines that the application under RTI Act should not be rejected for non-
payment of fee at the initial stage and then incur expenditure for defending cases in High Courts.
Instead the applications should be entertained and the fee may be added at the time of receiving
the information in such cases.
Pensioners’ Portal
27. The Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, while making
a presentation on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department, informed the Committee that

21
more utilities such as banking service, post office, property tax, bill payment, ticketing, income tax
payment, tourism related links, insurance and health have been added to the Pensioners’ Portal.
27.1 The Committee was apprised that visits were undertaken by the Department officials to
various States to facilitate identification of the pensioners’ associations and that such associations
have been identified in most of the States. The Committee appreciates the initiatives made by the
Department in providing software and hardware to these associations so that whatever information
needed by the beneficiaries could be accessed by them right from home.
27.2 The Committee was further apprised that the Grievance Redressal Programme with the
Pensioners’ Portal has been duff-tailed so that the pensioners could make on-line complaints, get
identity number and get the response within two days, or a maximum of two months.
27.3 The Committee commends the excellent work done by the Department in this aspect
to help the pensioners. The Committee is happy to note that the Department is seeking a
security audit for this system and envisaging an impact assessment for its evaluation. The
Committee would like to suggest that the service register of each Government employee
should be opened in an electronic form and that it should be updated electronically. Also,
the concerned employee should be allotted a unique registration code for accessing
information in his electronic service register.
Centralised Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS)
28. As per the note furnished by the Ministry during the examination of Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry, CPGRAMS is an online web-enabled system over NICNET developed
by DARPG with the technical support from NIC with an objective of speedy redress and effective
monitoring of grievances by various Ministries/Departments/Organisations, including the nodal
agencies. This system provides the following:
➢ An internet based Grievances Redress Mechanism for helping the speedy redress of the
grievances by the Ministries/Departments/Government Organisations; and thus help
promote transparency, accountability and efficiency in public grievance handling by the
concerned Public Grievance Officers (PGOs).
➢ A facility to the Ministry/Department/Organization to enter the grievance received by
them directly by post or through internet and redress the same efficiently.
➢ A tool to the Director of Public Grievances of various Ministries/Departments/
Government Organizations and their sub-ordinate offices for efficient grievance redress
and monitoring.
➢ A facility to the nodal agencies to monitor the redress action taken by various Ministries/
Departments.
28.1 Consequent upon online registration of a grievance by a citizen or the PGO, each registered
grievance gets a computerized unique Registration Number for identification and future reference.
This unique registration number can be used by the concerned citizen/PGO for sending
reminder(s)/clarification(s) as well as for accessing the current status of the grievance. The
grievance redress action taken (using the online feature of CPGRAMS) by the concerned Grievance
Officer of this registered grievance can be viewed by the aggrieved citizen online. CPGRAMS is
available at http://pgportal.gov.in under the  link “Centralised PGRAMS” , which can be accessed
by the Secretariat Staff of Ministry/Department/Organisation for viewing/entering and processing
the grievances received through internet/post.
28.2 The citizen can lodge his grievance online through the link available at http://pgportal.gov.in
directly to the concerned Ministry/Department and get an immediate acknowledgement and ascertain

22
the level at which his grievance is pending. The citizen can expect a reply from the Ministry/
Department within two months. His grievance is monitored not only by the nodal officer of the
Ministry/Department, but also the DARPG. The grievances sent manually or by post are also
integrated into a single data base.
28.3 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has acted upon its
recommendation made in its 19th Report that the PGRAMS should be introduced in all
Ministries and Departments and that the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances may pursue the matter with those Ministries who have yet to install PGRAMS
and to take expeditious steps to install the same without further delay. It appreciates that
this has led to the birth of Centralized PGRAMS, the implementation of which started in
June, 2007.
28.4 The Committee is happy to note that the CPGRAMS has been benefited by many
user organisations such as Railways and that its benefits are utilized by even the Zonal
Offices of the Railways.
Statutory Support for Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism
29. The Committee, in its 19th Report, had recommended that initiative should be taken to
envisage Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism (PGRM) in a statutory form on the line of RTI
Act so that grievances are pursued till their logical end.
29.1 In the Action Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that since the nature
of public grievances vary from one organization to another, the enactment of PGRM in a statutory
form would require thorough consideration.
29.2 The Committee is not satisfied with this reply. It is of the opinion that the
Ministries/Departments should keep a close vigil on grievances and that they should be
redressed in a time bound manner. It could gather that Government is the major litigant
in Courts of law, resulting in vast expenditure of public money, Governmental resources and
time. It is of the view that the essence of good governance is defeated in the absence of
efficient and timely redressal of grievances. If the grievances are redressed timely at the
level at which they arise, the aggrieved will not approach Courts of Law. This will save
resources and time, of both the aggrieved and the Government.
29.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should make a study
as to the nature of cases pending in Courts mainly because of non-application of in built
Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism and make the erring office accountable and
punished. This will reduce the number of cases in Courts which arise due to non-application
of mind and soul into the dispute.
29.4 The Committee is of the view that public service delivery system is inefficient unless
it caters to the needs and issues of the common man. In order to assuage the concerns of
the people regarding the efficiency of the public services, it is pertinent that their
grievances are redressed promptly.
29.5 The Committee strongly feels that enacting a statute for PGRM will go a long way
in ensuring participatory governance and the Ministry should seriously examine this issue
and the Committee be apprised of the outcome therefrom.
Administrative Reforms Commission
30. The Committee was apprised by the representatives of the Department during their
presentation on Demands for Grants (2008-09) that 7 (seven) reports have been submitted by the

23
Administrative Reforms Commission and that 11 (eleven) more Reports are yet to be presented.
The Group of Ministers (GoM) constituted to consider the Reports of the Administrative Reforms
Commission has so far considered two Reports namely, (i) Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements
and Governance – a Case Study about the implementation of the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act and (ii) Crisis Management: From Despair to Hope. Ministry of Rural Development
and Ministry of Home Affairs, which are administratively concerned with these Reports, have been
requested to take further necessary action to implement the accepted recommendations.
30.1 The Committee recommends that the concerned Ministries/Departments should be
impressed upon to implement the accepted recommendations and the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances should monitor the progress made in this
regard.
Governance Knowledge Centre Portal
31. The Ministry, in its Annual Report, has stated that in order to ensure quality documentation
of select best practices on a continuing basis, Centre for the Study of Law and Governance,
Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) was selected as Consultant. Governance Knowledge Centre has
now become functional as the team of researchers of JNU have completed documentation of 23
best practices’ in the first round of spot visits. They have also worked on re-designing the portal
in order to make it more attractive, informative and interactive for the users. Before launching the
re-designed portal, it has to pass the test of security audit as prescribed by NIC. For this purpose,
quotations from empanelled agencies of NIC have been invited and the upgraded portal is likely to
be launched by 2nd week of April, 2008.
31.1 The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry.
Citizens’ Charter
32. The Committee was apprised that all the Ministries/Departments of Government of India
except 13 Ministries have formulated their Citizens’ Charter.
32.1 The Committee recommends that the Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances should encourage all Ministries/Departments to include Citizens’ Charter
as an item in their Annual Report and to implement the Citizens’ Charter for effective
service delivery. They should also provide adequate support to formulate Citizens’ Charter
and implement the same. Special emphasis should be given to formulate and implement the
Citizens’ Charter in newly created Ministries/Departments. The Department should
encourage other Departments, Organisations and Institutions to coin a “slogan” and to
create a “logo”, reflecting their role, functions and motto, in the pattern of private
companies and corporate houses, and which can be comprehended by the common man.
Sevottam
33. In the Action Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that the
implementation process of Sevottam was started on a pilot basis in ten Departments having large
public interface. The Department of Administrative Reforms and Pubic Grievances is providing
technical and consultancy support in these ten Departments and also monitoring the progress of
implementation. Several training programmes have also been conducted to train the officers and
field staff of these departments on implementation of Sevottam. Feedback received from these
Departments shows that financial and manpower resources are essentially required to implement the
Sevottam model.

24
33.1 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry in this regard and
is of the opinion that it needs time bound implementation.
Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA)
34. The Committee notes that the Department of Personnel and Training had sanctioned
Plan Grant of Rs.1 crore to IIPA, during the year 2006-07, for infrastructural activities,
against which first instalment of Rs.50 lakh was released during the year. A sum of Rs.39.49 lakh
only was utilized during the year and balance of Rs.10.51 lakh was carried over to the next
year.
34.1 The Committee further notes that Rs.5 crore has been allocated by the Planning Commission
in Annual Plan 2008-09, while the grant to IIPA was only Rs.50 lakh in RE (2007-08).
34.2 The Committee is of the opinion that IIPA has greater role in training the officials
in modern administration. But the Committee feels that the works and programmes of IIPA
do not meet the required benchmark of appreciation. The Committee is of the view that
since the IIPA was unable to fully utilize the earlier Plan Grant, the setting apart of Rs.5
crore in this financial year is not justified. Further, the Committee wishes to be apprised
of the details of the proposed utilization of this amount.
OTHER ISSUES RAISED BY THE COMMITTEE
Need for granting more powers to the Department of Personnel and Training
35. While responding to a query raised by the Committee regarding implementation of plans/
schemes and policies envisaged and formulated by DoPT, the Secretary, Department of Personnel
and Training stated that in the Government of India as well as in the State Governments, the
Ministries and Departments are nearly independent and autonomous and that they are only
accountable to the Parliament. He also stated that the Ministries are not accountable to any other
Ministry and that DoPT only lays down polices.
35.1 The Committee, therefore, feels that the Department of Personnel and Training is
the nerve centre of the entire administration of all the Ministries/Departments of the
country, and that whatever vibrance and dynamism is imparted by the Department, is
reflected on other Ministries/ Departments of the Government. Further, the Committee is
of the opinion that since the mandate of formulation of policies and programmes are given
to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, it should invariably be given
powers to implement, monitor and review them and to undertake necessary follow-up
action. In view of the above, the Committee observes that the, DoPT should be given more
powers as regards ensuring implementation of the schemes/ policies envisaged by the
Ministry and approved by the Cabinet.
35.2 The Committee is of the considered view that the Secretary, DoPT should be
empowered to such an extent so as to get replies from all Secretaries of Departments
immediately. The Committee is of the opinion that the data collection regarding the
reservation policy shows the lack of respect to the Department. The Committee is of the
view that the Secretary, DoPT should be treated as Cabinet Secretary manning all the
Departments in respect of the schemes/policies envisaged by the Ministry and approved by
the Cabinet.
Nomination of SC/ST officer in Selection Board
36. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, instructions exist that the Ministries/Departments

25
etc. should endeavour to nominate to the maximum extent possible, a Scheduled Caste/ Tribe/Other
Backward Class officer on the Selection Boards, Departmental Promotion Committees constituted
for various posts/services under them.
36.1 Some Members of the Committee raised concern that though it is obligatory that whenever
there is a Selection Board there should be one person each from SC/ST/OBC and from minority
group, it is not implemented in true spirit.
36.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should address this issue on priority
basis to ensure that whenever there is a Selection Board, there should be one person each
from SC/ST/OBC and from minority group.
Manpower issues in the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
37. The Committee takes note that this Department is the nodal Department, inter alia, for
formulating and implementing various schemes/programmes regarding ‘administrative reforms’
across the Government of India and that in order to fulfil the mandate, it is crucial that its
workforce should comprise of officers and staff with professional/technical qualifications to impart
the required momentum to the reform process.
37.1 However, the Committee has been apprised that the personnel for this Department are
selected and appointed in the similar manner as in the various Departments of the Government of
India and that the Central Staffing Scheme under which officers of the level of Deputy Secretary
and above level are appointed, does not provide any flexibility for selection of officers with aptitude
for reforms. The Committee feels that this could be a hindrance to the Department’s ability
to offer considered advice to client Ministries. Also, there is an imperative need to provide
training to staff from various cadres on subjects such as computers, governance, public
policy and other soft skills like communication, leadership and personality development.
37.2 Taking the abovementioned facts into consideration, the Committee is of the
considered view that since the permanent staff with the Government may not have the
requisite expertise to deal with an environment which is undergoing constant mutation, it
is inevitable that assistance of experts and expert organizations are made available to this
Department. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibilities
of appointing specialists/consultants/experts for specific assignments in this Department on
fixed tenures. It feels that such a step would help to tap the vast reservoir of talent that
exists in the country and which could be harnessed for the public good.

26
26
CHAPTER –IV
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
38. The budgetary allocation for CBI for the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 are as follows:—
(Rs. in crores)
BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09
Non-Plan 132.78 145.28 136.48
Plan 12.70 12.70 30.14
38.1 The Special Police Establishment (SPE) came into existence in the year 1941 through an
executive order with a rather limited role and responsibility to investigate offences of bribery and
corruption connected with transactions relating to War and Supply Department, Government of
India and with the passage of time resulted in the evolution of the Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI) of today. Over the last 64 years, the organisation has evolved from an anti-corruption agency
to a multi-faceted, multi-disciplinary central police law enforcement agency with capability,
credibility and legal mandate to investigate and prosecute offences anywhere in India.
38.2 At present, CBI has the following Divisions:
(1) Anti-Corruption Division;
(2) Economic Offences Division;
(3) Special Crimes Division;
(4) Directorate of Prosecution;
(5) Administration Division;
(6) Policy and International Policy Cooperation Division;
(7) Training Division; and
(8) Central Forensic Science Laboratory.
38.3 The CBI derives the power to investigate from the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,
1946 (DSPE). As per section 2 of the Act, DSPE has jurisdiction to investigate offences in the
Union Territories only. However, the jurisdiction can be extended by the Central Government to
other areas including Railway areas and States under section 5(1) of the Act, provided the State
Governments have accorded consent under section 6 of the Act. The superintendence of Delhi
Special Police Establishment vests with the Central Government save investigations of offences
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 in which the superintendence vests with the Central
Vigilance Commission.
38.4 Director, CBI as Inspector General of Police, Delhi Special Police Establishment, is
responsible for the administration of the organization. The CVC Act, 2003 provides mechanism for
selection of Director, CBI and security of his tenure to hold office for a period not less than two
years from the date of assuming office, notwithstanding anything contrary in the conditions of
service. The Act also provides mechanism for selection of other officers of the rank of SP and
above in CBI.

27
Vacancies in CBI
39. The following table submitted for consideration of the Committee reflects the vacancies
existing in various ranks in CBI:—
Vacancies in various ranks
Posts Sanctioned Actual V acancies Vacancies
Strength (SS) Strength (AS) (%)
Executive 4077 3254 823 20.1%
Prosecution 230 159 71 30.8%
Ministerial 1284 978 306 23.8%
Technical 154 52 102 66.2%
Group ‘D’ 144 122 22 15.2%
Canteen 70 58 12 17.1%
TOTAL: 5959 2623 1336 22.4%
Vacancies in investigating ranks
Ranks SS AS V acancies Vacancies (%)
Addl. SP 75 59 16 21.3%
Dy. SP 240 106 134 58.8%
Inspector 755 605 150 19.8%
SI 381 267 114 29.9%
39.1 The Committee is of the view that the number of vacancies existing in CBI is
alarming. It recommends that the causes/reasons for the vacancies should be thoroughly
examined and should be addressed immediately. It is of the opinion that such large number
of vacancies will affect the operational efficiency of the organisation and the existing staff
will be hard pressed to deliver results. The vacancies of 30.8%, 66.2 %, 58.8% in the ranks
of Prosecution, Technical and Deputy Superintendent of Police are alarming. It strongly
observes that when we aspire CBI to evolve into an organisation of international standards,
there is no scope for such vacancies which will adversely affect the pace of investigation and
trial.
39.2 The Committee was apprised that delay in holding Departmental Promotion Committees
(DPCs) in UPSC is one of the reasons for vacancies existing in CBI. However, it takes note of
the submission made by the Secretary, UPSC before the Committee during deliberations on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) that as on date, there is not even a single case of CBI vacancy
pending with the UPSC and that in the past, in many cases, several reminders were sent to CBI
for intimating the Commission of their requirements.
39.3 The Committee fails to understand the total absence of co-ordination and
communication between two organisations functioning within the jurisdiction of the same
Ministry. It would like to impress upon the Ministry that immediate remedy should be
devised to build better co-operation amongst the various organisations and agencies

28
functioning under the Department of Personnel and Training, particularly between CBI and
UPSC for that matter.
39.4 The Committee is upset over the vacancies existing in CBI at various grades which
it had, on various occasions pointed out to the organisation, but have yielded no results. It
recommends that if vacancies are not filled in the deputationist quota, they should be filled
by direct recruitment or through promotions. It strongly recommends that stringent plans
should be chalked out and the recruiting agency, i.e. the UPSC should be pressed upon to
ensure that the vacancies are filled up without delay. While filling up vacancies, CBI should
provide more preference to women in various levels of the organisations, atleast to the level
of 33%.
39.5 In the reply to the questionnaire on Demands for Grants (2008-09) furnished to the
Committee, the Ministry has submitted that special incentive allowance @25 per cent of pay up
to the rank of Senior SP and @ 15 per cent of pay for the rank of DIG and above have been
sanctioned for executive ranks in CBI to attract more officers for induction on deputation.
39.6 The Committee recommends that in the event of the vacancies not being filled up
due to non-availability of officers on deputation inspite of granting such incentives, steps
should be taken to fill up those vacancies by seeking recruitment from the permanent cadre
of CBI.
39.7 The Ministry has also furnished to the Committee that the proposal of the CBI to exempt
them from the request of prior approval of Screening Committee for filling of direct vacancies, is
under consideration of the Government.
39.8 The Committee recommends that the proposal should be considered expeditiously so
that the professional efficiency of CBI does not suffer due to vacancies not being filled up.
Prosecution
40. The Committee notes that the registration of cases has decreased from 1156 in 2006 to 940
in 2007. The representatives of CBI deposed before the Committee on 25th March, 2008 that it
is the result of conscious decision made by CBI to register only those cases which are sustainable
in Court of Law.
40.1 The Committee appreciates such efforts and is of the opinion that this would
maximize the conviction rate and minimize expending of resources and time.
40.2 The Committee is concerned about the pendency of cases under trial, especially those
which are pending for 10 years and more. It observes that pendency is one of the major
concerns which should be addressed urgently and recommends that concrete steps should be
taken in a time bound manner to minimize the backlog of cases.
Separate Enactment for CBI
41. The Committee, in its 5th, 14th and 19th Reports had recommended that CBI should be
empowered by a suitable legislation to investigate all the offences under the Central Laws in any
part of the country after obtaining concurrence of the Central Government.
41.1 The Ministry has stated in the reply to the questionnaire on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
furnished to the Committee that as on date, 69 existing Central and 18 State Acts and 231 offences
under IPC have already been notified enabling CBI to take up investigation subject to provisions
under Sections 5 and 6 which require consent of the State Government for officers of DSPE to
exercise powers and jurisdiction. It has been stated that the State Governments are required to, and

29
generally give, their consent to enable CBI to take over investigation and that CBI, thus, has
adequate powers under the present legislation where the autonomy of the State Government is
respected, but at the same time, their cooperation is available to the CBI.
41.2 The Committee, however, fails to agree and strongly feels that the absence of a
separate statute for CBI is a major hindrance for effective functioning of the organisation.
It observes that if we aspire CBI to transform into an organisation of international
standards, an effective statutory support is inevitable. The Committee, has time and again,
felt the necessity for a separate enactment for CBI. It is of the opinion that the
Constitution of India itself envisages the same, as has been observed by this Committee in
its 24th Report on “Working of CBI”.
41.3 In view of the above, the Committee would appreciate the avoidance of such evasive
replies and recommends that this matter should instead be urgently examined at the
highest level. The Committee wishes to be apprised of the action taken in this regard at
the earliest.
Budgetary Concerns of CBI
42. The Committee was apprised by the representatives of CBI that there was shortfall in the
budgetary grant under the following heads:— Medical (14.56%), Foreign Travel Expenses
(17.43%), Public Prosecutors (36.47%) and Information Technology (66.01%).
42.1 The Committee strongly feels that such shortfall will adversely affect the welfare of
the subordinate staff, foreign investigations, special incentives to public prosecutors, IT
initiatives etc. It recommends that adequate funds should be provided under these heads so
that investigation/prosecution do not suffer for want of technological resources and the
morale of the officers and staff are kept high.
42.2 The Committee is of the opinion that a premier investigating agency such as CBI on
whom the public, Courts and Governments have immense faith, should not suffer on
account of shortage of funds. It is of the view that if prosecutors in CBI are not paid
reasonably, or if inadequacy of funds turns out to be a reason for inability to engage a
foreign lawyer in cases having international ramifications, the merit of prosecution will
suffer drastically. It is of the opinion that in order to attract best talent to its fold,
attractive incentives and emoluments should be granted to the officers and staff of CBI.
Therefore, austerity measures should not be a road block to ensuring highest professional
acumen and operational efficiency in the organisation.
42.3 The Committee also recommends that proper mechanism should be put in place to
ensure that 33% of the work force in CBI constitutes women.

30
30
CHAPTER–IV
LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ADMINISTRATION
43. The budgetary allocation for LBSNAA for the financial years 2007-08 and 2008-09 are as
follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09
Non-Plan 9.32 9.09 9.97
Plan 20.00 8.40 27.00
43.1 The Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie is the
apex training institution in the country for imparting training to members of the Indian Civil
Services in a common Foundation Course for the All India Services and the Central Service Group-
A; and professional training to regular recruits of the Indian Administrative Service (IAS). The
Academy also conducts in-service training courses for middle to senior level members of the IAS
and induction level training to officers promoted to the IAS from the State Civil Services. It offers
a range of specialized inputs for a diverse clientele. Individuals, Non-Government Organizations, the
corporate sector, and the Government both within India and abroad, are offered customized
courses, which cater to their research and training requirements.
Strategy for Training
44. According to the Annual Report of LBSNAA, the effort of the Academy is to help create
a bureaucracy that commands respect by performance rather than through position. They interpret
the Constitutional mandate for civil servants as one that promotes empathy for the underprivileged,
commitment to the unity and integrity of the nation, a promise to uphold integrity and impeccable
character in a manner that they appear as role models for the large number of subordinates
working with them and for the society at large; a respect for all castes, creeds, religions; and a
professional competence that makes the battle against poverty the ultimate objective of every civil
servant. At a time when nations are going global in the processes of liberalization and economic
reforms, it is their endeavour to make young civil servants realize the need of upholding enlightened
national interest in their interface with the world at large. They also try to learn from the
experiences of bureaucracies that have helped in the achievement of economic progress, growth
with equity and human wellbeing in other countries.
44.1 The Committee is of the view that the training curricula for the All India Services
Probationers should be designed in such a way that team building, responsive
administration, sensitisation to problems and need of the people, right and positive attitude
are inculcated in them and they are equipped to discharge their responsibilities in a humane
way by according top priority to the welfare of the people and to the sentiments of people’s
representatives.
44.2 The Committee strongly feels that the bureaucrats, and especially the Civil Servants
should be sensitized to the needs of the people in this era of transition from the level of
Government Servant to the people’s servant. They should be groomed in such a way that

31
they not only implement, but also involve themselves in the formulation of the policies and
plans. Moreover, they should be able to respond to the aspirations and needs of the general
public and fulfil them by maximum utilization of resources at hand.
44.3 The Committee was apprised by the Director, LBSNAA during discussions on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) that each member of the faculty plays the role of a counselor to a group of
trainees and that in the Council meetings which are held every two weeks, value based interaction
takes place. He apprised the Committee that throughout the training programme for IAS Officer
trainees, various events are organised with an objective to inculcate values in the trainees.
44.4 The Committee was made to understand that all the officers in the foundation course are
sent to various villages spread all over the country during which they spend about eight or nine
days in the villages and that when they return to the Academy, they are expected to make detailed
presentations on their experiences in the villages. Also, they are attached to prominent NGOs like
Pratham, which is involved in education of slum children, or the NKS in Rajasthan, which played
a great role in the field of RTI. The Committee could also gather that they are taken on visits to
many organisations which cater to under- privileged people and that they interact with prominent
persons who are invited to give lectures. The Committee was also informed that the trainees are
presently engaged in drought relief work in Bundelkhand.
44.5 The Committee hopes that such visits/interactions have a salutary effect on these
officers and that they help them in understanding the social and political milieu in the
country. The Committee applauds such steps and feels that active participation of the like
as in the drought relief work on the part of trainees is indeed commendable. It appreciates
the innovative methods adopted by the Academy in sensitizing the trainees regarding the
problems faced by the common man and applauds the schemes adopted by the Academy for
upgrading the infrastructure, IT assets, library, academic syllabus etc. It is pleased to note
that the Academy has taken steps to strengthen the relations with other training
institutions within the country and that regular training programmes, workshops, seminars
and conferences are being held in the Academy.
44.6 The Committee is happy to note that the Academy has been transformed into a
Wi-Fi campus and that the Academy is uploading their training material onto a common site
so that the material is available to all the training institutes. It also acknowledges the steps
taken by the Academy to provide on-line administrative training through which the training
undergone by each trainee is monitored on-line. The Committee hopes that such initiatives
would create tremendous synergy among the institutes and ensure transparency. It
recommends that adequate funds and infrastructural support should be given to the
Academy to maintain international standards and to transform it into an international
centre of excellence.
44.7 At the same time, the Committee recommends that a system of ascertaining the
results of the various training programmes should be devised in order to tab the impact of
the training. The Committee is of the opinion that training should concentrate on the
principles of transparency (RTI Act) and how to handle an irate citizen and how to discover
the real reason behind the complaint (by applying the Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism) and solve the problem, rather than to allow or pass on the buck to the Courts
and to understand that “time” is the essence of management of service and delivery
system.

32
32
CHAPTER–VI
RECRUITMENT AGENCIES
45. The Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and the Staff Selection Commission (SSC)
are the two designated recruitment agencies of the Central Government. While the UPSC is a
Constitutional body set up under Article 315 of the Constitution, the SSC has been set up by a
Resolution of the Government and has the status of an attached office of the Department of
Personnel and Training.
Union Public Service Commission
46. The budgetary allocation for UPSC for the financial years 2007-08 and 2008-09 are as
follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09
72.12 72.12 77.81
46.1 The UPSC comprises of a Chairman and ten Members at present. The functions of the
Commission are as specified in Article 320 of the Constitution of India. So far as the working of
the Commission is concerned, Article 323 of the Constitution provides for submission of Annual
Report on the working by the Commission and its laying before the Parliament. A separate Report
on the working of the Commission is accordingly laid before the Parliament.
46.2 The Secretary, UPSC informed the Committee during deliberations on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) that certain reforms which are related to the exams were submitted by the UPSC to the
Department of Personnel and Training on 28th February, 2008.
46.3 The Committee takes serious note of the enormous time gap between advertising
vacancies and declaring results, and recommends that the UPSC should consider the
viability of conducting examinations in the format adopted in Graduate Management
Admission Test (GMAT), IIT and IIM. The Committee is of the view that this would prevent
wastage of resources and time and would ensure transparency and instill greater confidence
of the candidates in the examination system.
46.4 The Secretary, UPSC apprised the Committee that there is a need for more Members in the
UPSC and that this could hasten the disposal of DPCs in UPSC.
46.5 The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to consider this submission in the
right earnest and explore the possibilities of implementing the same, in a time bound
manner. The Committee is presently making an in-depth study on this aspect for separate
Report.
Staff Selection Commission
47. The budgetary allocation for CBI for the financial years 2007-08 and 2008-09 are as
follows:—

33
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09
Non-Plan 24.43 25.48 32.08
47.1 The main responsibility of the Staff Selection Commission is to make recruitment to Group
C (non-technical) and Group B (non-gazetted–both technical and non-technical) posts in
Departments of Government of India, its attached and subordinate offices except those for which
recruitment is made by the Railway Recruitment Boards and Industrial Establishments. The
Government of India, by an amendment to the Resolution on 13.11.2003 and 29.09.2005, has also
given the responsibility of making recruitment to the posts of Section Officer (Commercial/Audit)
and all non-gazetted posts which carry pay scale of Rs.6,500-10,500.
47.2 The Staff Selection Commission comprises of a Chairperson, two Members and a Secretary-
cum-Controller of Examinations. The Commission has a nationwide network of nine Regional/
Sub-Regional Offices. The Commission has seven Regional offices at New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai,
Chennai, Allahabad, Guwahati and Bangalore and two sub-Regional offices at Raipur and Chandigarh.
47.3 These Regional/Sub-Regional Offices implement the policies and programmes of the
Commission and are responsible for receipt and processing of applications for various examinations,
issue of admit cards to the candidates, conducting the interviews/PETs (wherever required) either
at the Regional headquarters or other major cities within the regions.
47.4 The Chairperson, SSC apprised the Committee during deliberations on Demands for Grants
(2008-09), that examinations have been designed for physically handicapped which are
non-numerical, non-special and non-graphical and that infrastructure has been created in all the
regional centres to facilitate them.
47.5 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by SSC to facilitate the physically
handicapped people.
47.6 The Committee was informed that the application forms for the Graduate Level and Matric
Level have been combined and that this has resulted in saving of three months. As regards the
Central Police Organisation, it was apprised that the time limit has been reduced by making the
physical test, endurance test and medical test in one sitting.
47.7 The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken in this regard and recommends that
more innovative steps should be adopted to ensure cutting down on time and expenditure.
47.8 The Committee notes that the results of matric level Main-2006 exam are yet to be declared.
It feels that such inordinate delays should not take place and that the entire examination
system should be reviewed and concrete steps should be taken to minimize such delays.
47.9 The Committee could understand that one of the reasons for the delay in advertising for
the vacancies by SSC is that Directorate of Audio and Visual Publicity (DA VP) is the only agency
through which advertisements are placed and that on many occasions, the DAVP takes about one
month to publish the notice.
47.10 The Committee feels that such delays are uncalled for in the present era of
technological advancements and recommends that the Ministry should explore steps to
tackle this delay effectively.
47.11 Some Members of the Committee raised concern about the fact that the preliminary
examinations conducted by SSC are either in English or Hindi. It could gather that the candidates
who are not proficient in these languages lag behind because of the language barrier.

34
47.12 In view of the above, the Committee desires that the Ministry should explore the
possibilities of holding the preliminary examinations in regional languages also, by setting
the question papers in regional languages.
47.13 According to the Annual Report of SSC, during the year 2006-07, the web-sites of the SSC
(HQ) was revamped with many new features which may be useful for the candidates of various
examinations conducted by Staff Selection Commission. The facilities provided by the web-site
includes the examination schedule for the given year and the notice of examinations including
downloadable application forms. The most desirable feature of the web-site is the availability of the
results of all the examinations at various stages. The Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) section
provides answers to the general doubts arising in the minds of the candidates.
47.14 One of the most important steps taken by the Commission is to update its Electronic Data
Processing Unit with the latest technology with the help and guidance of National Information
Centre. The National Information Centre is developing Software for expediting the results’
processing of all the examinations conducted by the Commission.
47.15 The Committee is pleased to note that the SSC has taken steps to facilitate the
candidates and has undertaken IT initiatives and appreciates the same.

35
35
CHAPTER–VII
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
48. The budgetary allocation for CVC for the financial years 2007-08 and 2008-09 are as
follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09
Non-Plan 24.43 9.77 8.19
48.1. The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) was established in 1964, as an apex body for
exercising general superintendence and control over vigilance administration, through the
Government of India Resolution of 11th February, 1964. The main mandate of the Commission was
based on the report of the Committee on Prevention of Corruption, popularly known as the
Santhanam Committee. The establishment of the Commission was considered essential for evolving
and applying common standards in deciding cases involving lack of probity and integrity in
administration.
48.2. According to the Annual Report of Central Vigilance Commission, each Department/
organization, to which the advisory jurisdiction of the Commission extends, has a vigilance unit
headed by a Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO). The CVOs act as the extended arms of the
Commission and for all practical purposes represent the Commission in respect of vigilance
matters, particularly with reference to junior officers, who fall outside the jurisdiction of the
Commission. They are required to provide experts’ assistance in advising the head of the concerned
organization in all vigilance matters concerning it. The CVOs serve as the vital link between the
Departments/organizations and the CVC and it is their function to advise the organizations to
establish effective systems and procedures and periodically monitor their compliance to minimize
factors, which provide opportunities for malpractices. On the punitive side, the CVOs are required
to ensure speedy processing of vigilance and disciplinary cases.
Leveraging of technology for improving vigilance administration
49. In its Annual Report, the CVC has stated that the Commission has been emphasizing the
use of technology for bringing about transparency in the functioning of the Government
organizations. The Commission with a view to bringing about systems improvement in order to
tackle such malpractices, has given directions to all Government organizations, making it
compulsory for them to provide detailed information regarding the rules and procedures governing
issue of licenses, permissions etc. on their web-sites. The Commission has also directed that all
the application forms, proforma are to be made available on the web-sites and that the complainants
should be kept informed about the status of their applications online. The Commission had in the
past directed all organisations to post every month a summary of all awarded contracts/purchases
on their websites and the instructions have been reiterated.
49.1 The Committee is of the opinion that governance improves with greater trust
between people and the Government and that trust improves with greater transparency. It
is pleased to note the technological initiatives by CVC to improve transparency in
governance.

36
Protection against victimization of officials engaged in investigation/vigilance related
duties
50. The Committee was apprised that the Commission, in order to provide the required
independence and freedom to the vigilance functionaries to work without fear, issue directions
regarding having a fixed tenure for them which would not be disturbed normally and certainly not
without the concurrence of the CVO concerned. The Commission also shielded them by prohibiting
the organizations from posting them under those officers against whom they had conducted any
kind of investigation while working in vigilance departments.
50.1 The Committee is of the view that such steps ensure that those posted to the
Vigilance Organisations do not have the fear of returning to their parent cadre with the
possibility of facing the displeasure of those against whom they made inquiries.
Some areas of concern highlighted in the Annual Report of CVC
51. The Commission has strongly advocated the need to have a full time CVO in major
government departments, particularly, those having a number of important PSUs under their
administrative control. The Commission has also felt the need to have outsiders as CVOs in
departments Like Railways, Telecom, CPWD, Post and Telegraph, CBDT and CBEC. The
Commission tries to ensure that the post of the CVO is not allowed to remain vacant. The
Commission has recommended that the selection of the successor should be completed at least one
month before the expiry of the tenure of the incumbent CVO.
51.1 The Commission is consulted at two stages by the organizations under its purview with
respect to the vigilance cases investigated by the Disciplinary Authorities concerned. Two stage
consultation mechanism has been outlined in the Central Vigilance Commission’s Vigilance Manual
and is based on the Central Vigilance Commission’s instructions to all organizations under its
purview. However, the CCS (CCA) Rules of the Government of India do not specifically mandate
such consultation with the Commission. The Commission’ s first stage advice in vigilance cases
should be made mandatory to be implemented by all Government of India organizations, Public
Sector Undertakings and Banks. An appropriate amendment to the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 is
required to be made by incorporating a clause making the Commission’s First Stage Advice
mandatory for all Government of India organizations under its purview. A Directive is also required
to be issued by Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) to all Government of India Public
Sector Undertakings and Banks to incorporate a similar clause in their Disciplinary, Conduct and
Appeal rules.
51.2 The Government is required to approach the Commission for its advice at two different
stages, in matters relating to the disciplinary proceedings against the public servants coming within
the purview of the Central Vigilance Commission. In respect of the officers of All India Services
and Group’ A’ Officers, the Government is also required to approach the UPSC to decide about
the quantum of punishment to be imposed on the officers. The UPSC was established in 1952 with
the main aim of carrying out selection of officers under All India Services and other Group’ A’
posts. As at that time, Central Vigilance Commission was not in existence, UPSC was given the
responsibility of deciding about the quantum of punishment to be imposed on these officers in
disciplinary cases decided against them.
51.3 Apart from this, the Commission has also realized the need to undertake some inquires
directly, where there is apprehension on the part of the complainant that entrusting it to the
organizational vigilance may not yield proper and quick result. The Commission has, on the basis
of a scientific study of work in the organization, proposed strengthening of the resources of the
Commission. This has to be addressed most urgently.

37
51.4 The Commission being an expert agency on vigilance cases and having been made
paramount in matters pertaining to vigilance administration, it is only appropriate that it should have
the final word on disciplinary matters. Such an overlapping of authority creates unnecessary delays
and hindrances in the finalization of cases, besides undermining the Commission’s authority and
which would be counter productive. Hence, there is a need to do away with the consultation
mechanism with UPSC regarding the quantum of punishment to be imposed on the Government
officials.
51.5 The Committee recommends that the issues/concerns raised by CVC and reflected in
its Annual Report (2006) should be addressed urgently in order to ensure independence,
impartiality and credibility of the Apex Body.
51.6 In the reply furnished by Central Vigilance Commission to the Committee, it has been stated
that the number of complaints under “Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informers
(PIDPI)” Resolution have come down. The lack of media campaign has been highlighted as the
reason for this decline. It has also been stated that due to shortage of staff, CVC is reluctant to
mount a media campaign.
51.7 The CVC, in its reply, has also stated that Chief Technical Examiners (CTE) inspections
hardly cover 2% of the total procurement operations of the Government, PSUs and Banks and that
there is need to induct new skills which can begin with outsourcing and later, inducting full time
staff can be considered.
51.8 The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to consider these issues
which are very important for the effective working of the Commission in checking
corruption in Ministries/Departments and maintaining probity and integrity in
administration.
51.9 As per the Annual Report (2006) of CVC, a total of 579 cases were received from the CBI
for sanction of prosecution and the disciplinary authorities gave sanction for prosecution in 440
cases and denied sanction in 51 cases. Only 88 cases were pending for decision with respect to
sanction for prosecution, of which 16 were pending for more than 6 months.
51.10 The Committee feels that the prevailing tendency of delaying sanction of prosecution
is deplorable and recommends that urgent effective steps should be taken to punish the
guilty at the earliest and to clear the innocent of charges/allegations raised against them.
51.11 The Committee notes that at the end of the year 2006, as many as 2174 cases were pending
for over six months for the implementation of the first stage advice of the Commission and 863
cases were pending for over six months for the implementation of the second stage advice of the
Commission.
51.12 The Committee deplores occurrence of delay/indifferent attitude of Departments/
Ministries in implementation of the advice of CVC and recommends that once the CVC
renders advice, it should be implemented without undue delay. The Ministry should,
therefore, issue guidelines to all Departments/Ministries to that effect.
51.13 Some Mem bers of the Committee expressed the view that a study should be conducted
regarding the effectiveness of CVC in curbing corruption in India. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should consider this and take necessary action in this regard.

38
38
CHAPTER–VIII
CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
52. The budgetary allocation for CIC for the financial years 2007-08 and 2008-09 are as
follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09
Non-Plan 5.00 6.08 5.90
Plan 4.00 1.25 7.50
52.1 The Right to Information (RTI) Act, 2005 is designed to set up a practical regime for
citizens to access information available with public authorities, in order to promote transparency
and accountability in their working. The Act, inter-alia provides for the constitution of the Central
Information Commission (ClC) to be responsible for the implementation of the Act, exercising
powers conferred on it under Section 18 of the Act.
52.2 The CIC, under Section 12, will consist of one Chief Information Commissioner, who will
head the Commission, and such number of Central Information Commissioners, as may be deemed
necessary, but not exceeding ten. The CIC is empowered to receive and inquire into complaints
from any person relating to access to information under the control of public authorities and to
decide appeals against the decisions of designated appellate authorities.
52.3 The Commission has powers to require the public authority to compensate the complainant
for any loss or other detriment suffered. The decision of the Commission on an appeal is binding
and is not subject to further appeal in a court of law.
52.4 The Commission is expected to recommend to the Government every year, reforms on any
“matter relevant for operationalising the right to access information”. The Act mandates the CIC
to submit an Annual Report to the Parliament.
52.5 As per the Annual Report of CIC (2005-06), the Commission has decided to submit its
report to the Parliament at the end of each financial year. The Commission is also considering the
possibility of setting up a call centre for providing guidance to the general public, and senior
citizens in particular, so that they do not have to run from pillar to post for submitting RTI
applications.
52.6 The CIC, in its Annual Report (2005-06), has stated that the CIC requested the Secretaries
of all Ministries and certain independent apex-level offices to provide information, but on the
realization that this could be a herculean task, the task was accomplished with the assistance of
the National Informatics Centre, which designed and developed software that enabled Ministries to
place the above information on the website of the Commission. It has also been stated that almost
90 per cent of public authorities have submitted their annual returns to respective Ministries.
52.7 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by CIC to pursue the Ministries/
Departments to provide information to the public. It is of the opinion that such initiatives
are indeed commendable.

39
Certain issues highlighted in the Annual Report of CIC
53. The CIC, in its Annual Report, has highlighted certain issues which need to be tackled by
the stakeholders concerned:—
(i) Setting up a citizens’ council of RTI User Groups/Sector Panels to oversee the
implementation of the Act and act as a bridge between the public and Government.
(ii) Public authorities engaging in dialogue with applicants can be a constructive process
to strengthen the freedom of access to information. Every Ministry could consider
setting up a mechanism within public authorities under its jurisdiction to address this.
(iii) In keeping with the above suggestion, each Ministry may suo motu  develop a
mechanism in consultation with the Commission to deal with RTI matters in any
Government Department.
(iv) Suo motu disclosure by public authority.
(v) Expand the modes of depositing the fee for making an RTI application.
(vi) Seeking i nformation using e-mail.
(vii) All Head Post Offices should be designated as Assistant Public Information Officers
to receive RTI applications for public authorities.
(viii) Government and public authorities must set aside a specific budget for dissemination
of knowledge amongst citizens so that the provisions of the Act can be utilized at all
levels of society, through heightened public awareness.
(ix) All public authorities may include a chapter titled “Implementation of RTI Act, 2005”
in their Annual Reports.
(x) Strengthening the grievance redressal mechanism of public authorities so that citizens/
employees do not have to resort to the RTI Act.
(xi) Monetary remuneration to the Public Information Officers.
(xii) Financial and administrative autonomy of the Commission.
(xiii) Contempt powers should be given to the Commission.
(xiv) Training of Public Information Officers.
(xv) The Government may set up a Centre for Accountability and Transparency for
undertaking activities relating to research in best practices in creating an open access
regime and other such related activities that would effectively strengthen the
Commission in pursuing its mandate.
53.1 The Committee discussed about the interpretation of Section 2(h) of the RTI Act i.e.
definition of Public Authority wherein sub clause (a) is very clear that all the constitutional
authorities come under the definition of public authority. This Committee had examined in
detail every clause of RTI Bill, 2004 which was referred to it for consideration and report.
It is conscious of the fact that all the three wings of State–executive, legislature and
judiciary–are fully covered under this Act, since all organs of the State are accountable to
the citizens of India in a democratic State. It is more so since the judiciary is having dual
role as (i) administrative function; and (ii) judicial decision making. Except the judicial
decision making, all other activities of administration and the persons included in it are
subject to RTI Act. This is the pith and substance of this enactment. This Committee is also

40
conscious of all the amendments proposed by this Committee which were also accepted by
the executive and Parliament.
53.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should address the issues highlighted
above and take necessary steps to ensure that the fruits of the RTI Act, which is a historic
piece of legislation, are enjoyed by the public.
53.3 In the 19th Report of the Committee, concern was raised about the vacancies which then
prevailed in CIC. In the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that while
some posts have been filled up, action for filling up the remaining posts is being taken.
53.4 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. It notes that accurate data has not
been furnished by the Ministry. It wishes to be apprised of the latest data. It also
recommends that time bound steps should be taken to fill the vacancies so that the pending
cases could be cleared to avoid one another institution suffering due to backlog of cases.

41
MINUTES

43
RECORD OF DISCUSSION OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. to 1.15 P.M. and again at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
25th March, 2008, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
3. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
4. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri Harin Pathak
8. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
9. Prof. M. Ramadass
10. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri Satyanand Mishra, Secretary;
2. Shri Vivek Mehrotra, Special Secretary and Financial Advisor (Home);
3. Shri Rahul Sarin, Special Secretary (Services and Vigilance);
4. Shri Ajay Sawhney, Joint Secretary (Training);
5. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Joint Secretary (Administrative Tribunal and Administration);
6. Shri C.B. Paliwal, Joint Secretary (Establishment);
7. Shri P.K. Tripathi. Joint Secretary (Vigilance);
8. Dr. Ms. P.S. Behuria, Secretary, Public Enterprises Selection Board;

44
9. Shri Govind Ballabh, Registrar, Central Administrative Tribunal;
10. Shri Prem Sagar, Director (Finance-Personnel);
11. Shri Suresh Pal, Director (Administration);
12. Shri Hemant Jain, Controller of Accounts; and
13. Shrimati Vinakashi Gupta, Financial Advisor, Administrative Tribunal.
Representative of the Central Information Commission
Shri Mohammad Haleem Khan, Secretary.
Representatives of the Union Public Service Commission
1. Shri Alok Rawat, Secretary;
2. Shri D.K. Samantaray, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri Biresh Kumar, Additional Secretary; and
4. Shri Dhananjay Kumar, Joint Secretary.
II. Representatives of the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
1. Shrimati Rajni Razdan, Secretary;
2. Shri Dhruv Vijai Singh, Additional Secretary;
3. Shrimati Meenakshi Sharma, Director (Administrative Reforms);
4. Shrimati Lekha Kumar, Director (e-Governance);
5. Shri Alok Ranjan, Director (Documentation and Dissemination; and
6. Shri A.B. Prasad, Joint Secretary (Administrative Reforms Commission).
III. Representatives of the Central Bureau of Investigation
1. Shri M.L. Sharma, Special Director;
2. Shri Paramvir Singh, Additional Director;
3. Shri R.V . Raju, Additional Director;
4. Shri K. Saleem Ali, Joint Director (Administration);
5. Shri N.R. Wasan, Joint Director (Prosecution);
6. Shri S.K. Sharma, Director of Prosecution; and
7. Shri Vineet Agarwal, Assistant Inspector General (Policy).
IV. Representatives of the Staff Selection Commission
1. Dr. (Mrs.) C.T. Misra, Chairman;
2. Shri K.K. Lamba, Secretary; and
3. Shri L. Viswanathan, Director.
V. Representatives of the Central Vigilance Commission
1. Shri K.S. Ramasubban, Secretary;
2. Shri V .K. Gupta, Additional Secretary; and
3. Shri V . Ramachandran, Chief Technical Examiner.
VI. Representatives of the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
1. Shri Rudra Gangadhran, Director; and
2. Shri Padamuri Singh, Joint Director

45
VII. Representatives of the Kendriya Bhandar
1. Shri Jagdish Bhatia, Chief Managing Director;
2. Shri S.P. Sharma, Secretary; and
3. Shri R.K. Singh, Deputy General Manager.
2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Secretary, Department of Personnel and
Training and representatives of subordinate organisations under the Department. The Secretary then
gave a brief narration of the organizational set up of the Ministry and its functions and made a
presentation on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department. He also elaborated upon the
Department’s major initiatives.
3. The Members stressed upon various issues arising out of the presentation which inter alia
includes the need for vesting the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training with more
powers to implement the policies which are formulated by the Department and also enforcing
decisions/judgments of the Central Administrative Tribunal. During the deliberations, the Members
highlighted the importance of Information Technology initiatives and giving due publicity to Right
to Information Act, 2005. The witnesses then responded to the queries raised by the Members of
the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew) .
4. The Chairman then welcomed and requested the Secretary, Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances to apprise the Committee of the budgetary provisions of that
Department. After the opening remarks of the Secretary on the mandate of the Department, the
Additional Secretary made a presentation before the Committee on the important schemes of the
Department. He informed the Committee about the pilot projects on Administrative Reforms and
elaborated upon the measures adopted by the Department to improvise public grievances redressal
mechanism.
5. The Committee appreciated the initiatives of the Department and expressed hope that their
periodical evaluation would be conducted and steps would be taken by the Department to improve
the efficiency of its projects.
6. The Special Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CSl) also made a presentation before
the Committee on the budgetary needs of the organisation. The witnesses responded to the queries
raised by the Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew) .
7. The Committee adjourned at l.15 P.M. for lunch. After the lunch the Committee reassembled
at 3.00 P.M. to hear the officials of the organisations/ Institutes which are under the purview of
Department of Personnel and Training.
8. While making a presentation before the Committee on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
organisation, the Chairperson, SSC, inter alia , apprised the Committee of the steps taken to reduce
the delay in the examination process conducted by the SSC. The Members of the Committee raised
apprehension that since competitive examinations are held in English/Hindi, regional candidates who
are not well versed in these languages may lag behind. The witness replied to the points raised by
the Members of the Committee.
9. Thereafter, the Secretary, UPSC, submitted before the Committee that progressive efforts
were made to reduce the delay in the examination process of those conducted by the UPSC. The
witness responded to the points raised by the Members of the Committee.

46
10. The Director, LBSNAA also apprised the Committee in detail, about the strategy for training
adopted in LBSNAA and allayed the concern raised by some Members of the Committee that the
officers in Civil Services do not, very often, promptly respond to the public needs/grievances. He
replied to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee.
11. The Secretary, CVC then made a presentation before the Committee on the Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the organisation and responded to the points raised by the Members of the
Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew) .
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The meeting was adjourned at 5.25 
P.M.

47
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XIX
NINTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 24th April, 2008, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and thereafter, took up for
consideration its 25th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions. The Committee then discussed the report and adopted the same
with some modification.
3. * * *
47
*** Relates to other matters.

48
4. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte and
Shri Virendra Bhatia from Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar and in his absence Shri Varkala
Radhakrishnan and Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel from Lok Sabha to present/lay its Reports in
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha respectively.
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.