PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 22
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N P E R S O N N E L , PU B L IC G R IE V A N C E S , 
L A W  A N D J U S T IC E
TWENTY  SECOND REPOR T
ON
THE GRAM NY A Y ALA Y AS BILL, 2007
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 6 SEPTEMBER, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 6 SEPTEMBER, 2007)
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 6 SEPTEMBER, 2007)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 6 SEPTEMBER, 2007)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
SE PT E M B E R , 2007/B H A D R A PA D A , 1929 (SA K A )SE PT E M B E R , 2007/B H A D R A PA D A , 1929 (SA K A )

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
TWENTY SECOND REPORT
ON
THE GRAM NYAYALAYAS BILL, 2007
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 6 TH SEPTEMBER, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 6 TH SEPTEMBER, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER, 2007/BHADRAPADA, 1929 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-43

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—22
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 23—38
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 39—123
A. The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 ............................................................................. 41—74
B. Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
on the views/suggestions contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/
organisations/experts on the provisions of the Bill ...............................................
75—123

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2006)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Dr. P. C. Alexander
9. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
10. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
12. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
13. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Dr. C. Krishnan
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
18. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
19. Prof. M. Ramadass
20. Shri Vishvendra Singh
21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
22. Shri Raj Babbar
23. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
24. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
25. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
26. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2007)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Ram Jethmalani
9. Dr. P. C. Alexander
10. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
15. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
25. Shri Vishvendra Singh
26. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having
been authorised by the Committee to submit this Report on its behalf, do hereby present its Twenty
Second Report on the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007. The Bill seeks to establish Gram Nyayalayas
for the purpose of providing access to justice, both civil and criminal, to the citizens at the grass-
roots level and to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by
reason of social, economic or other disabilities.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣  the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha
on the 15th May, 2007 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 17th May, 2007 for
examination and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press
communique to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions
of the Bill. Accordingly, a press communique was issued in response to which memoranda
containing suggestions were received by the Committee.
4. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry
of Law and Justice in its meetings held on 7th and 14th June, 2007.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it: —
(i) Background note on the Bill;
(ii) The comments of the Legislative Department on the views/suggestions contained in the
memoranda received from various organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on the
provisions of the Bill;
(iii) Suggestions given by some State Governments with whom the Committee held
discussions on the Bill; and
(iv) Suggestions of the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
6. The Committee held clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on the 16th August, 2007.
7. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 29th August, 2007.
8. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
29th August,  2007 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
♣  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, (No. 44111) dated the 17th May, 2007.

1
REPORT
The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 (Annexure-A) seeks to establish Gram Nyayalayas for the
purpose of providing access to justice, both civil and criminal, to the citizens at the grass-roots
level and to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason
of social, economic or other disabilities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 was introduced* in the Rajya Sabha on 15th May, 2007.
It was referred
♣ by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on 17th May, 2007 for examination
and report.
3. The background note, furnished by the Ministry of Law and Justice, on the Bill, stated as
follows:
“Article 39 A of the Constitution of India directs the State to secure that the operation of
the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular,
provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or
other disabilities. The Government has taken various measures to strengthen judicial system,
inter alia, by simplifying the procedural laws; incorporating various alternative dispute
resolution mechanisms such as arbitration, conciliation and mediation, conducting of Lok
Adalats, etc. The Law Commission of India in its 114th Report on Gram Nyayalayas
suggested establishment of Gram Nyayalayas so that speedy, inexpensive and substantial
justice could be provided to the common man. The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 is broadly
based on the recommendations of the Law Commission. The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007
after its enactment as an Act of Parliament would ensure justice to the poor at their
doorstep. Setting up of Gram Nyayalayas with mobility in the rural areas would bring to
the people of rural areas speedy, affordable and substantial justice.”
4. The Committee decided to invite views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations
on the Bill. It, accordingly, authorised the Secretariat to issue a press release inviting views/
suggestions. In response to the press release published in major English and Hindi dailies and
vernacular newspapers all over India on 3rd June, 2007, a number of representations/memoranda
were received.
4.1 The Committee forwarded the memoranda so received from the individuals and
organisations to the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) for their comments
thereon. The comments of the Ministry were received on 14th August, 2007(Annexure-B).
4.2 The major points raised in the memoranda are summarized as follows:
(i) Clause 3(1) of the Bill envisages Gram Nyayalayas at intermediate level. This might
reduce accessibility to justice through these Nyayalayas as the litigant would have to
travel from the village to the block at the expense of time and money.
(ii) R eservation should be made mandatory. The benefit of reservation may be extended to
Backward Class of citizens also.
* Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 15th May, 2007.
♣  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.44111) dated the 17th May, 2007.

2
(iii) If the Magistrate transfers the case to his own court as per Clause 25 at the last stage,
the trial will get delayed resulting in pendency of cases.
(iv) Since lawyers are not barred, the same procedures will creep in as in the case of
formal judicial set up.
(v) One of the conciliators provided in Clause 30(3) should be a woman.
(vi) Clause 32 would bring in th e same rigidity and procedural aspects which exist in the
formal judicial set up.
(vii) Practical difficulties as to availability of legally qualified persons, their dependability as
to being stationed in a rural location, the heavy burden to be borne by the exchequer
will be faced. Expenditure will have to be incurred to hold mobile courts and court
proceedings in villages and for providing accommodation to Nyayadhikaris and other
staff.
(viii) Gram Nyayadhikari may be treated a part of the cadre of State Subordinate Judicial
Service and it may be the first point of entry in that service. This would ensure their
career progression and would attract good talent.
(ix) Provision should be made insisting that there should be at least one sitting of Gram
Nyayadhikari at each headquarters of Gram Nyayalayas every month.
(x) The recruitment of Nyayadhikaris of Gram Nyayalaya may be made through Union
Public Service Commission. After recruitment, the qualified candidate may be provided
extensive training at the National Judicial Academy at Bhopal.
(xi) Instead of setting up Gram Nyayalayas at the intermediate panchayat level, the need of
the hour is to strengthen the existing system of subordinate judiciary, which forms the
major chunk of our judicial system, by creating additional courts at the
District/Tehsil/Taluka level depending upon the extent of pendency of cases to ensure
that the litigants get quick justice at reasonable cost. This can be done over a period
of, say, five years. Simultaneously, the High Courts need to effectively review and
monitor the progress of disposal of cases by subordinate judiciary on regular basis.
This will entail much less expenditure on the creation of additional infrastructure at the
District/Tehsil/Taluka level than on the creation of Gram Nyayalayas. In addition, the
strength of Judges in the High Courts and the Supreme Court must also be increased
to ensure that the disposal of cases gets speeded up to a reasonable extent. Also, we
must lay much greater emphasis on the creation of alternative redressal mechanism.
(xii) In addition to the provision for appeal included in the Bill, a provision for revision may
also be included. It may be noted that inspite of the fact that there is no provision
of appeal from the Senior Civil Judge or Additional/Assistant Sessions Judge, High
Court may exercise its jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
4.3 The highlights of the response of the Legislative Department on the comments/suggestions
contained in the memoranda are as under:
(i) Nyaya Panchayats established by various State Governments under the provisions of
respective State Panchayati Raj legislations are already functioning. The concept of
establishment of Gram Nyayalayas are different from Nyaya Panchayats.
(ii) Gram Nyayalayas, like other subordinate judiciary, will be under direct control of the
respective High Courts.

3
(iii) The approach through this legislation is that simple and non-complicated disputes
which could be resolved in a short time will be entrusted to the Gram Nyayalayas.
Endeavour is made to make the Gram Nyayalayas to be effective forum for resolution
of disputes emanating from rural areas and to deal with such disputes, the Gram
Nyayalayas will follow the summary procedure as laid down under the procedural
codes.
(iv) Establishing Gram Nyayalayas at every Gram Panchayat level would involve a huge
expenditure, which is very difficult for the Central Government as well as the State
Government to meet. To manage the Gram Nyayalayas financially, it was felt not
feasible to consider establishing Gram Nyayalayas at every Gram Panchayat level but
only at intermediate Panchayat level. However, anticipating such difficulties, the
concept of mobile Courts has been incorporated in clause 11 of the Bill.
(v) Wide publicity about the objects and scope of the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 has
already been given. The same course would be adopted by the Central Government/
State Government after its enactment.
5. The Committee heard the views of the State Governments of Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Gujarat on the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 during its study visits. The
Committee held discussions with the representatives of an NGO-Rural Litigation and Entitlement
Kendra on the Bill at Dehradun. The Committee also sought the views of all the State Governments
on the provisions of the Bill. The Governments of Gujarat, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra and NCT of Delhi responded and the gist of their views are as follows:—
I. Gujarat
(i) Taking into consideration the provisions of the said Bill, it appears that the State
Government will be required to constitute as many as 225 Gram Nayayalayas since
there are 225 Talukas in the State. Accordingly, 225 Nyayadhikaris will be required to
be appointed and if the strength of each of these courts is temporarily placed as 21,
then in all, 4725 new posts will be required to be created and in view of the provisions
of the said Bill, a new separate cadre will come into existence. Clause 11 of the Bill
inter alia provides that the Nyayadhikari will be required to hold mobile courts and
conduct proceedings in villages. To ensure this, the Nyayadhikaris will have to be
provided with mobile vans, drivers etc. Further, the State Government will have to
see that the Nyayadhikaris and other staff are provided with accommodation and as
such, the State Government will have to undertake the construction of Government
quarters for them. Other infrastructure facilities will also be required to be provided
to the said Gram Nyayalaya. The State Government is therefore, of the view that
for providing such infrastructure facilities, a huge amount running into crores of
rupees which may exceed Rs. 300 crores will have to be spent by the State
Government. The State Government is of the view that it would a huge burden on the
State Exchequer.
(ii) They have submitted that they are enforcing the scheme of evening Courts, the system
of Alternative Dispute Resolution and the concept of Lok Adalats. It has also been
submitted that a scheme called “Tirth Gram Yojna” has been implemented for rural
Gujarat to encourage communal harmony and brotherhood at village level. As regards
the financial burden on the State exchequer, it has been stated that there is a foreseen
additional financial burden which is amounting to approximately Rs. 300 crores and
that at present, budgetary provisions for the Legal Department is Rs. 257 crores.

4
II. Uttarakhand
(i) There are 95 Panchayats of medium-level in the State. Therefore, 25 Gram Nyayalayas
are required to be established as per the proposed Bill. Approximately, an amount of
Rs. 1 crore is likely to be spent for the construction of one building for Gram
Nyayalaya and a residential house for Nyayadhikari. A recurring expenditure of about
Rs. 10 lacs per annum would be incurred on one Gram Nyayalaya. Government of
India have already provided recurring and non-recurring amount for Fast Track
Courts.
(ii) As there are less number of criminal and civil disputes in the villages of Uttarakhand,
it would be appropriate for every regional Panchayat Head Quarters not to establish a
Gram Nyayalaya compulsorily. Rather, it would be appropriate if the Himalayan States
are given the option to establish a Gram Nyayalaya at every Tehsil level, if required.
(iii) The system of mobile courts seems suitable for the geographical conditions of
Uttarakhand and this would create possibilities for timely justice to the villagers of
inaccessible areas of the State. All appropriate facilities would be provided by the State
Government to Gram Nyayalayas during mobile-courts.
(iv) This should also be provided in the proposed Bill as to how Gram-Nyayalayas will
execute their verdict. Further, it should be mentioned whether the verdict given by
Gram Nyayalayas would be made into decree or not.
(v) It has been provided in the proposed Bill that advocates can appear in Gram
Nyayalayas with the permission of Nyayadhikari. This should also be mentioned clearly
that such permission would be granted in exceptional cases only. The purpose of Gram
Nayalayas should be to ensure that common people can state directly to Courts. The
words “or through their advocates or authorised agents” given in Section 33(3), be
deleted.
(vi) In order to attract talented persons to the post of Nyayadhikari, it is necessary that
the service conditions of the post are good. As per the present Bill, person appointed
to the post of Nyayadhikari would remain on the same post till his retirement.
Therefore, it is necessary to give them the opportunity of promotion on 25% posts of
“Civil Judge (Junior Division)” in Judicial Services of the State, so that deserving
persons may progress in future according to his merit.
(vii) A sufficient budget for Gram Nyayalayas is needed in such circumstances, so that
Nyayalayas should not lack resources. Therefore, a provision for cent per cent
budgeting by the Central Government should be made. Otherwise, the State
Governments would not be enthusiastic about the Gram Nyayalaya scheme with their
limited resources.
III. NCT of Delhi
(i) In this context, it is submitted that in the National Capital Territory of Delhi, the
Panchayati Raj is not operational since 1990. Since the Panchayat Raj system is
not in existence in Delhi, appointment of any Nyayadhikari is not possible. Therefore,
the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas without appointment of Nyayadhikari may
not be feasible. It is further submitted that most of the villages in Delhi have been
urbanized and the rural villages left, are in the process of the urbanization. In fact,
under the present scenario, the rural areas in Delhi can be construed as urban
agglomeration.

5
(ii) Besides the above, it is also submitted that under the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954,
Act No.3 of 1955 was passed by the erstwhile Delhi State Legislative Assembly to
establish and develop Local Self Government in the rural areas of the then Delhi State
and to make better provision for village administration and development, which has not
been repealed; provision is already made in chapters VI, VII and VIII thereof to
establish Circle Panchayats and Panchayati Adalats to deal with certain offences
(including offences under the IPC and to impose penalties). Even these bodies are, at
present, defunct and have not been revived.
IV. Madhya Pradesh
(i) The Gram Nyayalaya Adhiniyam, 1996 came into force on 26th January, 2001 and
extends to all of the State of Madhya Pradesh except the local limits and such
scheduled areas of the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council, Nagar
Panchayat or Cantonment Board. Under this Act, the Government of M.P. had
constituted multi-member Gram Nyayalayas.
(ii) The Central Government has agreed to bear the total non-recurring expenditure and has
expressed its desire to share the recurring expenditure with the State Government for
three years. Looking at the financial conditions of the State, the Central Government
is requested to bear the recurring expenditure also along with the non-recurring
expenditure.
V. Maharashtra
(i) With regard to giving powers to the State Government to add to or omit any item from
the schedules to the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 on par with the Central Government,
it was submitted that any such addition or omission shall be subject to the concurrence
of the Central Government.
(ii) So far as the suggestion regarding the power of the Gram Nyayalayas (in clause 28
of the Bill) to take cognizance of any offence punishable with a imprisonment for more
than one year i.e. upto three years is concerned, it is pointed out that it is regarding
the power of the Gram Nyayalayas to take cognizance of any such offence, and not
the power which authorizes the Gram Nyayalaya to punish the person for such period.
6. The Committee also heard the presentation of the Secretary, Legislative Department on 7th
June, 2007 and 14th June, 2007. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj deposed before the
Committee on the Bill on 1st August, 2007. The Committee held in-house discussion on the Bill
on 8th August, 2007 and took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on 16th August, 2007.
The draft Report on the Bill was adopted on 29th August, 2007.

6
CHAPTER II
DELIBERATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON V ARIOUS
PROVISIONS OF THE BILL
7. The Committee took into consideration the recommendations in the Report of Justice Sohani
Committee constituted by the Government of Madhya Pradesh on Gram Nyayalayas and that of the
Law Commission of India on ‘Alternative forum for resolution of disputes at grass-roots level’
contained in its 114th Report (1986), while examining this Bill.
8. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of Article 39A of the Constitution of
India providing for Equal justice and free legal aid. The State shall secure that the operation of the
legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free
legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for
securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.
9. The Secretary, Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice), while making a
presentation on the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 informed the Committee that the Government has
identified the States in which these Gram Nyayalayas would be established at the intermediate
Panchayat levels-approximately 5,064 places where the Gram Nyayalayas at intermediate Panchayat
levels were proposed to be set up. So far as financial implications are concerned, there are two
types of expenditures i.e., recurring expenditure and non-recurring expenditure. The recurring
expenditure would be on the appointment of the Nyayadhikaris and of the pleaders, court clerks,
stenographers, etc. and their salaries. The issue of recurring expenditure was also discussed in the
Law Ministers’ Conference at Hyderabad and the State Governments welcomed this proposal only
if the entire funding comes from the Centre. Now the Finance Ministry has also agreed that so
far as the recurring expenditure is concerned for the first three years, the Central Government will
bear it in the proportion of 50:50 with the State Governments. So far as the non-recurring
expenditure is concerned, that will be incurred by the Central Government. Expenditure for court
building and mobile van will be provided by the Central Government. For one Gram Nyayalaya,
roughly, the non recurring expenditure is about eight to nine lakhs of rupees.
10. The Committee notes that the aim of this legislation is to reduce the number of pending
cases. It also notes that the system of Lok Adalats, fast track courts and other methods were
adopted and even the Criminal Procedure Code was amended to reduce backlog of cases. The
Committee also took note of plea-bargaining as adopted in United States of America, in order to
speed up delivery of justice and consequently, the Committee was told that 90 per cent of the cases
are disposed of through plea-bargaining. The Committee strongly feels for bringing in plea-
bargaining in this legislation.
11.1 The Committee is of the view that in the present scenario, rural poor are reluctant to
approach the Court because the process of litigation is expensive, formal, and highly technical. The
Committee, during its discussions, could gather that setting up of Gram Nyayalayas at the level of
Panchayat at intermediate level throughout the country will require huge funds both from the
Central and the State exchequers in respect of buildings—for residential purposes and for the
Headquarters of Gram Nyayalayas, salaries and allowances to the Nyayadhikaris and staff and other
infrastructural expenses.
11.2 The Committee is also aware of the huge backlog of cases and inordinate delays in disposal
of cases in Courts at all levels. The Committee is of the opinion that people belonging to the
6

7
underprivileged classes are the majority victims of this state of affairs of the judicial system and
that it is high time that due consideration/attention is given to the reforms in judicial administration
pertaining to such classes.
11.3 The Committee applauds the intention of the Government in bringing forward this Bill i.e.,
ensuring access to justice to citizens at grass root level. It appreciates the earnestness of the
Government to clear the backlog of cases. But, the Committee, during its deliberations, expressed
doubts as to whether setting up of Gram Nyayalayas as proposed in this Bill, alone, will reduce
pendency of cases. It is of the considered opinion that there are certain incongruencies in
the Bill which would defeat the noble objective of the Bill, which is to render inexpensive,
easily available, non-formal and substantial justice.  In the view of the Committee, the
following are the incongruencies:
JURISDICTION OF GRAM NYAYALAYAS
12.0 Clause 3(3) of the Bill provides that a Gram Nyayalaya shall be the lowest Court of
Subordinate Judiciary in the State. However, the Committee takes cognizance of the fact that as
per Section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the Court of a Magistrate of the Second
Class is the lowest Court.
12.1 Further, as per clause 14(2)(i) of the Bill, Gram Nyayalayas will exercise jurisdiction over
all offences under the Central Acts where the maximum punishment provided for, is imprisonment
not exceeding one year, whether with or without fine. At the same time, the Committee notes that
a Second Class Magistrate has jurisdiction over cases wherein imprisonment is less than one year
or fine is less than 5000 rupees.
12.2 This would mean that as per the Bill, Gram Nyayalayas will have jurisdiction over cases
wherein maximum punishment is imprisonment for less than one year. As per Section 29(3) of
CrPC, a Court of Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year. Therefore, the Committee feels that there is overlapping of
jurisdiction of Second Class Judicial Magistrate Courts and the proposed Gram Nyayalayas.
12.3 Clause 14(1) of the Bill provides that Gram Nyayalayas may take cognizance of all offences
specified in Part I of the first Schedule. Further, clause 28 of the Bill provides that the Gram
Nyayalayas shall not take cognizance of any offence which is punishable with imprisonment for
more than one year. However, the Committee notes that many offences specified in Part I entail
maximum punishment of imprisonment of more than one year. Therefore, it is of the opinion
that these clauses are not in conformity with each other.
12.4 Further, the Committee notes that a First Class Magistrate Court can grant sentence
of maximum imprisonment of three years according to Section 29(2) of CrPC. Hence it feels
that if the Gram Nyayalayas are First Class Magistrate Courts, this anomaly will in effect
be rectified.
12.5 Moreover, clause 6(1) (a) of the Bill provides that a Nyayadhikari should be eligible to be
appointed as a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
12.6 The Committee finds no coherent reason as to why a person who is eligible to be
appointed as a Magistrate of the First Class would opt to be appointed as Nyayadhikari in
the Gram Nyayalayas which, as proposed in the Bill, is subordinate to the Court of
Magistrate of the First Class.
12.7. Clause 25 of the Bill provides that if at any stage of the proceedings, it appears to the Gram
Nyayalaya that the case is one which ought to be tried by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class

8
or any other superior court, or if at the close of a trial, the Gram Nyayalayas is of the opinion
that the accused is guilty and that he ought to receive a punishment more severe than that which
the Gram Nyayalayas is empowered to impose, it shall submit the case to the appropriate
Magistrate having jurisdiction who shall transfer the case to his own court and proceed according
to law.
12.8 Since the main objective of the Bill is speedy and inexpensive justice, the Committee
feels that this clause, if accepted, would result in a situation wherein cases will be
transferred from Gram Nyayalayas to the Courts for adjudication, and that too, even at the
fag end of the trial. The Committee is of the opinion that the true yardstick to measure
the effectiveness of a change proposed to be introduced is the benefits that will be accrued
to an average citizen who is the consumer of such change. It is of the view that such
uncertainty would create confusion in the minds of litigants regarding the jurisdiction of
Gram Nyayalayas in criminal/civil cases. They will ultimately be pushed from pillar to post
to get relief and this will defeat the very noble objective of access to justice at the grass
root level.
12.9 Moreover, the Committee fears that such transfer of cases will eventually result in
greater pendency of cases. Thus, the ultimate cause of alleviating the backlog of cases in
Courts will not be fulfilled. The Committee is apprehensive that inspite of incurring huge
expenditure for the setting up and functioning of Gram Nyayalayas, the objective will not
be achieved.
12.10 Clause 32(2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall not be bound by the procedure laid
down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the rules of evidence as laid down in the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other
provisions of this Act and any rule made by the High Court, the Gram Nyayalaya shall have the
power to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its proceedings.
12.11 The Committee is of the view that the Gram Nyayalayas should not be exempted
from the Code of Civil Procedure and the Indian Evidence Act. Further, the issue of
exemption from CPC and Evidence Act will not arise if the recommendation of this
Committee that Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff Courts should be Gram Nyayalayas
is accepted.
Exclusion of jurisdiction
12.12 The Committee notes that clause 18 of the Bill excludes disputes against the Government
and revenue claims from the jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas.
12.13 The Committee is of the view that disputes against Government and revenue
disputes arise frequently at the grass root level. They might even constitute the bulk of
disputes. The Committee feels that such exclusion would result in many disputes not coming
under the jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas. In such an event, the Committee is of the
opinion that this would defeat the purpose of the Bill, which is access to justice at the grass
root level. Therefore, it recommends that there is no necessity for such exclusion.
Extension of jurisdiction
12.14 The Government of NCT of Delhi, while tendering its views on the Gram Nyayalayas
Bill, 2007 stated inter alia, as follows:
...Since the Panchayat Raj system is not in existence in Delhi, appointment of any
Nyayadhikari is not possible. Therefore, the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas without

9
appointment of Nyayadhikari may not be feasible. It is further submitted that most of the
villages in Delhi have been urbanized and the rural villages left, are in the process of the
urbanization. In fact, under the present scenario, the rural areas in Delhi can be construed
as urban agglomeration...
12.15 The Committee, during its deliberations on the Bill, felt that the benefits of Gram
Nyayalayas should be made available to the people living in towns and cities more so in the
urbanised villages also, so that participatory justice is made available to the public,
irrespective of their place of residence. Since huge expenditure is anticipated to be incurred
for Gram Nyayalayas, Committee is of the view that its fruits should be enjoyed by
maximum citizens. Therefore, it recommends that such Nyayalayas, which would be mobile
Courts, should be envisaged for urban areas also.
Career prospects of Nyayadhikari
12.16 The Committee notes that as per the provisions of the Bill, there are no further career
prospects for Nyayadhikaris. The Committee feels that this is a disincentive and that it would
be a hindrance to attracting best talent to the arena of administration of justice.  Moreover,
the Committee notes that the maximum age limit for Nyayadhikaris is prescribed as 45 years. This
would imply that a person below this age, who will be at the hey days of his career, will have
to opt to be appointed as Nyayadhikari, when better avenues will be available to him at this age.
12.17 The Committee is constrained to note that as per the provisions of this Bill, a person
appointed in the post of Nyayadhikari would remain in the same post till retirement. It is
of the view that this provision is a major dissuading factor in attracting best talent to the
subordinate judiciary.
12.18 Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that the Nyayadhikari should be entitled
to the salaries and all the service conditions as a Judicial First Class Magistrate. This will
ensure their career progression and thereby, better talent would be attracted into this cadre.
Execution of decrees/orders
12.19 The Committee, while deliberating upon the Bill, observed that the strength of police
personnel in most of the States in the country is far from satisfactory. Though the Bill provides
that every police officer functioning within the local limits of jurisdiction of a Gram Nyayalaya shall
be bound to assist the Gram Nyayalaya in the exercise of its lawful authority in clause 43(1), the
Committee has a reasonable apprehension that due to severe strain on human resources of
the State police, this provision may not be rendered fruitful. The Committee feels that this
would hamper the functioning of Gram Nyayalayas in general, and execution of its orders
in particular; more so because the Gram Nyayalayas are not armed with contempt
jurisdiction. This can be resolved only if the Gram Nyayalayas are First Class Magistrate
Courts.
Mobile Courts
12.20 The Secretary, Legislative Department while deposing on the Bill, stated that the concept of
mobile Court is being experienced in Brazil, Venezuela, Mexico and Philippines to bring justice
closer to the people, especially marginalized sections of our society, the poor and the
under-privileged. In Philippines, it is known as ‘justice on wheel’. They hold the Court in a big
van which accommodates the judicial officer along with the staff. But, we have not followed that
concept here and have put it at headquarters at Panchayat Samiti level though a beginning has been
made in Haryana very recently.

10
12.21 The Committee is of the opinion that in order to ensure participatory system of
justice, expeditious disposal of disputes and access to justice at grass root level, mobile
Courts is a good mechanism. It is of the view that mobile Courts would be the best method
to ensure delivery of justice at the doorstep. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
the Gram Nyayalayas shall be Mobile Courts.
12.22 The Committee could gather that the Government had extended the term of Fast
Track Courts at the District level upto 31st March, 2010 and that a sum of Rs. 509 crore
had been provided for this programme. It notes that its success rate has been commendable.
Therefore, it recommends that the Government should take a cue from this and establish
Gram Nyayalayas in the same line as Fast Track Courts.
Reservation
12.23 Clause 6(2) of the Bill provides that while appointing a Nyayadhikari, representation shall be
given, as far as practicable, to the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, women
and any other classes or communities as may be specified by the State Government from time to
time.
12.24 The Committee apprehends that the phrase ‘as far as practicable’ will dilute the
enforceability of reservation and therefore, recommends that reservation should be made
mandatory as per policy of the Government.
Financial Statement
12.25 The Committee, during its deliberations, raised an apprehension regarding the financial
implications, as it would not be possible to work out the exact expenditure that would be required
and how the budgetary support would reach the State Governments. The Committee was
constrained to note that a District Munsif or a District Judge is not having sufficient funds for
his day-to-day affairs.
12.26 The Committee also voiced its concern over the mode of sharing of expenditure to be
incurred for the setting up and functioning of Gram Nyayalayas.
12.27 The Committee gathers from various State Governments that they are already reeling under
severe resource crunch and that they would not be able to bear the expenditure of Gram
Nyayalayas despite the fact that Central Government would bear the entire recurring cost for the
initial three years. Most of the State Governments have submitted that they require cent per cent
funding from the Central Government to meet both recurring and non-recurring expenditure.
12.28 In this regard, the Committee however feels that at least for five year period, these Courts
should be fully supported by the Government of India rather than allowing the State Governments
to have a stake on it. Many States are saying that they cannot run even the present Court system
due to financial disabilities. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Government of
India should come forward and bear, for five years, both the recurring and no-recurring
expenses.
12.29 Meanwhile, an objective study should be conducted to gauge the success rate of Gram
Nyayalayas and if they are found to have achieved the objective of speedy and inexpensive
justice, the Gram Nyayalayas should continue. The Committee opines that the expenses
incurred thereafter, should be met by the State Government and Central Government on
sharing basis. It feels that when the litigants are satisfied with the functioning of Gram
Nyayalayas and pendency of cases is reduced, it would be rightful to expect that the State
Governments which are benefited by the same, should share the financial burden.

11
Plan expenditure
12.30 The Committee is of the view that a society which is peaceful and rife free is sine qua
non for better human resources and enhanced productivity. If individuals/groups could solve
disputes quickly and the acceptance of the dispute resolution is also ensured, then productivity of
the individual/groups will be more.
12.31 The Committee is aware of the reality that in villages, people sell agricultural property and
dwelling houses to conduct cases through the court system. If Gram Nyayalayas could deliver
justice at their doorstep, they will be free of such shackles and their capacity to produce goods
and assets will be enhanced. Moreover, it will make them dynamic and vibrant citizens. Thus the
human productivity index of our nation will also increase.
12.32 If we apply this basic economic principle, the Committee feels that the expenditure in the
Department of Justice on Gram Nyayalayas should be made as plan expenditure just as the
Government is spending for roads, education, health, infrastructure etc. which are necessary for
increasing the productivity of the nation. This thought may not have been considered by the
international funding agencies or the Government of India.
12.33 Taking into account all the socio-political issues, the Committee strongly feels that
the expenditure incurred on Gram Nyayalayas should also be treated as an investment on
human resources and hence be made as plan expenditure and that the Ministry of Finance
should allot specific amount under this head.
12.34 The Committee is of the view that whenever a legislation is introduced in
Parliament, the financial statement accompanying the Bill should be religiously looked into
and scientific empirical calculation should be made anticipating the expenses which are
likely to be incurred. There should also be specific budget allocation for enforcement of
each enactment. Further, certain percentage of budget allocation made to the respective
Departments should also be diverted for utilization for the implementation of the enactment
through that particular Department. Notionally, it can be said that atleast 5 to 10 % of
budgetary allocation of the nodal Department should automatically be allotted to the
Department of Justice so that they can have a well equipped judicial system, right from the
Gram Nyayalayas to the highest forum. The Committee has a reasonable apprehension that
unless a specific dedicated allotment is made from the budget for Gram Nyayalayas, it will
become yet another programme which is colorful in paper and not in action. Such state of
affairs will ultimately make the people lose faith in the democratic process.
Conclusions and recommendations of the Committee
12.35 Some Members of the Committee were of the opinion that this Bill should not be proceeded
further. They felt that instead of having a parallel system of Judiciary dealing with these categories
of cases, the funds available should be made available for strengthening the existing infrastructure,
to have more subordinate Courts, have more number of Magistrates, to create better infrastructure
and other facilities and that the subordinate judiciary should be strengthened.
12.36 The Committee noted that bringing in the proposed legislation for the creation
of Gram Nyayalayas would only add another tier in the judicial hierarchy, besides
creating confusion in the minds of the common man, who might be forced to run from
pillar to post to seek justice, with no clear guidelines laid down to guide him as to whom
he should approach for a particular offence/injustice committed against him. This aspect
should thoroughly be examined by the Government before proceeding further with the
Bill.

12
12.37 The Committee takes note of the fact that before the amendment of the Code of Criminal
Procedure in 1973, the last tier in the hierarchy of criminal courts was the Magistrates of the Third
Class. The Third Class Magistrate Courts could pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one month or of fine not exceeding fifty rupees. Since it was felt that this resulted in
pendency of cases, the Magistrates of the Third Class were abolished. Here it is pertinent to note
that the Gram Nyayalayas are envisaged in the Bill as the lowest court of subordinate judiciary,
thereby adding another tier. The Committee is of the strong view that adding another tier in
the subordinate judiciary would eventually lead to the pre-amendment situation. Also, it will
not have significant positive impact on the backlog of cases. This aspect also needs to be
thoroughly examined.
12.38 The Committee also feels that the Gram Nyayalayas would face difficulties in
executing their orders/decrees because the local police personnel might not co-operate fully
since Gram Nyayalayas are not granted same powers as regular Courts and also because of
shortage of staff in the State police. Moreover, only if the orders/decrees of Gram
Nyayalayas are executed quickly, speedy and inexpensive justice can be delivered. In order
to ensure quick execution of orders, the Committee is of the strong view that Gram
Nyayalayas should be armed with all the powers enjoyed by a Judicial First Class Magistrate/
Munsiff Court under CrPC and CPC.
12.39 Furthermore, the litigants who approach Gram Nyayalayas should not have the
feeling that the forum which they are approaching is in any way inferior to the regular
Courts. A sense of confidence should be instilled in their minds that they will get the same
justice in Gram Nyayalayas as they would get in regular Courts, but with less wastage of
time, money and efforts. The Committee was of the unanimous view that if the
recommendations made in the foregoing paragraphs are implemented, Gram Nyayalayas will
be just like the Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff Courts functioning at present, with
the only distinction that they will be “ Mobile People’s Courts” in the true sense.
12.40 The Committee is of the opinion that rule of law cannot be achieved unless Courts
are created commensurate with the workload. It feels that creation of more Courts, rather
than creation of an additional tier would ease out the burden presently experienced by
Courts. Therefore, it recommends that additional Courts of the Magistrate of the
First Class/Munsiff should be created as Gram Nyayalayas which would function as mobile
Courts.
12.41 The Committee wishes to place on record reservations regarding the setting up of
Gram Nyayalayas as per the provisions of this Bill. Having said so, in the event of the
Government being very keen to go ahead with this Bill in its present form, it should take
into consideration the observations/recommendations of the Committee.
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL
Clause 2
13.0 The Committee considered the definitions provided in this clause.
13.1 During the deliberations of the Committee, it was felt that since huge expenditure is
envisaged by the Government to set up and for the functioning of Gram Nyayalayas and since
underprivileged classes exist in urban areas also, the benefits of this noble venture should not be
restricted to the rural populace only.
13.2 This view was expressed by the Chairman of the Committee as follows:

13
...You are very much clear that it is only for rural areas, but there is a suggestion that you
can take up the urban areas also. There are many slums and other places, remote areas,
inside the urban area itself...
13.3 Therefore, the Committee recommends that urban areas where people handicapped
by social, economic or other disabilities also reside should be included in the definition
clause itself of the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007.
13.4 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 3
Clause 3(1)
14.0 Clause 3(1) of the Bill provides for establishment of one or more Gram Nyayalayas for
every Panchyayat at intermediate level or group of contiguous Panchayats at intermediate level in
a district or where there is no Panchyat at intermediate level in any State, for a group of
contiguous Gram Panchyayats.
14.1 The Committee felt that since the intermediate level Panchayats differ from State to State,
practical difficulties would arise at the implementation stage of Gram Nyayalayas. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the role of Gram Nyayalayas should be complementary to the
regular First Class Magistrate Courts. This would also allay any confusion which might arise
regarding the territorial jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas. This needs to be clarified in this
clause of the Bill.
14.2 Further more, since Gram Nyayalayas are envisaged as Mobile Courts, the
Committee was of the considered opinion that they could have a complementary role
alongwith the regular subordinate Courts in reducing pendency of cases and enabling better
access to justice to the common man.
Clause 3(3)
15.0 Clause 3(3) of the Bill provides that a Gram Nyayalaya shall be the lowest court of
subordinate judiciary in the State.
15.1 T aking into account various practical realities, the Committee opines that creating one more
tier in the subordinate judiciary is not called for at this juncture. This opinion was voiced by the
Committee as under:
...If you want to make additions and if you want that there should not be any pending
cases, and speedy justice should be given, there was a suggestion that you have to
contemplate that it should be equal to the present existing system. But it should be an
additional court, just like a Fast Track Court. Now, you are managing at the district level.
In addition, it should also be a Magistrate Court. But it can be called Gram Nyayalayas. It
can have the mobility, it can have the powers, but it should be a defined area as a
complementary one for the existing one. Take the example of revenue taluk. There is one
court which is in existence now. Now, after this Act has come into force, if the
Government wants to have another court, they can have another court within that taluk
itself, that is, additional court is available. That means, more cases can be disposed of. The
distance covered by the client to come over to that place, that will also be reduced...
15.2 Moreover, since the main objective of creating an additional tier is clearing the backlog of
cases and ensuring that justice is accessible to all irrespective of disabilities, the Committee
recommends that envisaging Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff Courts as Gram
Nyayalayas which would be Mobile Courts, would achieve this objective.

14
15.3 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 4
16.0 Clause 4 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 5
Clause 5(2)
17.0 Clause 5(2) of the Bill provides that the Nyayadhikari shall be appointed by the Governor
of the State in consultation with the High Court in accordance with the rules made in this behalf.
17.1 The Committee, while deliberating upon the appointment of Nyayadhikari, observed as follows:
...A sitting Magistrate or Munsiff may be appointed as the Nyayadhikari of the Gram
Nyayalaya, instead of having a separate recruitment system without setting the service
conditions, promotions, future aspects and all other things. You put a sitting District
Munsiff or First Class district Magistrate as the Nyayadhikari...
17.2 The Committee recommends that the Gram Nyayalayas should be Judicial First Class
Magistrate/Munsiff Courts and that there should be no separate recruitment rules for
Nyayadhikari. It recommends that the recruitment process of Nyayadhikari should be the
same as that of the Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff. Since the eligibility to be
appointed as Nyayadhikari is same as that of Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, they
should be appointed in the regular judicial stream.
17.3 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 6
Clause 6(1)
18.0 Clause 6(1) of the Bill lays down the qualifications for appointment as Nyayadhikari.
18.1 In this regard, the Committee recommends that in order to attract talented persons to the
post of Nyayadhikari, it is essential that the service conditions of the post are good. As per this
Bill, a person appointed in the post of Nyayadhikari would remain in the same post till retirement.
The Committee feels that this will be a dissuading factor. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the Nyayadhikaris should be made part of the State Judicial Services. It
was of the view that this would ensure that deserving persons will progress in future based
upon his merit.
Clause 6(2)
18.2 Clause 6(2) of the Bill provides for reservation in the appointment of Nyayadhikari.
18.3 This clause was widely discussed at length. The Committee was of the strong view that
reservation should be made mandatory. Therefore, the term ‘as far as practicable’ may be
deleted.
18.4 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 7
19.0 Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the cadre of Nyayadhikari of Gram
Nyayalayas.

15
19.1 Since the Committee’s recommendation is that the Gram Nyayalayas should be
Judicial First Class Magistrate Courts, it was of the considered view that this clause is not
necessary.
19.2 The clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 8
20.0 Clause 8 of the Bill lays down the grounds for removal of Gram Nyayalayas.
20.1 Since the Committee’s recommendation is that the Gram Nyayalayas should be Judicial First
Class Magistrate Courts, the conditions of removal of Nyayadhikari from his office should be the
same as that of the Judicial First Class Magistrate. Therefore, the Committee was of the opinion
that there is no need to spell out the grounds for removal in the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007.
20.2 The clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 9
21.0 Clause 9 of the Bill lays down the terms and conditions of service of Nyayadhikaris.
21.1 Since the recommendation of this Committee is that the Gram Nyayalayas should be
Judicial First Class Magistrate Courts, the Committee is of the view that this clause is not
needed.
21.2 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 10
22.0 Clause 10 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 11
23.0 Clause 11 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 12
24.0 Clause 12 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 13
25.0 Clause 13 of the Bill defines the limits of the territorial jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas.
25.1 The Committee was of the opinion that this would unnecessarily bifurcate the
present jurisdiction of Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff Courts. Therefore, it was felt
that the Gram Nyayalayas should be Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff Courts.
25.2 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 14
Clause 14(l)
26.0 Clause 14(1) of the Bill prescribes the criminal jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas.
26.1 While deliberating upon this clause, the Committee noted that Section 29 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 lays down the hierarchy in the subordinate judiciary. It felt that there is

16
no need at present which warrants change in this hierarchy. If Gram Nyayalayas are made the
lowest Court in the subordinate judiciary, it will necessitate redefinition of penal/pecuniary
jurisdiction of the Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff Courts. The Committee felt that this
would give rise to practical difficulties. Moreover, this would arouse confusion/ambiguity in the
minds of litigants as regards the powers/jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas.
26.2 This view of the Committee was summarized by the Chairman as under:
...The Committee had already suggested that there should not be any ambiguity for a person
who is a complainant, who comes forward with a complaint before a Nyayadhikari; he
cannot be expected to know that this Magistrate is going to give only one year’s
punishment and during the course of the evidence if he finds that it is punishable for one
year more, then he will transfer the case to the District Judge or District Sessions Judge
or the appropriate authority. If that is so, the basic purpose of creating this system itself
fails. Therefore, if you give the First-Class Magistrate power for this Nyayadhikari, then
automatically, he gets the power to punish for a limit of three years and he has got the
power to punish for Rs. 10,000 fine also according to the definition given in Section 29
of the Criminal Procedure Code. Therefore, here we want to suggest those thing. Instead
of creating doubts in the mind of the complainant to search for the forum, we should be
very clear in telling him that this is the first level, the magisterial level or the civil court
level, and you can have that limit of powers; you can seek that remedy with that...
26.3 Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Gram Nyayalayas should be the
Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff Courts, which would ensure that the offences to be
tried by the Gram Nyayalayas will automatically be the same as that of Judicial First Class
Magistrate/Munsiff Courts.
26.4 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 14(2)
27.0 The Committee, while discussing this clause, noted that plea bargaining is provided in
Section 265 (A-L) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It is of the opinion that plea
bargaining should be made applicable for litigants approaching the Gram Nyayalayas also.
Therefore, it recommends that plea bargaining should also be included in clause 14(2) as
clause 14(2) (iv).
27.1 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 15
28.0 Clause 15 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 16
29.0 Clause 16 of the Bill lays down the powers of the Central Government to amend Schedules
of the Bill.
29.1 The Committee opined that when Gram Nyayalayas are granted the same powers and
status as Judicial First Class Magistrate Courts, there is no need for clause 16.
29.2 The clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 17
30.0 Clause 17 of the Bill provides that Gram Nyayalayas shall have exclusive jurisdiction in
respect of certain disputes.

17
30.1 The Committee opined that when Gram Nyayalayas are Judicial First Class
Magistrate Courts, there is no need for clause 17.
30.2 The clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 18
31.0 Clause 18 of the Bill lays down certain disputes which are not to be tried by Gram
Nyayalayas.
31.1 The Committee opined that when Gram Nyayalayas are Judicial First Class
Magistrate Courts, there is no need for clause 18.
31.2 The clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 19
32.0 Clause 19 of the Bill prescribes the circumstances under which a case can be closed by
the Nyayadhikari.
32.1 The Committee opined that when Gram Nyayalayas are Judicial First Class
Magistrate Courts, there is no need for clause 19.
32.2 The clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 20
33.0 Clause 20 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 21
34.0 Clause 21 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 22
35.0 Clause 22 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 23
Clause 23 (1) and (2)
36.0 The Committee was of the opinion that since summary procedure is provided in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 there is no need for specific reference to the same in the
Bill.
36.1 The clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 24
37.0 Clause 24 of the Bill deals with pronouncement of Judgment by Gram Nyayalayas.
37.1 The Committee recommends that since this is a procedural matter, the High Court
can direct accordingly.
37.2 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 25
38.0 Clause 25 of the Bill prescribes the power of Gram Nyayalayas to transfer cases.

18
38.1 The Committee is constrained to note that if the cases are referred in the manner provided
in this clause, it would lead to adding to the backlog of cases which exists already. Furthermore,
the litigants will be forced to run from one forum to the other in search of justice. The Committee
feels that such a situation is against the very concept of speedy justice. Taking this into account,
the Committee feels that there is need for clarity as regards jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas. It
also observed that if Gram Nyayalayas are Judicial First Class Magistrate Courts, such
anomalies can be rectified.
38.2 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 26
39.0 Clause 26 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 27
40.0 Clause 27 of the Bill lays down the power of Gram Nyayalayas to compound cases.
40.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that clause 14(2) (iii) of this Bill provides for trial
of compoundable offences by Gram Nyayalayas as well and therefore, opines that it is repetitive.
40.2 The clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 28
41.0 Clause 28 of the Bill specifies the classes of offences, the cognizance of which cannot be
taken by Gram Nyayalayas.
41.1 The Committee, while deliberating upon this Clause, observed that in the event of Gram
Nyayalayas being Judicial First Class Magistrate Courts, as per its recommendation, its jurisdiction
will also be the same. Therefore, the need for this clause does not arise.
41.2 The Committee is constrained to note that this clause is in contradiction to clause
14(1)(a) of the Bill. The reason for this contradiction is that certain offences classified in
Part I of the Schedule entail maximum punishment of imprisonment for three years and
as per clause 28, Gram Nyayalayas shall not take up offences which is punishable with
imprisonment for more than one year.
41.4 The Committee recommends that this clause may accordingly be deleted.
Clause 29
42.0 Clause 29 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 30
43.0 Clause 30 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 31
44.0 Clause 31 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 32
Clause 32(2)
45.0 The Committee notes that on the one hand, clause 32(1) provides that Gram Nyayalayas
shall be deemed to be a civil court and on the other, clause 32(2) provides that Gram Nyayalayas

19
shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. It is of the
opinion that contradictory procedures are given in the same clause.
45.1 Moreover, the Committee is of the view that since Gram Nyayalayas are envisaged as the
lowest court of subordinate judiciary, the substantive and procedural laws should be made
applicable to them in the same manner as to regular Courts. It is of the opinion that granting
exemption from such laws might result in miscarriage of justice, which is antithesis to rule of law.
45.2 Therefore, it recommends that this contradiction should be thoroughly analysed by
the Government and that this clause may be suitably amended.
45.3 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 33
Clause 33 (1)-(9) and (11)
46.0 The Committee while deliberating upon this clause, takes note of the fact that the provisions
(1)-(11) of the Bill are already provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Since clause 32(1)
of the Bill provides that the Gram Nyayalayas shall be deemed to be a civil court, the Committee
feels that this clause is not needed. In view of the above, the Committee recommends that this
fact should be looked into by the Government.
Clause 33 (10)
46.1 An apprehension was raised in the memoranda received by the Committee that though the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 stipulates the disposal of cases within a period of ninety days,
rarely cases are disposed within this time limit.
46.2 Taking this into account, the Committee recommends that the time limit for disposal
of cases may be extended to six months.
Clause 33 (12)
46.3 This clause provides that a copy of the order shall be delivered to both the parties within
three days on payment of such fees as may be prescribed by the State Government.
46.4 The Committee notes that clause 24(2) of the Bill provides that the Gram Nyayalayas shall
deliver a copy of its judgment immediately to both the parties free of cost in criminal cases.
Keeping in view the fact that the Bill is proposed for the benefit of citizens suffering from
social, economic or other disabilities, the Committee is of the opinion that exemption from
payment of fees to procure a copy of the order should be given in civil cases also.
46.5 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 34
47.0 Clause 34 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 35
48.0 Clause 35 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 36
49.0 Clause 36 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.

20
Clause 37
50.0 Clause 37 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 38
51.0 Clause 38 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 39
52.0 Clause 39 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 40
Clause 40(1)
53.0 Clause 40(1) of the Bill provides that an appeal against any order or sentence passed by
a Gram Nyayalaya in a criminal matter shall lie to the Court of Sessions exercising jurisdiction over
the area within which the Gram Nyayalaya is situated, within thirty days of the passing of such
order or sentence.
53.1 The Committee, while discussing this clause, found no valid reason as to why the period
of limitation provided in the CrPC in this regard should not be made applicable to Gram Nyayalayas
also. Moreover, it goes against the statutory right granted to litigants in this regard.
53.2 Therefore, the Committee recommends that the time limit for filing an appeal
against any order or sentence passed by a Gram Nyayalayas in a criminal matter should be
the same as that in CrPC.
53.3 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 41
Clause 41(1)
54.0 Clause 41(1) provides that an appeal against any final order or judgement passed by a Gram
Nyayalaya in a civil matter shall lie to the District Court exercising jurisdiction over the area within
which the Gram Nyayalaya is situated within thirty days of the passing of such order or judgment.
54.1 The Committee recommends that period of limitation for appeal in civil cases should
be the same as that provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
54.2 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 42
55.0 Clause 42 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 43
56.0 Clause 43 of the Bill deals with the assistance to be given to Gram Nyayalayas by the
police.
56.1 The Committee, while deliberating upon this clause, took note of the apprehensions raised
by majority of Members of the Committee that in the present scenario, the strength of the State
police personnel is not satisfactory and that their co-operation in issuing summons, warrants etc.

21
as part of the adjudicatory process by Courts is far from satisfactory. Taking serious note of such
constraints, the Committee has reasonable apprehensions as to how far a police officer functioning
within the local limits of jurisdiction of a Gram Nyayalayas will assist/will be in a position to assist
it. Such apprehensions are reinforced by the fact that the Gram Nyayalayas do not have powers
to punish for contempt.
56.2 In view of the above, the Committee recommends that if Gram Nyayalayas are
Judicial First Class Magistrate/Munsiff Courts, it will give them more teeth.
56.3 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
Clause 44
57.0 Clause 44 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 45
58.0 Clause 45 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 46
59.0 Clause 46 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 47
60.0 Clause 47 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 48
61.0 Clause 48 of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 1
Clause 1(2)
62.0 W hile deliberating upon this clause, the Committee was of the opinion that instead of
exempting tribal areas, the entire North Eastern States, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand should
be excluded.
62.1 Subject to the above observations/recommendations, the clause was adopted.
63.0 The enacting formula of the Bill was adopted without suggesting any change.
Long Title
64.0 During the discussions of the Committee, it was felt that since huge expenditure is envisaged
by the Government to set up and for the functioning of Gram Nyayalayas, the benefits of this venture
should not be restricted to the rural population only. Therefore, it recommends that urban areas/
slums in urban areas where people handicapped by social, economic or other disabilities also
reside should be included under the purview of the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007.
64.1 Keeping in view this recommendation, the long title of the Bill should be suitably
modified.
Short Title
65.1 During the deliberations of the Committee, it could gather that a Bill on the Nyaya
Panchayats is also under active consideration of the Government. It felt that confusion could arise

22
in the minds of the public because the nomenclature of that Bill and the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007
are similar, especially since the beneficiaries of both the Bills are as envisaged at present, the rural
population.
65.2 Since the recommendation of this Committee is that Gram Nyayalayas may be the
Courts of Magistrate of the First Class/Munsiff Courts, a suggestion was put forward that
the title may be the “Fast Track Gram/Nagar Nyayalayas Bill, 2007”. Some other
appropriate short title may also be thought of.
65.3 Therefore, the Committee recommends that the title of this Bill may suitably be
amended so as to remove confusion.

23
MINUTES

25
RELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 7th June, 2007, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
9. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Dr. C. Krishnan
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Prof. M. Ramadass
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
15. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
*** Relates to some other matter.

26
II. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
(i) Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary; and
(ii) Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
III. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007
9. Thereafter, the Committee took up for discussion the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007. The
Committee wanted a clarification regarding the financial statement of the Bill which conveyed that
it was not possible to work out the exact expenditure that might be required for creating Gram
Nyayalayas throughout India. The Committee also desired for a clarification on the non recurring
and recurring expenses resource mobilization and the manner of allotting the fund for the
establishment of the Gram Nyayalayas. The Committee was of the opinion that the idea of creating
Gram Nyayalayas throughout India might get defeated because of lack of funds.
10. The representative of the Legislative Department informed the Committee that they have
identified 5,064 places where the Gram Nyayalayas at intermediate Panchayat levels would be set
up. Regarding the financial implications, the representative clarified that the recurring expenditure,
for the first three years, would be borne by the Central Government in proportion of 50:50 with
the State Governments and the non-recurring expenditure would be borne by the Central
Government. Still, the Committee desired for an assessment of the entire expenditure, resource
mobilization and allocation of the funds so that the aims and objectives of the Bill were achieved.
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The meeting was adjourned at 1.04 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

27
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 14th June, 2007, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
7. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Prof. M. Ramadass
14. Shri Raj Babbar
15. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. K.N. Chaturvedi, Secretary;
2. Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
3. Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Additional Legislative Counsel.
27
*** Relates to some other matter.

28
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007
5. The Secretary, Legislative Department, while making a presentation on the Gram Nyayalayas
Bill, 2007 apprised the Committee that the Central Government would meet the entire non-recurring
expenditure of Gram Nyayalayas and that 50% of the recurring expenditure would be borne by the
Central Government for the initial three years. He stated that approximately 5067 Gram Nyayalayas
were proposed to be established at the intermediate Panchayat level. He further elaborated upon the
salient features of the Bill and stated that Gram Nyayalayas would be Mobile Courts.
6. He replied to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
(The witness then withdrew)
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 1.04 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

29
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 17th July, 2007, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
7. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
12. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
13. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
14. Shri Raj Babbar
15. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
16. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
29
*** Relates to some other matter.

30
III. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
(i) Shri B.K. Sinha, Additional Secretary; and
(ii) Shri T.R. Raghunandan, Joint Secretary.
IV. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri P. B. Singh, Joint Secretary.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
III. THE GRAM NYAYALAYAS BILL, 2007
8. The Chairman then welcomed representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to the
meeting and informed them that the purpose of inviting them was to elicit their views/suggestions
on the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 presently pending before the Committee for consideration and
Report. On coming to know that the Secretary, Panchayati Raj was not present due to her some
pre-engagement, the Committee took a serious view and asked the representative of the Ministry
to withdraw. The Committee decided to hear the Secretary in its next meeting.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting was adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

31
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 1st August, 2007 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
13. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
14. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Shrimati Meenakshi Datta Ghose, Secretary;
2. Shri B.K. Sinha, Additional Secretary; and
3. Shri T.R. Raghunandan, Joint Secretary.
II. Representative of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary.
2. The Chairman of the Committee, while requesting the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj
to make a presentation on the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 stated that the Committee wished to be
31

32
enlightened about the Nyaya Panchayats, proposed to be set up under the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj and which would be complementary to the formal judicial system. After the opening remarks
by the Secretary, a power point presentation was made on Nyaya Panchayats.
3. The Secretary apprised the Committee that a drafting Committee under the Chairmanship of
Prof. Upendra Bakshi was set up in 2006 and that the draft Bill prepared by this Committee was
circulated to the Central Ministries and all State Governments for their comments thereon.
4. The Members raised apprehension that the nomenclature of ‘Gram Nyayalayas’ and ‘Nyaya
Panchayats’ would create confusion in the minds of people regarding the jurisdiction of the two
fora.
5. The witnesses responded to the queries put forward by the Chairman and Members of the
Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 12.53 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

33
I
FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 8th August, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Raj Babbar
8. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
9. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
10. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shri Harin Pathak
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. Members were also of the unanimous view that bringing in the proposed legislation for the
creation of Gram Nyayalayas would only add another tier in the judicial hierarchy besides creating
confusion in the minds of the common man, who might be put to run from pillar to post to seek
justice, with no clear guidelines laid down to guide him as to whom he should approach for a
particular offence committed against him. Besides, there would be overlapping of jurisdiction as
Nyaya Panchayats already exist.
33
*** Relates to some other matter.

34
5. Members also expressed their views that since Gram Nyayalayas are basically the
jurisdiction of the State Governments, and all recurring expenditure is to be borne by them, it is
imperative that the comments of the State Governments on the Bill are sought in the first instance.
6. The Committee then took up in-house discussion on the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007. The
Members raised serious doubt as to the feasibility of the Bill. They expressed apprehension that the
Bill lacked clarity with regard to the jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas and that the present strength
of police personnel in States would not be sufficient to cater to the demands of Gram Nyayalayas.
They also observed that appointments in subordinate Courts were not made in time and opined that
strengthening of existing subordinate Courts would be a better alternative than Gram Nyayalayas
as far as reducing pendency of cases was concerned.
7. The Committee adjourned at 11.30 
P.M.

35
II
SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16th August, 2007 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
3. Dr. P.C. Alexander
4. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
6. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
7. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
8. Dr. C. Krishnan
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
11. Prof. M. Ramadass
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, MINISTRY OF LAW AND
JUSTICE
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
2. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007.
The Committee opined that since huge expenditure was envisaged by the Government for the
setting up as well as for the functioning of Gram Nyayalayas and since underprivileged/marginalised
sections of the society reside in urban areas also, it is but imperative that urban areas should also
be brought under the purview of the Bill. It was of the view that since intermediate level
35

36
Panchayats differ from State to State, practical difficulties would arise at the implementation stage
of Gram Nyayalayas. The Committee was of the view that creating an additional tier in the
subordinate Judiciary would lead to further accumulation of backlog of cases and suggested that
additional Courts of the Courts of the Magistrate of the First Class/Munsiff should be created and
that they should be Mobile Courts which are to be termed as Gram Nyayalayas. The Committee,
during its deliberations, observed that the Nyayadhikaris should be made part of the State Judicial
Services so that they become entitled to future career progression. It was of the opinion that
reservation in the appointment of Nyayadhikaris should be made mandatory.
3. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
4. The Committee adjourned at 5.25 
P.M.

37
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 29th August, 2007, in Room No. ‘126’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Shri Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
14. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
15. Prof. M. Ramadass
16. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
17. Shri Anirudh Prasad alias Sadhu Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Deputy Director
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Assistant Director
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007.
It was decided to present/lay the Report in both Houses of Parliament on the 6th September, 2007.
The Committee authorised Shri Shailendra Kumar, and in his absence Shri S.K. Kharventhan to lay
the Report on the table of Lok Sabha and the Chairman, and in his absence Shri Balawant alias
Bal Apte to present the Report in Rajya Sabha, on its behalf.
37

38
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

39
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE ‘A’
AS I NTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. XXXVII of 2007
THE GRAM NYAY ALAYAS BILL, 2007
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
GRAM N YAYALAYA
3. Establishment of Gram Nyayalayas.
4. Headquarters of Gram Nyayalaya.
5. Appointment of Nyayadhikari.
6. Qualifications for appointment.
7. Constitution of cadre of Nyayadhikaris of Gram Nyayalayas.
8. Removal of Nyayadhikari.
9. Terms and conditions of Nyayadhikaris.
10. Nyayadhikari not to participate in proceedings in which he is interested.
11. Nyayadhikari to hold mobile courts and conduct proceedings in villages.
12. Seal of Gram Nyayalaya.
CHAPTER III
J
URISDICATION , P OWERS AND A UTHORITY  OF G RAM N YAYALAYA
13. Limits of jurisdication of Gram Nyayalayas.
14. Criminal jurisdiction.
15. Civil jurisdiction.
16. Power to amend Schedules.
17. Gram Nyayalaya to have exclusive civil and criminal jurisdication in certain matters.
18. Certain disputes not to be tried by Gram Nyayalayas.
19. Gram Nyayalayas to close a case in certain circumstances.
20. Limitation.
21. Transfer of pending cases.
22. Duties of ministerial officers.
41

42
CLAUSES
CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE  IN C RIMINAL  C ASES
23. Gram Nyayalaya to follow summary procedure.
24. Pronouncement of judgment.
25. Power of Gram Nyayalayas to transfer cases.
C
LAUSES
26. Legal aid to parties.
27. Power to compound cases.
28. Gram Nyayalayas not to take cognizance of certain offences.
29. Power of Gram Nyayalayas to order amount of fine to be applied for certain expenses.
CHAPTER V
P
ROCEDURE  IN C IVIL C ASES
30. Duty of Gram Nyayalaya to make efforts for conciliation and settlement of civil disputes.
31. Appointment of Conciliators.
32. Procedure generally.
33. Special procedure in civil disputes.
34. Transfer of civil disputes.
35. Payment of interest in money decrees.
36. Power of the Gram Nyayalaya to issue commissions.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROCEDURE  G ENERALLY
37. Proceedings to be in the official language of the State.
38. Evidence to be on oath.
39. Gram Nyayalayas to have the power of Judicial Magistrate of the first class for
summoning any person.
CHAPTER VII
A
PPEALS
40. Appeal in criminal cases.
41. Appeal in civil cases.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
42. Cases pending in or disposed of by other courts.
43. Assistance of police to Gram Nyayalayas.
44. Nyayadhikaris and employees, etc., to be public servants.
45. Inspection of Gram Nyayalayas.
46. Power to remove difficulties.
47. Power of High Court to make rules.
48. Power of State Government to make rules.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.

43
AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. XXXVII of 2007
THE GRAM NYAY ALAYAS BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas for the purposes
of providing access to justice, both civil and criminal, to the
citizens at the grassroots level and to ensure that opportunities
for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of
social, economic or other disabilities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir, the State of Nagaland, the State of Arunachal Pradesh,
the State of Sikkim and to the tribal areas.
43
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

44
Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “tribal areas”
means the areas specified in Parts I, II, IIA, and III of the table
below paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution within
the State of Assam, the State of Meghalaya, the State of Tripura and
the State of Mizoram, respectively.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette,
appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Gram Nyayalaya” means a subordinate Court
established under sub-section (1) of section 3;
(b) “Gram Panchayat” means an Institution (by
whatever name called) of self-government constituted, at the
village level, under article 243B of the Constitution, for the
rural areas;
(c) “High Court” means,—
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for
that State;
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the
jurisdiction of the High Court for a State has been
extended by law, that High Court;
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the
highest Court of criminal appeal for that territory other
than the Supreme Court of India;
(d) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notified” shall be
construed accordingly;
(e) “Nyayadhikari” means the presiding officer of a
Gram Nyayalaya appointed under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(f) “Panchayat at intermediate level” means an
institution (by whatever name called) of self-government
constituted, at the intermediate level, under article 243B of the
Constitution, for the rural areas in accordance with Part IX of
the Constitution;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(h) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory,
means the administrator thereof appointed under article 239 of
the Constitution and any reference to “Governor” shall be
construed as a referenee to the administrator of such Union
territory;
(i) all other words and expressions used but not defined
in this Act and defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Codes.
Definitions.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.

45
CHAPTER II
GRAM N YAYALAYA
3. ( 1) The State Government shall, for securing access to
justice, both civil and criminal at the grass-roots level to the
citizens, by notification, establish one or more Gram Nyayalayas for
every Panchayat at intermediate level or a group of contiguous
Panchayats at intermediate leve1 in a district or where there is no
Panchayat at intermediate level in any State, for a group of
contiguous Gram Panchayats:
Provided that where the State Government is of opinion that
there is a need to establish additional Gram Nyayalayas for any
Panchayat at intermediate level it shall, in consultation with the High
Court, by notification, establish such additional Gram Nyayalayas as
it deems fit.
(2) The Gram Nyayalayas established under sub-section ( 1)
shall be in addition to the civil and criminal courts established under
any other law for the time being in force.
(3) A Gram Nyayalaya shall be the lowest Court of
subordinate judiciary in the State.
4. The headquarters of every Gram Nyayalaya shall be located
at the headquarters of the intermediate Panchayat in which the Gram
Nyayalaya is established or such other place as may be notified by
the State Government.
5. (1) Every Gram Nyayalaya established under sub-section
(1) of section 3 shall be presided over by a Nyayadhikari.
(2) The Nyayadhikari shall be appointed by the Governor of
the State in consultation with the High Court in accordance with the
rules made in this behalf.
6. (1) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a
Nyayadhikari unless he—
(a) is eligible to be appointed as a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class: and
(b) belongs to the cadre of Nyayadhikaris constituted
by the Governor in consultation with the High Court under
section 7.
(2) While appointing a Nyayadhikari, representation shall be
given, as far as practicable, to the members of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes, women and any other classes or communities
as may be specified by the State Government from time to time.
7. The Governor shall, in consultation with the High Court,
constitute a cadre of Nyayadhikaris comprising of persons with
integrity and fulfilling the following, namely:—
(a) he should possess a degree in law from a
recognised University;
Establishment
of Gram
Nyayalayas.
Headquarters of
Gram
Nyayalaya.
Appointment of
Nyayadhikari.
Qualifications for
appointment.
Constitution of
cadre of
Nyayadhikaris
of Gram
Nyayalayas.

46
(b) he should not be more than forty-five years of age
at the time of appointment;
(c) he should have proficiency in at least one official
language of the State other than English.
8. (1) A Nyayadhikari may be removed from his office on the
ground of incompetence, gross negligence, corruption, malfeasance
or conduct unbecoming of a Nyayadhikari.
(2) Any person who has been removed from the office of
Nyayadhikari shall be ineligible for appointment under the
Government.
9. The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms
and conditions of service of the Nyayadhikaris shall be such as may
be prescribed by the State Government.
10. The Nyayadhikari shall not participate in the proceedings
of the Gram Nyayalaya if he has any interest or is involved in the
subject matter of the dispute pending consideration or is related to
one of the parties to the proceeding and in such a case the
Nyayadhikari shall refer the matter to the District Judge or Sessions
Judge, as the case may be, for transfer of the case to any other
Gram Nyayalaya.
11. ( 1) The Nyayadhikari shall periodically visit the villages
falling under his jurisdiction and conduct proceedings (including
taking of evidence, deciding of cases and the holding of mobile
Court if considered necessary) at any place which it considers is in
close proximity to the place where the parties ordinarily reside or
where the whole or part of the cause of action had arisen:
Provided that where the Gram Nyayalaya decides to hold
mobile court outside its headquarters, it shall give wide publicity as
to the date and place where it proposes to hold mobile Court.
(2) The State Government shall extend all facilities to the
Gram Nyayalaya including the provision of vehicles for holding
mobile Court and additional security for the Nyayadhikari while
conducting proceedings outside its headquarters.
12. Every Gram Nyayalaya established under this Act shall use
a seal of the court in such form and dimensions as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
CHAPTER III
J
URISDICTION , P OWERS AND A UTHORITY  OF G RAM N YAYALAYA
13. The State Government shall, by notification, define the
local territorial limits of the jurisdiction of any Gram Nyayalaya in
consultation with the High Court and may, from time to time,
depending on the workload, alter or readjust the local territorial
limits in like manner.
Removal of
Nyayadhikari.
Terms and
conditions of
Nyayadhikaris.
Seal of Gram
Nyayalaya.
Limits of
jurisdiction of
Gram
Nyayalayas.
Nyayadhikari
not to
participate in
proceedings
in which he
is interested.
Nyayadhikari
to hold
mobile courts
and conduct
proceedings
in villages.

47
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in
force, the Gram Nyayalaya may take cognizance of an offence on
a complaint or on a police report and shall—
(a) try all offences specified in Part I of the First
Schedule; and
(b) try offences and grant relief specified under the
enactments specified in Part II of that Schedule:
Provided that where the Gram Nyayalaya, at any stage of the
trial, is of the opinion that the accused should be sentenced to
imprisonment exceeding one year, it may forward the case to the
court of session for referring it to the Court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Gram Nyayalaya shall also try all offences under the Central Acts
where—
(i) the maximum punishment provided for is
imprisonment not exceeding one year, whether with or
without fine;
(ii) the punishment provided for is only fine;
(iii) the offences are compoundable, whether with or
without the permission of the Court, under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or under any other law for the
time being in force.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1)
and ( 2), the Gram Nyayalaya shall also try all such offences or
grant such relief under the State Acts by including them in Part-III
of the First Schedule.
15. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force and subject to the provisions of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 and sub-section ( 2), the Gram Nyayalayas
shall have jurisdiction to try all original suits and proceedings of
such categories and subject to such pecuniary limits as may be
notified by the High Court from time to time.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall be the lowest court of
competent jurisdiction to hear and dispose of suits of a civil nature
falling under the classes of disputes specified in the Second
Schedule.
16. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is
necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification, add to or
omit any item from the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as
the case may be, and thereupon the First Schedule, or the Second
Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been
amended accordingly.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be
laid before each House of Parliament.
2 of 1974.
Criminal
jurisdiction.
2 of 1974.
Civil jurisdicion.
Power to amend
Schedules.
5 of 1908.

48
(3) If the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary or
expedient so to do, it may, in consultation with the High Court, by
notification, add to any item in Part III of the First Schedule or
Part III of the Second Schedule or omit from it any item in respect
of which the State Legislature is competent to make laws and
thereupon the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the case
may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(4) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 3) shall be
laid before the State Legislature.
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, or the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or
any other law for the time being in force and subject to the
provisions of this Act, a Gram Nyayalaya shall have exclusive
jurisdiction in respect of disputes covered by the subject matters
specified in sections 14 and 15.
18. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 13,
section 14 or section 15, the Gram Nyayalaya shall not have
jurisdiction to take cognizance of the following classes of disputes,
namely:—
(a) a dispute by or against the Central Government or
the State Government or a public servant for anything which
is in good faith done.or purported to have been done by him
in his official capacity;
(b) a dispute where one of the parties is a minor or a
person of unsound mind;
(c) any claim cognizable by revenue courts.
19. If the Nyayadhikari is satisfied that it is necessary in the
interest of justice to close a case, it may, on its own motion or on
an application by either party to the civil dispute, pass orders
closing the case, and advise the parties to approach the appropriate
civil court in respect of matters relating to any complicated issue of
fact or law which should be decided by any other competent court
of law:
Provided that whenever a case is closed by the Nyayadhikari
under this section, the period for which the case has been pending
in it shall be excluded for the purposes of computing the period of
limitation.
20. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, and the
provisions of Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 shall be applicable to the Gram Nyayalaya.
21. ( 1) The District Court may, with effect from such date
as may be notified, transfer all the cases pending before the Court
subordinate to it, both civil and criminal, to the Gram Nyayalaya
competent to hear and try.
Gram
Nyayalayas to
have exclusive
civil and
criminal
jurisdiction in
certain
matters.
Certain
disputes not
to be tried by
Gram
Nyayalayas.
Gram
Nyayalayas to
close a case
in certain
circumstances.
Limitation.
Transfer of
peding cases.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
36 of 1963.
2 of 1974.

49
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya may in its discretion continue with
the cases from the stage at which it was pending before the court
from which it was transferred or it may de novo hear or try the
case, as the case may be.
22. (1) The State Government shall determine the nature and
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the
Gram Nyayalaya in the discharge of its functions and provide the
Gram Nyayalaya with such officers and other employees as it may
think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the
Gram Nyayalaya shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(3) The officers and other employees of a Gram Nyayalaya
shall perform such duties as may, from time to time, be assigned to
them by the Nyayadhikari.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROCEDURE  IN CRIMINAL  CASES
23. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the rules
made thereunder shall apply to the proceedings in respect of
criminal cases triable by the Gram Nyayalaya under this Act.
(2) While exercising criminal jurisdiction, the Gram Nyayalaya
shall follow the procedure for summary trials and the provisions of
sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall apply accordingly.
(3) The trial of offences by the Gram Nyayalaya under this
Act shall be, as far as may be, on a day-to-day basis and every case
shall be disposed of within a period of ninety days from the date of
its institution.
24. ( 1) The Gram Nyayalaya shall pronounce its judgment
within one week from the last date of its hearing.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall deliver a copy of its judgment
immediately to both the parties free of cost.
(3) The Gram Nyayalaya shall, in cases where imprisonment
has been awarded, forward copies of the judgment alongwith the
warrant of commitment to the officer-in-charge of the jail
concerned, the police station concerned, and the Sessions Judge
having jurisdiction.
25. If at any stage of the proceedings it appears to the Gram
Nyayalaya that the case is one which ought to be tried by a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class or any other superior court, or if at the
close of a trial, the Gram Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the
accused is guilty and that he ought to receive a punishment more
Duties of
ministerial
officers.
Gram Nyayalaya
to follow
summary
procedure.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Pronouncement
of judgment.
Power of Gram
Nyayalayas to
transfer cases.

50
severe than that which the Gram Nyayalaya is empowered to
impose. it shall submit the case to the appropriate Magistrate having
Jurisdiction who shall transfer the case to his own court and
proceed according to law.
26. (1) The State Government shall appoint in each Gram
Nyayalaya one or more advocates for the purpose of conducting the
criminal cases in the Gram Nyayalaya.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in a criminal proceeding
before the Gram Nyayalaya, the complainant may, engage an
advocate of his choice and at his expense to present the case of the
prosecution with the leave of the Gram Nyayalaya.
(3) The State Legal Services Authority, constituted under
section 6 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, shall prepare
a panel of advocates and assign at least two of them to be attached
to each Gram Nyayalaya so that their services shall be readily
available to the parties, if they so desire.
27. Any offence cognizable by a Gram Nyayalaya under this
Act may be compounded with its permission, if such offence is
compoundable with or without the permission of the Court under
any law for the time being in force.
28. The Gram Nyayalaya shall not take cognizance of any
offence which is punishable with Imprisonment for more than one
year or if the accused has been previously convicted and sentenced
to suffer imprisonment for a term of one year or more.
29. In imposing any fine, the Gram Nyayalaya may direct that
the whole or any portion of the fine recovered shall be applied—
(a) towards defraying the expenses incurred in the case
by the complainant; or
(b) in giving compensation to the victim of an offence
or to a person for any material loss or damage caused to him
by reason of commission of the offence.
CHAPTER V
P
ROCEDURE  IN CIVIL CASES
30. (1) In every suit or proceeding of a civil nature instituted
endeavour shall be made by the Gram Nyayalaya in the first
instance, where it is possible to do so, consistent with the nature
and circumstances of the case, to assist, persuade and conciliate the
parties in arriving at a settlement in respect of the subject matter of
the suit or proceeding, as the case may be, and for this purpose a
Gram Nyayalaya may, subject to the rules made by the High Court
in this behalf. follow such procedure as it may deem fit.
Legal aid to
parties.
2 of 1974.
39 of 1987.
Duty of
Gram
Nyayalaya to
make efforts
for concilia-
tion and
settlement of
civil disputes.
Power to
compound
cases.
Gram
Nyayalayas
not to take
cognizance of
certain
offences.
Power of
Gram
Nyayalayas
to order
amount of
fine to be
applied for
certain
expenses.

51
(2) If, in any suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to
the Gram Nyayalaya that there is a reasonable possibility of a
settlement between the parties, the Gram Nyayalaya may adjourn the
proceedings for such period as it thinks fit to enable them to make
attempts to effect such a settlement.
(3) Where any proceeding is adjourned under sub-section ( 2),
the Gram Nyayalaya may in its discretion refer the matter to one or
more conciliators for effecting a settlement between the parties.
(4) The power conferred by sub-section ( 2) shall be in
addition to, and not in derogation of, any other power of the Gram
Nyayalaya to adjourn the proceedings.
31. ( 1) For the purposes of section 30, the District Judge
shall, in consultation with the District Magistrate, prepare a panel
consisting of the names of social workers at the village level having
integrity for appointment as Conciliators who posses such
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the High
Court.
(2) The sitting fee and other allowances payable to and the
other terms and conditions of engagement of Conciliators shall be
such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
32. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, and the
rules made thereunder, the Gram Nyayalaya shall be deemed to be
a civil court and shall have all the powers of such of court for
dealing with the suits of a civil nature.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall not be bound by the procedure
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the rules of
evidence as laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, but shall
be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the
other provisions of this Act and any rule made by the High Court,
the Gram Nyayalaya shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure including the fixing of places and times of its proceedings.
(3) In respect of matters of a civil nature for which no
express provision has been made in this Act, the High Court may,
by rules, provide for them.
33. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
relating to the court fee, any person desirous of settlement of any
dispute or matter of a civil nature referred to in the Second
Schedule may make an application to the Gram Nyayalaya in such
form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the High Court
and accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees or such other
amount as may be prescribed by the High Court from time to time.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall issue a notice accompanied by
a copy of the application served on the opposite party in such
manner as may be prescribed by the High Court fixing a date for
his appearance or to file a written reply.
5 of 1908.
Appointment of
Conciliators.
Procedure
generally.
Special
procedure in
civil disputes.
1 of 1872.

52
(3) After the opposite party files his written reply, the Gram
Nyayalaya shall fix a date for hearing and inform all the parties to
be present in person or through their advocates or authorised agents.
(4) On the date fixed for hearing the Gram Nyayalaya shall
hear both the parties in regard to their respective contentions and if
the dispute does not require recording of any evidence, pronounce
the decision.
(5) In case any of the parties to the dispute desires to
produce oral or documentary evidence, or both, and the Gram
Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the dispute involves questions of
fact which have to be decided by recording oral or documentary
evidence for a just decision, the Gram Nyayalaya shall record the
summary of evidence, if any, on a date fixed for hearing.
(6) Notwithstanding that the procedure laid down in the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall not be applicable to civil disputes or
claims before the Gram Nyayalaya, the Gram Nyayalaya shall, for
the purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a
civill court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a
claim or dispute in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(i) summoning and enforcing attendance of any person
or witness and examining him on oath;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any
document or other material object producible as evidence;
(iii) receiving of evidence on affidavits;
(iv) dismissing an application for default or deciding it
ex-parte;
(v) any other matter which may be prescribed by the
State Government.
(7) The Gram Nyayalaya shall have the power to proceed ex-
parte if any of the parties does not appear.
(8) In regard to any incidental matter that may arise during
the course of the proceedings, the Gram Nyayalaya shall adopt such
procedure as it may deem just and proper in the interest of justice.
(9) The proceedings shall, as far as is practicable, be
consistent with the interests of justice and the hearing shall be
continued on a day to day basis until its conclusion, unless the
Gram Nyayalaya finds the adjournment of the hearing beyond the
following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.
(10) The Gram Nyayalaya shall pronounce the judgment
within a period of ninety days trom the date of statement of claim
application, and within one week of the last day of hearing of the case.
(11) The judgment shall contain the number of the application,
the names of the parties, the particulars of the claim, the points for
determination, the summary of evidence adduced on either side, if
any, and the findings reached by the Gram Nyayalaya.

53
(12) A copy of the order shall be delivered to both the parties
within three days on payment of such fees as may be prescribed by
the State Government.
34. The District Judge having jurisdiction may, on an
application made by any party or when there is considerable
pendency with one Gram Nyayalaya or whenever he considers it
necessary in the interests of justice, transfer any case pending
before a Gram Nyayalaya to any other Gram Nyayalaya within his
jurisdiction.
35.  ( 1) Where in any claim for money due the Gram
Nyayalaya passes an order for payment of money, it may also order
payment of interest thereon at a rate not exceeding twelve per cent.
per annum from the date of the claim statement application till the
date of payment.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya may, if it deems fit, direct payment
in instalments with or without interest.
36. The Gram Nyayalaya shall have all the powers of the civil
court to issue commission and the provisions of sections 75 to 78
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply as if for the words
“the Court” or “any Court” referred to therein, the words “the Gram
Nyayalaya” had been substituted.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROCEDURE  G ENERALLY
37. The proceedings before the Gram Nyayalaya and its
judgment shall, as far as practicable, be in one of the official
languages of the State other than the English language.
38. The evidence given orally before a Gram Nyayalaya shall
be on oath or on solemn affirmation.
39. (1) The Gram Nyayalaya shall have the powers of a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class in respect of all matters relating
to summons, securing the presence of witnesses, attendance of
persons confined or detained in prisons, production of any material
evidence including any records, title deeds, agreements, contracts,
and any other thing, object or such relevant material as it may deem
fit.
(2) Where any person has been given notice or summon to
appear before the Gram Nyayalaya, the Gram Nyayalaya shall record
his statement and thereafter the Gram Nyayalaya may dispense with
his attendance at the hearing of the case.
CHAPTER VII
A
PPEALS
40. (1) An appeal against any order or sentence passed by a
Gram Nyayalaya in a criminal matter shall lie to the Court of
Transfer of
civil disputes.
Power of the
Gram Nyayalaya
to issue
commissions.
Payment of
interest in
money decrees.
Proceeding to
be in the
official language
of the State.
Evidence to be
on oath.
Gram
Nyayalayas to
have the power
of Judicial
Magistrate of
the first class
for summoning
any person.
Appeal in
criminal cases.
5 of 1908.

54
Sessions exercising jurisdiction over the area within which the Gram
Nyayalaya is situated, within thirty days of the passing of such
order or sentence.
(2) An appeal preferred under sub-section (I) shall be heard
and disposed of by an Assistant Sessions Judge subordinate to the
Sessions Judge within six months from the date of filing of the
appeal.
(3) The Assistant Sessions Judge may, pending disposal of the
appeal, direct the suspension of the sentence or order appealed
against.
(4) The decision of the Assistant Sessions Judge under sub-
section ( 2) shall be final and no appeal or revision shall lie from the
decision of the Assistant Sessions Judge.
41. (1) An appeal against any final order or judgment passed
by a Gram Nyayalaya in a civil matter shall lie to the District Court
exercising jurisdiction over the area within which the Gram
Nyayalaya is situated within thirty days of the passing of such order
or judgment.
(2) An appeal preferred under sub-section ( 1) shall be heard
and disposed of by the Senior Civil Judge subordinate to the District
Judge, within six months from the date of filing of the appeal.
(3) The District Court may, pending disposal of the appeal,
direct the suspension of the order or judgment appealed against.
(4) The decision of the Senior Civil Judge under sub-
section ( 2) shall be final and no appeal or revision shall lie from the
decision of the Senior Civil Judge.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. ( 1) The Gram Nyayalaya shall not try any civil matter
which is the subject matter of any proceeding pending or disposed
of by a competent Court unless it is a pending case transferred to
it by the District Court under section 21.
(2) Where a case is pending in any court against an accused
person in respect of any offence or where an accused person has
been tried for any offence, the Gram Nyayalaya shall not take
cognizance of any such offence or on the same facts, or any other
offence of which the accused might have been charged or convicted.
43. ( 1) Every police officer functioning within the local limits
of jurisdiction of a Gram Nyayalaya shall be bound to assist the
Gram Nyayalaya in the exercise of its lawful authority.
(2) Whenever the Gram Nyayalaya, in the discharge of its
functions, requests revenue or police officer or a Government
servant to provide assistance to the Gram Nyayalaya, he shall be
bound to provide such assistance.
Appeal in
civil cases.
Cases pending
in or disposed
of by other
courts.
Assistance of
police to Gram
Nyayalayas.

55
44. The Nyayadhikaris and the officers and other employees
of the Gram Nyayalayas shall be deemed, when acting or purporting
to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.
45. The District Judge shall authorise any Senior Civil Judge
or Assistant Sessions Judge to inspect the Gram Nyayalayas within
his jurisdiction once in every six months or such other period as the
High Court may specify and issue such instructions, as he considers
necessary and submit a report to the High Court.
46. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to
be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
47. (1) The High Court may, by notification, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the receipt and custody of all documents and
records by or on behalf of the Gram Nyayalaya and the grant
of judgment, orders and other records;
(b) the place and the manner in which the proceedings
or the Gram Nyayalaya shall be conducted;
(c) the manner in which any process is issued by the
Gram Nyayalaya;
(d) the particulars of the registers and records to be
maintained by the Gram Nyayalaya;
(e) the conduct of training programme for the
Nyayadhikaris and Conciliators of the Gram Nyayalayas;
(f) the supervision and inspection of the Gram
Nyayalayas in respect of specified matters;
(g) rules regulating the procedure for assisting,
persuading or conciliation of parties in arriving at a settlement
in a suit or proceeding under sub-section ( 1) of section 30;
(h) the detailed procedure for conduct of civil suits
under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 30;
45 of 1860.
Nyayadhikaris
and employees,
etc., to be
public servants.
Inspection of
Gram
Nyayalayas.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of High
Court to make
rules.

56
(i) the conditions which a person shall fulfil to be
eligible to be included in the panel of Conciliators under sub-
section ( 1) of section 31;
(j) the form and the manner of service of notice under
sub-section ( 1) of section 33;
(k) any other matter not being a matter specified in
section 48 in respect of which rules are required to be made
by the High Court for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
48. ( 1) The State Government may, by notification, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the rules relating to appointment of the Nyayadhikari
under sub-section ( 2) of section 5;
(b) the salary and allowances payable to and the other
terms and conditions of service of Nyayadhikaris under
section 9;
(c) the form and dimensions of the seal of the Gram
Nyayalaya under section 12;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other
terms and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the Gram Nyayalayas under sub-section ( 2) of
section 22;
(e) the sitting fee and other allowances payable to and
the other terms and conditions of engagement of Conciliators
under sub-section ( 2) of section 31;
(f) the fee payable in respect of copies of orders of the
Gram Nyayalaya under sub-section ( 12) of section 33;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed or in
respect of which rules are required to be made by the State
Government.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act
shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before the State
Legislature.
Power of
State
Government
to make rules.

57
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 14 and 16]
PART I
OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (45 OF 1860)
(i) Sections 109 to 113 in so far as they relate to the offences
mentioned at sub-item ( ii).
(ii) Sections 120B (relating to any other criminal conspiracy),
137, 138, 140, 143, 149, 150, 151, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158
(being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot except in case
of going with arm), 160, 163, 166, 168, 171, 171E, 171F, 171G,
171H, 171-I, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177 (relating to knowingly
furnishing false information to a public servant), 178, 179, 180, 182,
183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 202, 225B, 228, 264, 265, 266,
267, 269, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 282,
283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 294, 294A, 296, 297,
298, 309, 323, 334, 336, 337, 341, 342, 352, 357, 358, 374, 417,
426, 434, 447, 448, 482, 486, 489, 489E, 491, 508, 509 and 510.
(iii) Sections 125, 324, 332, 353, 379, 427, 428, 429, 430,
431, 432 and 504.
PART II
OFFENCES AND RELIEF UNDER THE OTHER CENTRAL ACTS
(i) The Protection of Civil, Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955).
(ii) The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976
(19 of 1976).
(iii) The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
Act, 2005 (43 of 2005).
(iv) The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (9 of 1948).
(v) The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).
(vi) Order for maintenance of Wives, Children and Parents
under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure;
1973 (2 of 1974).
(vii) The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976).
PART III
OFFENCES UNDER THE STA TE ACTS
(To be notified by the concerned State Government )
57

58
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 15 (2) and 16]
PART I
SUITS OF A CIVIL  NATURE
WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF GRAM NYAYALAYAS
(i) Civil Disputes:
(a) Right to purchase of property;
(b) Use of common pasture;
(c) Regulation, and timing of taking water from irrigation channel.
(ii) Property Disputes:
(a) Village and farm houses (Possession);
(b) Water channels;
(c) Right to draw water from a well or tube well.
(iii) Other Disputes:
(a) Claims under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (9 of l948);
(b) Claims under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of l936);
(c) Money suits either arising from trade transaction or money
lending;
(d) Disputes arising out of the partnership in cultivation of land;
(e) Disputes as to the use of forest produce by inhabitants of
Gram Panchayats.
PART II
CLAIMS AND DISPUTES UNDER THE CENTRAL ACTS
NOTIFIED UNDER SUB-SECTION (I) OF SECTION 14 BY THE
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
PART III
CLAIMS AND DISPUTES UNDER THE STATE ACTS NOTIFIED
UNDER SUB-SECTION (2) OF SECTION 14 BY THE STATE
GOVERNMENT
(To be notified by the concerned State Government )
58

59
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Access to justice by the poor and disadvantaged remains a
worldwide problem despite diverse approaches and strategies that
have been formulated and implemented to address it. In our country,
article 39A of the Constitution directs the State to secure that the
operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal
opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by
suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by
reason of economic or other disabilities.
2. In the recent past, the Government has taken various
measures to strengthen judicial system, inter alia , by simplifying the
procedural laws; incorporating various alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms such as arbitration, conciliation and mediation,
conducting of Lok Addalts , etc. These measures are required to be
strengthened further.
3. The Law Commission of India in its 114th Report on Gram
Nyayalaya suggested establishment of Gram Nyayalayas so that
speedy, inexpensive and substantial justice could be provided to the
common man. The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 is broadly based on
the recommendations of the Law Commission. The Gram Nyayalaya
is to be the lowest Court of subordinate judiciary in the State in
respect of criminal and civil jurisdiction. The Presiding Officer of
Gram Nyayalaya i.e. Nyayadhikari will periodically visit the villages
falling under his jurisdiction and conduct proceedings at any place
which he considers is in close proximity to the place where the
parties ordinarily reside. The Gram Nyayalaya will function as
mobile Court. In order to make the system of participatory justice
a reality, legal aid and mechanism of conciliation at the grass-roots
level would be a part of, Gram Nyayalaya.
4. Justice to the poor at their door step is a dream of the
poor. Setting up of Gram Nyayalaya (at the headquarters of
intermediate Panchayat) with mobility in the rural areas would bring
to the people of rural areas speedy, affordable and substantial
justice.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; H.R. BHARDWAJ
The 8th May, 2007.
59

60
Notes on clauses
Clause 1.— This clause provides for the short title of the
proposed legislation, its extent and commencement. The proposed
legislation shall not be applicable to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, the States of Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim and
the tribal areas specified in Parts I, II, IIA and III of the table
below paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution within
the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
Clause 2.— This clause seeks to define certain expressions
used in the Bill. The definitions of the terms “Gram Nyayalaya”,
“Gram Panchayat”, “High Court”, “Panchayat at intermediate level”,
are some of them. A “Panchayatat at intermediate level” means an
institution (by whatever name called) of self-Government constituted
at the intermediate level, under article 243B of the Constitution, for
the rural areas in accordance with the provisions of Part IX of the
Constitution.
Clause 3.— This clause provides for the establishment of one
or more Gram Nyayalayas by the State Government.
Sub-clause (1) provides that for the purpose of securing
access to justice, both civil and criminal at the grass-roots level to
the citizens of India, the State Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, establish one or more Gram Nyayalayas for
every Panchayat at intermediate level or a group of contiguous
Panchayats at intermediate level in a district or where there is no
Panchayat at intermediate level in any State, for a group of
contiguous Gram Panchayats. This sub-clause also empowers the
State Government to establish, in consultation with the High Court,
additional Gram Nyayalayas for any Panchayat at intermediate level
if it is of opinion to do so.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalayas shall be
in addition to the civil and criminal courts established under any
other law for the time being in force.
Sub-clause (3) provides that a Gram Nyayalaya constituted
under the proposed legislation shall be the lowest Court of
Subordinate Judiciary in the State.
Clause 4.— This clause provides that the headquarters of the
Gram Nyayalaya shall be located at the headquarters of the
Panchayat at intermediate level in which the Gram Nyayalaya is
established. However, the State Government is competent to notify
any other place as the headquarters of a Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to provide for the appointment
of the Presiding Officer of a Gram Nyayaylaya. Sub-clause (1)
60

61
provides that every Gram Nyayalaya established under the proposed
legislation shall consist of a Nyayadhikari. Sub-clause (2) provides
that the Nyayadhikari shall be appointed by the Governor of the
State in consultation with the High Court in accordance with the
rules made in this behalf.
Clause 6.— This clause seeks to provide for the qualifications
of a person to be eligible to be appointed as a Nyayadhikari of a
Gram Nyayalaya. Sub-clause (1) provides that a person shall not be
qualified to be appointed as a Nyayadhikari unless he belongs to the
cadre of Nyayadhikaris constituted by the Governor in consultation
with the High Court and such person is eligible to be appointed as
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
Sub-clause (2) provides that while appointing the
Nyayadhikari the State Government shall provide, as far as
practicable, representation to the members of the Scheduled Castes,
the Scheduled Tribes, women and to any other classes or
communities as may be specified by it from time to time.
Clause 7.— This clause seeks to provide for the constitution
of a cadre of Nyayadhikaris of the Gram Nyayalayas in a State. The
cadre of Nyayadhikaris which may be constituted by the Governor
in consultation with the High Court shall consist of persons of
integrity with not more than forty-five years of age at the time of
appointment. Such persons should possess a degree in law from a
recognised University and should have proficiency in at least one
official language of the State other than English.
Clause 8.— This clause seeks to provide for the removal of
Nyayadhikaris. Sub-clause (1) provides that a Nyayadhikari may be
removed from office on the ground of incompetence, gross
negligence, corruption, malfeasance or conduct unbecoming of a
Nyayadhikari.
Sub-clause (2) provides that a person who has been
removed from office of Nyayadhikari shall be ineligible for
appointment under the Government.
Clause 9.— This clause seeks to empower the State
Government to determine, by rules, the salary and allowances payable
to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Nyayadhikaris.
Clause 10.— This clause seeks to provide that the
Nyayadhikari shall not participate in certain proceedings before the
Gram Nyayalaya. The Nyayadhikari shall not particIpate in the
proceedings of the Gram Nyayalaya if he has any interest or is
involved in the subject matter of the dispute pending consideration
or is related to one of the parties to the proceeding and in such a
case the Nyayadhikari shall refer the matter to the District Judge or
Sessions Judge, as the case may be, for transfer of the case to any
other Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 11.— This clause seeks to empower the Nyayadhikari
to hold mobile courts and to conduct proceedings in villages.

62
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provide that the Nyayadhikari shall
periodically visit the villages falling under his jurisdiction and
conduct proceedings (including taking of evidence, deciding of
cases and the holding of mobile Court if considered necessary) at
any place which he considers is in close proximity to the place
where the parties ordinarily reside or where the whole or part of the
cause of action had arisen. In conducting such mobile courts
outside the headquarters of a Gram Nyayalaya the Nyayadhikari has
to give wide publicity as to the date and place where it proposes to
hold mobile court.
Sub-clause (2) seeks to provide that the State Government
shall be required to extend all facilities to the Gram Nyayalaya
including the provision of vehicles for holding mobile court and
additional security for the Nyayadhikari for enabling him to conduct
the proceedings outside the headquarters of the Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 12.— This clause seeks to provide for the seal of the
Gram Nyayalaya. The State Government shall, by rules, determine
the form and dimensions of the seal of the Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 13.— This clause seeks to empower the State
Government to fix the local limits of jurisdiction of the Gram
Nyayalaya in consultation with the High Court. It also empowers the
State Government in like manner readjust the territorial limits of the
Gram Nyayalayas depending on the work load of such Nyayalayas.
Clause 14.— This clause seeks to lay down the criminal
jurisdiction of the Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law
for the time being in force, the Gram Nyayalaya shall be competent
to take cognizance of an offence on a complaint or on a police
report and shall try all offences specified in Part I of the First
Schedule to the proposed legislation and shall also try offences and
grant relief specified under the enactments specified in Part II of
that Schedule. However, where the Gram Nyayalaya is of the
opinion that the accused should be sentenced to imprisonment
exceeding one year, it may forward the case to the Court of Session
for referring it to the court of competent jurisdiction.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall also
try all offences under the Central Acts where—
(i) the maximum punishment provided for is imprisonment
not exceeding one year, whether with or without fine;
(ii) the punishment provided for is only fine;
(iii) the offences are compoundable, whether with or
without the permission of the court, under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or under any other law for the time
being in force.

63
Sub-clause (3) provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-clauses (1) and (2), the Gram Nyayalaya shall also
try all such offences’or grant such relief under the State Acts by
including them in Part III of the First Schedule to the proposed
legislation.
Clause 15.— This clause seeks to lay down the civil
jurisdiction of the Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force and subject
to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and sub-
clause (2), the Gram Nyayalayas shall have jurisdiction to try all
original suits and proceedings of such categories and subject to
such pecuniary limits as may be notified by the High Court trom
time to time.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall be the
lowest court of competent jurisdiction to hear and dispose of suits
of a civil nature falling under the classes of disputes specified in the
Second Schedule to the proposed legislation.
Clause 16.— This clause seeks to empower the Central
Government as well as the State Government to amend the Schedules
to the Act as per their legislative competence of Parliament and State
Legislatures respectively.
Sub-clause (1) provides that if the Central Government is
satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, add to or omit any item trom the
First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the case may be, of the
proposed legislation and thereupon the First Schedule, or the Second
Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been
amended accordingly.
Sub-clause (3) provides that if the State Government is
satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to. do, it may, in
consultation with the High Court, by notification, add to any item in
Part III of the First Schedule or Part III of the Second Schedule
or omit from it any item in respect of which the State Legislature
is competent to make laws and thereupon the First Schedule or the
Second Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been
amended accordingly.
Sub-clauses (2) and (4) provides that every notification issued
under sub-section (I) by the Central Government and under sub-
section (3) by the State Government shall be laid before Parliament
and the State Legislature respectively.
Clause 17.— This clause seeks to provide that the Gram
Nyayalayas shall have exclusive civil and criminal jurisdiction in
certain matters. It provides that notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, or any other law for the time being in force and

64
subject to the provisions of this Act, a Gram Nyayalaya shall have
exclusive jurisdiction in respect of disputes covered by the subject
matters specified in sections 14 and 15 of the proposed legislation.
Clause 18.— This clause seeks to provide that the Gram
Nyayalayas shall not try certain disputes. It provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in proposed section 13, section
14 or section 15, the Gram Nyayalaya shall not have jurisdiction to
take cognizance of the certain classes of disputes They are—
(a) disputes by or against the Central Government or the
State Government or public servants for anything which is in
good faith done or purported to have been done by them in
their official capacity;
(b) a dispute where one of the parties is a minor or a
person of unsound mind; and
(c) any claim cognizable by revenue Courts.
Clause 19.— This clause seeks to empower the Nyayadhikaris
to close cases in certain circumstances. It provides that if the
Nyayadhikari is satisfied that it necessary in the interest of justice
to close a case, it may, on its own motion or on an application by
either party to the civil dispute, pass orders closing the case, and
advise the parties to approach the appropriate Civil Court in respect
of matters relating to any complicated issue of fact or law which
should be decided by any other competent court of law. However,
whenever a case is closed by the Nyayadhikari under this clause,
the period for which the case has been pending in the Gram
Nyayalaya shall be excluded for the purposes of computing the
period of limitation.
Clause 20.— This clause provides for the period of limitation.
It provides that the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, and the
provisions of Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
shall be applicable to the proceedings before the Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 21.— This clause provides for transfer of pending
cases in Subordinate Courts.
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provde that the District Court may,
with effect from such date as may be notified, transfer all the cases
pending before the court subordinate to it, both civil and criminal,
to the, Gram Nyayalaya competent to hear and try.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya may in its
discretion continue with the cases from the stage at which it was
pending from the court from which it was transferred or it may de
novo hear or try the case, as the case may be.
Clause 22.— This clause deals with the duties of ministerial
officers of the Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the State Government shall
determine the nature and categories of the officers and other

65
employees required to assist the Gram Nyayalaya in the discharge of
its functions and provide the Gram Nyayalaya with such officers
and other employees as it may think fit.
Sub-clause (2) seeks to empower the State Government to
determine by rules the salaries and allowances payable to and the
other conditions of service of the officers and other employees of
the Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (3) seeks to empower the Nyayadhikari to
assign from time to time the duties to be performed by the officers
and other employees attached to a Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 23.— This clause seeks to provide that the Gram
Nyayalayas shall follow summary procedure.
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provide that subject to the provisions
of sub-clause (2), the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 and the rules made thereunder shall apply to the proceedings
in respect of criminal cases triable by the Gram Nyayalaya under the
proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) provides that while exercising criminal
jurisdiction, the Gram Nyayalaya shall follow the procedure for
summary trials and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both
inclusive) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply
accordingly.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the trial of offences by the Gram
Nyayalaya shall be as far as may be, on a day-to-day basis and a
case shall be disposed of within a period of ninety days from the
date of its institution.
Clause 24.— This clause deals with the pronouncement of
judgment by the Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall
pronounce its judgment within one week from the last date of its
hearing.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall deliver
a copy of its judgment immediately to both the parties free of cost.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall, in
cases where imprisonment has been awarded, forward copies of the
judgment along with the warrant of commitment to the officer-in-
charge of the jail concerned, the police station concerned, and the
Sessions Judge having jurisdiction.
Clause 25.— This clause deals with the power of Gram
Nyayalayas to transfer certain cases. It provides that if at any stage
of the proceedings it appears to the Gram Nyayalaya that the case
is one which ought to be tried by a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class or any other superior court, or if at the close of a trial, the
Gram Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the accused is guilty and that

66
he ought to receive a punishment more severe than that which the
Gram Nyayalaya is empowered.to impose, it shall submit the case to
the appropriate Magistrate having jurisdiction who shall transfer the
case to his own Court and proceed according to law.
Clause 26.— This clause seeks to provide for legal aid to the
parties.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the State Government shall
appoint in each Gram Nyayalaya one or more advocates for the
purpose of conducting the criminal cases in the Gram Nyayalaya.
Sub-clause (2) provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section (1) or in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, in a criminal proceeding before the Gram NyayaIaya, the
complainant may, engage an advocate of his  choice and at his
expense to present the case of the prosecution with the leave of the
Gram Nyayalaya.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the State Legal Services Authority
constituted under section 6 of the Legal Services Authorities Act,
1987 shall prepare a panel of advocates and assign at least two of
them to be attached to each Gram Nyayalaya so that their services
would readily be available to the parties, if they so desire.
Clause 27.— This clause deals with the power of the Gram
Nyayalaya to compound certain offences. It provides that any
offence cognizable by a Gram Nyayalaya under the proposed
legislation may be compounded with its permission, if such offence
is compoundable with or without the permission of the court under
any law for the time being in force.
Clause 28.— This clause seeks to lay down that the Gram
Nyayalayas shall not take cognizance of certain offences. It provides
that the Gram Nyayalaya shall not take cognizance of any offence
which is punishable with imprisonment for more than one year or
if the accused has been previously convicted and sentenced to
suffer imprisonment for a term of one year or more.
Clause 29.— This clause deals with the power of Gram
Nyayalayas to order amount of fine to be applied in meeting certain
expenses. It provides that in imposing any fine, the Gram Nyayalaya
may direct that the whole or any. portion of the fine recovered shall
be applied towards deftaying the expenses incurred in the case by
the complainant or in giving compensation to the victim of an
offence or to a person for any material 1oss or damage caused to
him by reason of commission of the offence.
Clause 30.— This clause seeks to lay down the duties of
Gram Nyayalayas to make efforts for conciliation and settlement of
civil disputes.
Sub-clause (1) provides that in every suit or proceeding of a
civil nature instituted endeavour shall be made by the Gram
Nyayalaya in the first instance, where it is possible to do so,

67
consistent with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist,
persuade and conciliate the parties in arriving at a settlement in
respect of the subject matter of the suit or proceeding, as the case
may be, and for this purpose a Gram Nyayalaya may, subject to the
rules made by the High Court in this behalf, follow such procedure
as it may deem fit.
Sub-clause (2) provides that if, in any suit or proceeding, at
any stage, it appears to the Gram Nyayalaya that there is a
reasonable possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Gram
Nyayalaya may adjourn the proceedings for such period as it thinks
fit to enable them to make attempts to effect such a settlement.
Sub-clause (3) provides that where any proceedings is
adjourned under sub-clause (2) the Gram Nyayalaya may in its
discretion refer the matter to one or more conciliators for effecting
a settlement between the parties.
Sub-clause (4) provides that the power conferred by sub-
clause (2) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
power of the Gram Nyayalaya to adjourn the proceedings.
Clause 31.— This clause seeks to provide for appointment of
Conciliators.
Sub-clause (1) provides that for the purposes of clause 30,
the District Judge shall, in consultation with the District Magistrate,
prepare a panel consisting of the names of social workers at the
village level having integrity for appointment as Conciliators who
possess such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by
the High Court.
Sub-clause (2) empowers the State Government to make rules
laying down the rate of the sitting fee and other allowances payable
to and the other terms and conditions of engagement of Conciliators.
Clause 32.— This clause seeks to provide for the procedure
generally.
Sub-clause (1) provides that subject to the other provisions of
the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder, the Gram
Nyayalaya shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have all the
powers of such court for dealing with the suits of a civil nature.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall not be
bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 or the rules of evidence as laid down in the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice
and subject to the other provisions of the proposed legislation and
any rule; made by the High Court, the Gram Nyayalaya shall have
the power to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of
places and times of its proceedings.
Sub-clause (3) provides that in respect of matters of a civil
nature for which no express provision has been made, the High
Court may, by rules, provide for them.

68
Clause 33.— This clause seeks to provide for a special
procedure in civil disputes.
Sub-clause (1) provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law relating to the Court fee, any person
desirous of settlement of any dispute or matter of a civil nature
referred to in the Second Schedule may make an application to the
Gram Nyayalaya in such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed by the High Court and accompanied by a fee of one
hundred rupees or such other amount as may be prescribed by the
High Court from time to time.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall issue
a notice accompanied by a copy of the application served on the
opposite party in such manner as may be prescribed by the High
Court fixing a date for his appearance or to file a written reply.
Sub-Clause (3) provides that after the opposite party files his
written reply, the Gram Nyayalaya shall fix a date for hearing and
inform all the parties to be present in person or through their
advocates or authorised agents.
Sub-clause (4) provides that on the date fixed for hearing the
Gram Nyayalaya shall hear both the parties in regard to their
respective contentions and if the dispute does not require recording
of any evidence, pronounce the decision.
Sub-clause (5) provides that in case any of the parties to the
dispute desires to produce oral or documentary evidence, or both,
and the Gram Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the dispute involves
questions of fact which have to be decided by recording oral or
documentary evidence for a just decision, the Gram Nyayalaya shall
record the summary of evidence, if any, on a date fixed for hearing.
Sub-clause (6) provides that notwithstanding that the
procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall not
be applicable to civil disputes or claims before the Gram Nyayalaya,
the Gram Nyayalaya shall have the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a
claim or dispute in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(i) summoning and enforcing attendance of any person or
witness and examining him on oath;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any
document or other material object producible as evidence;
(iii) receiving of evidence on affidavits;
(iv) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex
parte;
(v) any other matter which may be prescribed by the
State Government.

69
Sub-clause (7) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall have
the power to proceed ex parte if any of the parties does not appear.
Sub-clause (8) provides that in regard to any incidental matter
that may arise during the course of the proceedings, the Gram
Nyayalaya shall adopt such procedure as it may deem just and
proper in the interest of justice.
Sub-clause (9) provides that the proceedings shall, as far as
is practicable, be consistent with the interests of justice and the
hearing shall be continued on a day to day basis until its conclusion,
unless the Gram Nyayalaya finds the adjournment of the hearing
beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be
recorded in writing.
Sub-clause (10) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall
pronounce the judgment within a period of ninety days from the
date of statement of claim application, and within one week of the
last day of hearing of the case.
Sub-clause (11) provides that the judgment shall contain the
number of the application, the names of the parties, the particulars
of the claim, the points for determination, the summary of evidence
adduced on either side, if any, and the findings reached by the Gram
Nyayalaya.
Sub-clause (12) provides that a copy of the order shall be
delivered to both the parties within three days on payment of such
fees as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Clause 34.— This clause seeks to provide for transfer of civil
disputes. It provides that the District Judge having jurisdiction may,
on an application made by any party or when there is considerable
pendency with one Gram Nyayalaya or whenever be considers it
necessary in the interests of justice, transfer any case pending
before a Gram Nyayalaya to any other Gram Nyayalaya within his
jurisdiction.
Clause 35.— This clause seeks to provide for payment of
interest in case of money decrees.
Sub-clause (1) provides that where in any claim for money
due the Gram Nyayalaya passes an order for payment of money, it
may also order payment of interest thereon at a rate not exceeding
twelve per cent. per annum from the date of the claim statement
application till the date of payment.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya may, if it
deems fit, direct payment in instalments with or without interest.
Clause 36.— This clause seeks to provide for the powers of
the Gram Nyayalayas to issue commissions. It provides that the
Gram Nyayalaya shall have all the powers of the civil court to issue
commission and the provisions of sections 75 to 78 of the Code of
Civil Ptocedure, 1908 shall apply as if for the words “the Court” or

70
“any Court” referred to therein, the words “the Gram Nyayalaya”
had been substituted.
Clause 37.— This clause seeks to provide for the use of the
official language of the State in proceedings before the Gram
Nyayalayas. It provides that the proceedings before the Gram
Nyayalaya and its judgment shall, as far as practicable, be in one of
the official languages of the State other than the English language.
Clause 38.— This clause seeks to provide that the evidence
give orally before a Gram Nyayalaya shall be on oath or on solemn
affirmation.
Clause 39.— This clause seeks to provide that the Gram
Nyayalayas shall have the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class in summoning of persons.
Sub-clause (l) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall have
the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class in respect of
all matters relating to summons, securing the presence of witnesses,
attendance of persons ,confined or detained in prisons, production
of any material evidence including any records, title deeds,
agreements, contracts, and any other thing, object or such relevant
material as it may deem fit.
Sub-clause (2) provides that where any person has been given
notice or summons to appear before the Gram Nyayalaya, the Gram
Nyayalaya shall record his statement and thereafter the Gram
Nyayalaya may dispense with his attendance at the bearing of the
case.
Clause 40.— This clause seeks to provide for appeals in
criminal cases.
Sub-clause (1) provides that an appeal against any order or
sentence passed by a Gram Nyayalaya in a criminal matter shall lie
to the Court of Sessions exercising jurisdiction over the area within
which the Gram Nyayalaya is situated, within thirty days of the
passing of such order or sentence.
Sub-clause (2) provides that an appeal preferred under sub-
section (1) shall be heard and disposed of by an Assistant Sessions
Judge subordinate to the Sessions Judge within six months from the
date of filing of the appeal.
Sub-clause (3) provides that an Assistant Sessions Judge may,
pending disposal of the appeal, direct the suspension of the sentence
or order appealed against.
Sub-clause (4) provides that the decision of the Assistant
Sessions Judge under sub-section (2) shall be final and no appeal
orrevision shall lie from the decision of the Assistant Sessions
Judge.

71
Clause 41.— This clause seeks to provide for appeals in civil
cases.
Sub-clause (1) provides that an appeal against any final order
or judgment passed by a Gram Nyayalaya in a civil matter shall lie
to the District Court exercising jurisdiction over the area within
which the Gram Nyayalaya is situated within thirty days of the
passing of such order or judgment.
Sub-clause (2) provides that an appeal preferred under sub-
section (1) shall be heard and disposed of by the Senior Civil Judge
subordinate to the District Judge, within six months from the date
of filing of the appeal.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the District Court may, pending
disposal of the appeal, direct the suspension of the order or
judgment appealed against.
Sub-clause (4) provides that the decision of the Senior Civil
Judge under sub-clause (2) shall be final and no appeal or revision
shall lie from the decision of the Senior Civil Judge.
Clause 42.— This clause seeks to make certain provisions
in respect of cases pending in or disposed of by other courts.
Sub.clause (1) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall not try
any civil matter which is the subject matter of any proceeding
pending or disposed of by a competent court unless it is a pending
case transferred to it by the District Court under clause 21.
Sub-clause (2) provides that where a case is pending in any
court against an accused person in respect of any offence or where
an accused person bas been tried for any offence, the Gram
Nyayalaya shall not take cognizance of any such offence or on the
same facts, or any other offence of which the accused might have
been charged or convicted.
Clause 43.— This clause seeks to provide for assistance of
police to Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) provides that every police officer functioning
within the local limits of jurisdiction of a Gram Nyayalaya shall be
bound to assist the Gram Nyayalaya in the exercise of its lawful
authority.
Sub-clause (2) provides that whenever the Gram Nyayalaya,
in the discharge of its functions, requests revenue or police officer
or a Government servant to provide assistance to the Gram
Nyayalaya, he shall be bound to provide such assistance.
Clause 44.— This clause seeks to provide that the
Nyayadhikaris and employees of the Gram Nyayalaya, etc., shall be
public servants. It provides that the Nyayadhikaris and the officers
and other employees of the Gram Nyayalayas shall be deemed, when

72
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of
the proposed legislation would be public servants within the meaning
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 45.— This clause seeks to provide for inspection of
Gram Nyayalayas. It provides that the District Judge shall authorise
any Senior Civil Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge to inspect the
Gram Nyayalayas within his jurisdiction once in every six months or
such other period as the High Court may specify and issue such
instructions, as he considers necessary and submit a report to the
High Court.
Clause 46.— This clause empowers the Central Government
to issue orders published in the Official Gazette making such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation for removing difficulties in giving effect to it provisions.
Such orders could be issued within three years from the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation. It also provides for
laying of such orders before each House of Parliament.
Clause 47.— This clause seeks to empower the High Courts
to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. These are mainly matters of procedure.
Clause 48.— This clause confers power on the State
Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the matters in
respect of which rules may be made by the State Government shall
be published in the Official Gazette and be laid before the State
Legislature.

73
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to
establish one or more Gram Nyayalayas for every Panchayat at
intermediate level or for a group of contiguous Panchayats at
intermediate level in every district to exercise both civil and criminal
jurisdiction. Every Gram Nyayalaya shall be presided over by a
Nyayadhikari. Clause 9 empowers the State Governments to lay
down, by rules, the salary and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the Nyayadhikaris. Clause 22 of
the Bill empowers the State Government to determine the nature and
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist a
Gram Nyayalaya in the discharge of its functions and to lay down
rules specifying the salaries and allowances payable to, and the
terms and conditions of service of, the other officers and employees
of the Gram Nyayalayas. Clause 26 empowers the State Government
to appoint one-or more advocates for each Gram Nyayalaya for the
purpose of conducting the criminal cases before each such Gram
Nyayalaya. Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the State Government to
determine the sitting fees and other allowances payable to, and the
other terms and conditions of engaging Conciliators.
2. The Central Government will meet the entire non-recurring
expenditure and the recurring expenditure for first three years will
be shared between the Central and State Government, following
which, it will be met by the concerned State Governments. At
present it will not be possible to work out the exact expenditure that
may be required.
73

74
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 47 empowers the High Courts to make, by notification
in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates
the matters in respect of which such rules may provide for. These
matters inter alia  include the receipt and custody of all documents
and records by or on behalf of the Gram Nyayalaya and the grant
of judgment, orders and other records, the place and the manner in
which the proceedings of the Gram Nyayalaya shall be conducted,
the manner in which any process is issued by the Gram Nyayalaya,
the particulars of the registers and records to be maintained by the
Gram Nyayalaya, the conduct of training programme for the
Nyayadhikaris and Conciliators of the Gram Nyayalayas, the
supervision and inspection of the Gram Nyayalayas in respect of
specified matters, rules regulating the procedure for assisting,
persuading or conciliation of parties in arriving at a settlement in a
suit or proceeding under sub-clause (I) of clause 30, the detailed
procedure for conduct of civil suits under sub-clauses (I) and (3)
of clause 30, the conditions which a person shall fulfill to be eligible
to be included in the panel of Conciliators under sub-clause (1) of
clause 31 and the form and the manner of service of notice under
sub-clause (1) of clause 33;
2. Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to
make, by notification in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out
the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may
be made. These matters inter alia include the rules relating to
appointment of the Nyayadhikari under sub-clause (2) of clause 5,
the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and
conditions of service of Nyayadhikaris under clause 9, the form and
dimensions of the seal of the Gram Nyayalaya under clause 12, the
salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the
Gram Nyayalayas under sub-clause (2) of clause 12, the sitting fee
and other allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions
of engagement of Conciliators under sub-clause (2) of clause 31 and
the fee payable in respect of copies of orders of the Gram
Nyayalaya under sub-clause (12) of clause 33.
3. The rules made by the State Government are required to be
laid before the State Legislature.
4. The matters in respect of rules may be made either by the
High Court or by the State Government are matters of administrative
details or of procedure and it is not possible to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
74

75
ANNEXURE ‘B’
COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
Memo- Name of the Commen ts/Suggestions/Prepostions Response of Government
randum Organisation/indi-
No. vidual
12 3 4
l. Uday S Shinde, (1) The clause providing fixed defmite reasonable It is out side the purview and object of the
Advocate unemployment allowance to the youth both rural and Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007.
urban by specific officer appointed for this purpose.
(2) A separate legislation imposing two child norm —Do—
which should be made mandatory so far as the
Gram Nyayalaya Sabha Act is concerned.
(3) In the alternative instead of the Gram Nyayalaya Nyaya Panchayats established by various State
Sabha Act, the Central Government can appoint a Governments under the provisions of respective
reasonable number of the Rural Panchayat members in State Panchayati Raj Legislations are already
proportion to the population of village in permanent functioning. The concept of establishment of
lok adalat or in the machanism of mediation, conciliation, Gram Nyayalayas are different from Nyaya
negotiation, and other methods, with existing Panchayats.
infrastructure already available with the state or central
Government the employment above said shall be for
specific period on contract base.
(4) A clause imposing restriction on the basis of income One of the object of establishment of Gram
of the citizen the eligibility to go for Gramnyayalaya Sabha Nyayalayas is to ensure that opportunities for
by the people, be imposed. securing justice are not denied to any citizen
by reason of social, economic or other disabilities.
(5) A clause providing for direct governance and Gram Nyayalayas, like other subordinate
responsibility, liability, by and on the district judge at the judiciary will be under direct control of the
district level and one of the High Court Judges at the respective High Courts. As per clause 45 of
State Level and another at the judge of Supreme Court. the Bill, the District Judge shall authorise any
Senior Civil Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge

76
12 3 4
to inspect the Gram Nyayalayas within his
jurisdiction once in every six months or such
other period as the High Court may specify
and issue such instructions, as he considers
necessary and submit a report to the High
Court.
(6) A clause providing for the protection from the State All authorities of the revenue and police
police, central or state reserve police, the regular army department or any other Government servant
personnel for implementing the provisions of this Gram operating at Gram Panchayat level, at both the
Nyaya Sabha Act. levels shall be under obligation to assist the
Gram Nyayalays in discharging its functions
and performing its duties.
(7) A clause providing for simple procedure of filing, The approach through this legislation is that
appearance, arguments, by the parties and looking to the simple and non-complicated disputes which
laws applicable and giving judgement on the same day by could be resolved in a short time will be
the appointed on the board of lok adalat, conciliation, entrusted to the Gram Nyayalayas. Endeavour is
negotiation, mediation. The Above personnel to be paid fixed made to make the Gram Nyayalayas to be
salary with to and fro allowance for attending to the effective forum for resolution of disputes
proceeding in Gram Nyaya Sabha. emanating from rural areas and to dealing with
such disputes, the Gram Nyayalayas will
follow the summary procedure as laid down
under the procedural codes.
(8) A clause providing to and fro allowance to the parties, Payment of any kind of allowance does not
in the case to be paid at the time of decision in the arise since the Gram Nyayalayas shall
Nyaya Sabha. periodically visit villages and hold mobile
courts and conduct proceedings.
(9) A clause providing for the penalty in the form of Sufficient safeguards have been provided under
amount and imprisonment in case of misuse of the clause 44 of the Bill.
sabha, false case, the unnecessary prolonging the matter
be included.

77
(10) A clause providing for recruitment, suspension,
promotion, dismissal of the personnel of the lok adalat —Do—
conciliation, mediation, negotiation, machinery meant for
implementing the provisions of this act.
(11) A clause prescribing a definite period within which The trial of offences by the Gram Nyayalaya
the above case be solved and decided both to the parties shall be, as far as may be, on-day to-day basis
and the functionaries of the said instruments, fixed looking and every case shall be disposed of within a
to the urgency of the matter inrespect of both civil and period of ninety days. As far as civil cases are
criminal matters. concerned, subject to the rules made by the
High Court in this behalf, follow such
procedure as it deem fit.
(12) A clause providing for a compensation in case of Clause 29 of the Bill deals with the power of
injury or death in criminal case or loss (pecuniary) in the Gram Nyayalayas to order amount of fine to
civil cases be awarded at once at the time of decision in be applied in meeting certain expenses. It
given case by a authorized representative from central provides that in imposing any fine, the Gram
Government having authority to sign the cheque for the above Nyayalaya may direct that the whole or any
compensation by a provision for endorsement from CBI, portion of the fine recovered shall be applied
or lokyuktha commissioner on the said cheque for the above towards defraying the expenses incurred in
compensation by a provision for endorsement from CBI, or the case by the complainant or in giving
lokyuktha commissioner on the said cheque after verifying compensation to the victim of an offence or to
its bonafide with additional endorsement from the Governor a person for any material loss or damage
of the State who represent the executive. caused to him by reason of commission of the
offence.
2. B.N. Majhi Chapter I – It is suggested to put some additional All essential terms have been defined. The term
definitions in section beyond sub-section (i) as (h) “Gram “Gram Sabha” does not occur anywhere in the
Sabha” means as defined in sub section(d) of section 4 of Bill and expression “Scheduled and Tribal
the PESA Act, 1996 and Chapter I sub section (g) of Areas”, as already defined under article 244 of
section 2 of the Scheduled Tribes and Traditional Forest the Constitution of India would stand good.
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act-2006. The necessity for defining “customary laws”
(k) “Scheduled and Tribal Areas” as defined in may not arise as they are well understood.
clause (1) and (2) of Article, 244 of the constitution.

78
12 3 4
(I) “Customary Law” means a social system governed
through tradition, custom and mores in the society
for harmonious and healthy living.
Chapter II
It is suggested to add sub section (4) in section 3
(4) Grama Nyayalayas shall give congnizance and consider Interference in respect of decision taken by
decision taken by village Head in the matter of disputes village heads may lead to encroaching upon
related to custom, tradition and mores in the society. other spheres and lead to unwarranted
complications. The limits of jurisdiction of
Gram Nayalayas have been precisely envisaged
under clauses 13 to 15 of the Bill.
In section 6 sub section(3) can be add as-
(3) while posting of Nyayadhikari in Gram Nyayalayas The issue is within the ambit of sub-clause (2)
SC/ST/Woman shall be posted in the area having population of clause 6 of the Bill.
SC/ST considering to solve the problem of local people.
Chapter III
In section 22 there shall be additional sub-section (4) as-
(4) The officers and other employees of a Gram It may not sub-serve the judicial principle of
Nyayalayas shall be preferably from local area. impartiality and is also against the principle laid
down in clause 10 of the Bill.
Chapter V
Under section 30 sub-section (5) can be added as-
(5) The Gram Nyayalayas may call village head or member For the purposes of conciliation and settlement,
of Gram Sabha to mediate for settlement of disputes the District Judge shall in consultation with
between the parties. District Magistrate prepare a panel consisting

79
of names of social workers at the village level
having integrity for appointment as Conciliators
who possess such qualification and experience
as may be prescribed by the High Court and
hence, village head or member of Gram Sabha
to be Conciliators would be subject to the
aforementioned.
Under Section 31 sub-section (3) can be added as-
(3) The conciliator shall be appointed from the W ould be in contravention to the mode of
Scheduled Tribe Community for Tribal and Scheduled appointment prescribed under clause 31 (1) of
Areas. the Bill.
Under Section 33 sub section (13) and (14) can be
added as-
(13) In Gram Nyayadhikari can call petitioner and give The aspect has been already taken care under
advice to resolve the matters covering its merit to avoid clause 30 of the Bill to the extent permissible
the proceeding. under law.
(14) Disputes solved through compromise shall be waived Not agreed as the same would amount to loss
from payment of all charges/fees etc. of revenue to the Government.
Chapter VI
Under section 37 sub section (l) can be added as-
(1) the judgment shall be given in Tribal Language May not be feasible and the language of the
included 8th schedule of the constitution as well as judgement as envisaged under clause 37 shall
recognized languages in addition to one of the official be one of the official language of the State
language of the State. other than the English language.
Chapter VII
Under Section 42 sub section (3) can be added as-
(3) The Gram Nyayalayas shall take undertakings from Such matters will be borne out by records and
the petitioner on the matter under section 42(1) and (2). hence, not agreed.

80
12 3 4
3. Government of The State Government is of the view that for providing May not be feasible. In the interest of public at
Gujarat. such infrastructure facilities, a huge amount running into large, the Central Government has decided to
crores of rupees which may exceed Rs.300/-crores will share 50% of recurring expenditures towards
have to be spent by the State Government. The State maintenance of the Gram Nyayalayas with the
Government is of the view that it would be a huge State Governments for the first three years and
burden on the State Exchequer. At present budgetary bear the entire non-recurring expenditure
provision for the Legal Department is Rs. 257 crores. In towards its establishment.
such circumstances, cent per cent Central Government’s
assistance is absolutely necessary. The financial constraints
also will prevent the Government of Gujarat to
implement the scheme of Gram Nyayalaya which has the
noble cause of justice for poor, needy people a grass root
level.
4. Shri Nareswar Suggests that a few Ex-service personnel widely spread Under clause 44 of the Bill, the Nyayadhikaris
Chutia, Assam. over in every village may please be included in all Gram and its employees are public servants and
level Nyayalayas proposed in the said Bill for 2007. hence would be subject to retirement.
Emphasis must, however, be given to such ex-servicemen
only who are of Senior Citizenship certificate holders.
5. RLEK Dehradun. Accessibility
GN – constituted at intermediate level,it would reduce Establishing Gram Nyayalayas at every Gram
accessibility. It would cater to a population of 50000. Panchayat level would involve a huge expenditure,
In addition the distance would also act as an impediment which is very difficult for the Central
in accessing this forum as the litigant would have to Government as well as the State Government
travel from the village to the block which would require to meet. To manage the Gram Nyayalayas
time and money. financially, it was felt not feasible to consider
establishing Gram Nyayalayas at every Gram
NP – constituted at village level more accessible to its Panchayat level but only at intermediate
user. At present states have constituted NPs for population Punchayat level. However, anticipating such
between 3000-45000 in Jammu & Kashmir and 1000-5000 difficulties, the concept of mobile courts has
in Himachal Pradesh. been incorporated in clause 11 of the Bill.

81
Since NPs are situated within the village itself the litigant
would not have to travel a long distance as well as Further the concept of Nyaya Panchayats is
forego a day or two earnings. different from Gram Nyayalayas to be established
all over India and hence the two institutions
should be compared.
Constitution of Bench
GN – the bench consists of one Nyayadhikari and it is The C entral Government has come out with
ambiguous as to whether they will be any other members the Bill on Gram Nyayalayas after indepth
on the Bench. The Nyayadhikari is appointed which examination of all factors stated herein by
could be seen contradictory to the concept of democratization. RLEK, the recommendations made by the
Imposed by the state and having no role to play in its Law Commission of India in its 114th Report
constitution the institution would lack legitimacy in the eyes and on the basis of discussions in the National
on the villagers. Conference of Law Ministers and Law
Secretaries held on 18-12-2005. The Bill seeks
NP – five elected members constitute the Bench. It further to sub-serve the dire need of the poor at rural
democratization but politicization of this forum is an eminent areas at their door step and is not against the
threat, which could be curbed by providing certain concept of democratization.
safeguards.
Seperation of power
GN – Constitution of the GN would be in accordance
with the Principle of Seperation of Power as mandated by
the Constitution (Article 50).
NP – At present in Jammu & Kashmir, Bihar, Chhattisgarh
and Uttar Pradesh judicial functions are exercised by the
NP which is separate and independent of the administrative
wing. In Punjab and Himachal Pradesh there is no such
distinction, members of the GP exercise judicial functions.
Economic Viability
GN - 7000 new courts and recruitment of 7000 fresh May not be feasible. In the interest of public
judges would be required. Plus infrastructure which at large, the Central Government has decided
includes both physical i.e. setting up of office etc. as to share 50% of recurring expenditures towards
well as personnel who would assist the GN. Other practical maintenance of the Gram Nyayalayas with the
difficulties which need to be addressed include availability State Governments for the first three years and

82
12 3 4
of such persons, their dependability as to being stationed bare the entire non-recurring expenditure towards
in a rural location the heavy burden to be borne by the its establishment.
exchequer, etc..
The Central Government will meet the entire non-recurring
expenditure and the recurring expenditure for first three years
will be shared between the Central and State Government
following which it will be met by the concerned State
Governments. The Expenditure is to be borne 50% by the
Central Government and 50% by the State Government.
Most of the States including Uttarakhand have refused this
condition.
NP – In case of NPs minimal costs are involved as the
people who man the Bench are elected representatives
who belong to the community.
Representation of the marginalized
GN – the term as far as practicable has been used to Already covered in the Bill under clauses 6(2)
provide representation to marginalized communities. and 44.
Reservation should be made mandatory.
NP – there is a clear provisions for representation of
marginalized i.e. women, SC and STs. At present in
Madhya Pradesh/Chhattisgarh and Bihar proportional
representation of SC, ST and OBCs along with one
third reservation for women in NPs is provided for.
Educational Qualifications
GN – What need to be looked into is whether a person Too hyper technical to invent such an
possessing such qualifications would be available to apprehension at this stage.
work at the village level.

83
NP – a literate person would be an asset to such a forum.
However the varying literacy rates across States make it
difficult to set a minimum educational qualification. What
is required is to increase the overall literacy levels and
impart training on regular basis to NP members.
Jurisdiction
In order to ensure the effective functions of the two The concept of Gram Nyayalaya and the
forums what is essential is to look into the exclusivity object behind its establishment is entirely
of jurisdiction. different.
Conciliation/settlement
GN – is seen as the lowest level of the judicial set-up Not agreed in view of clause 30 of the Bill,
not a conciliatory or settlement body. Even the Bill does which provides for possibility of settlement/
not make it mandatory for the GN to arrive at a settlement. conciliation in the first instance.
Procedure and Execution
GN – rules of procedure are applicable in certain cases. Not agreed.
This would bring in the same rigidity and procedural
aspects which exist in the formal judicial set-up.
NP – no rules of procedure to apply this makes the
system less like the formal judicial set-up which is
intimidating to the rural populace.
Lawyers
GN – Lawyers are not bared therefore the same Too hyper technical to invent such an
procedures will creep as in the case of the formal apprehension at this stage.
judicial set-up.
NP – Since lawyers are bared it would make it more
cost effective and people's friendly.

84
12 3 4
Status and remuneration
GN – a positive step to give the GN functionaries the In view of the discussions in the National
status of public servants. Conference of Law Ministers and Law
NP – the Bill provides for the status of public servants to Secretaries held on 18.2.2005, such an
NP functionaries. However, at present States do not apprehension may not be sustainable
provide for similar provisions in their Acts.
Supervision, feedback and monitoring system and
Assistance and Infrastructure
A monitoring and feed back system makes the system All precautionary measures for effective
more effective and responsive. monitoring of the institution/system of Gram
Nyayalaya has been covered in the Bill.
Court Fees The fee prescribed under the Bill (Rs. 100/-) is
GN – Fees of Rs.l00 would be too much for a village meagre when compared to the benefits of
litigant to pay it would be a financial burden. redressal provided and the establishment costs
for setting up Gram Nyayalyas.
NP – The court fees is low which has been set at
Rs.20/-, presently in Himachal Pradesh in civil matters
the fee ranges between two to ten and in criminal
matters between two to five. In Chhattisgarh it is ten
rupees in civil cases and five rupees in criminal.
A nominal fee should be charged for providing the facility
but marginalized sections of the village population should
be exempted from such a charge. A graded fee structure
would allow higher charges in matters involving large
amounts. Better still would be that instead of an initial fee
a small percentage of the value of the claim by the
successful party be made payable after the resolution of
the dispute. In addition, in case of compromise both the
parties share the amount payable. A schedule (like the one
for the court fee at present) would layout the amount

85
to be paid finally. To discourage vexatious and frivolous
litigation the payment could be doubled or a fine could
be levied besides the cost.
6. Consumer Unity Clause 31(1)
and Trust Society
(1) One seat of conciliators should be reserved for The existing clause 31 (1) already covers the
women, belonging to the jurisdiction of the proposed suggested aspects and does not prevent
Nyayalaya. Further any active member of any political women to be appointed as conciliators, subject
party should not be included in jury. to the conditions envisaged under the said
provision.
(2) It is essential that atleast one member of the Wide publicity about the objects and scope of
“Traditional Village Panchayat” also be a member of the the Gram Nyayalaya Bill, 2007 has already
panel for imparting basic training in creating a new been given. The same course would be adopted
atmosphere in the forum where all formal technical by the Central Government/State Government
approach must be avoided. Such members should assist in after its enactment.
imparting information about relevant point of law, social
justice approachm and non-formal disposal of cases.
Clause 3(1)
The local jurisdiction of a Gram Nyayalaya should confine It has been proposed for establishing Gram
to limited number of villages. State Government with the Nyayalyas at intermediate Panchayat level. As
approval of high court may change the jurisdiction of Gram regards jurisdictional aspects, the same has
Nyayalayas depending up on the number of cases. been already envisaged under clause 13 to 15
Jurisdictions must be referable to the subject-matter of of the Bill.
the dispute and no to its fiscal value.
Clause 11(1)
(1) as proposed since the Gram Nyayalayas are mobile Would be against the principle of time limit
courts, services of lawyers may not be available in the envisaged under the Bill for disposal of cases
villages. Hence, Gram Nyayalaya shall not adjourn the and would amount to pendency of cases.
case/change the venue, to accommodate the lawyer of Further clause 26 of the Bill provides for free
any party. legal aid to the parties by the State Legal

86
12 3 4
(2) In addition atleast the services of two lawyers should Services Authority and the said aspect has
be made available at each Gram Nyayalaya, who would be already been covered under clause 31 of the
independent of influence of any party and readily available Bill.
for the party if so desire and help in the disposal of
disputes.

87
COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
Memo- Name of the Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
randum Organisation/indi-
No. vidual
12 3 4
7. Dr. Suryakand Extent: must include the State of Jammu and Kashmir, After indepth examination, the extent of
Y . Joshi, the State of Nagaland. The State of Arunachal Pradesh, applicability of the Bill has been excluded to
M.I.R.P.M., L.L.B., the State of Sikkim and to the tribal areas. The the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Nagaland,
Ph.D. CAIB; DTL; constitutional provision related to the border demarcations Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim and other tribal
DCPA; DIBM. should be redefined, re-amended, restructured legally, areas specified in I, II, IIA and III of the Table
9B, LARA- through the Parliamentary process at the time passing of Bill of paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to
RESIDENCY; this Bill to be converted in the form a National Act of 2007. the Constitution.
Mayur Colony, Both the houses of the Parliament must take very systematic
Kothrud; and scientific view in ensuring to pass the National Act
Pune–411038. during the year 2007 only, no false reasoning be brought
Maharashtra State. forward to avoid the important issue.
All the constitutional provisions as specified in parts I, II,
IIA and III of the table below paragraph 20 of the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution within the State of Assam,
The State of Meghalaya, the State of Tripura and the State
of Mizoram, respectively be amended forthwith. So also
Article 370 of the Indian National Constitution to the
special status to the State of Jammu and Kashmir should
be properly amended immediately. The proposed Act should
come into force on or before 15th August, 2007 by
notification to be published by the Central Government in
the Official gazette, and to appoint the same date for
entire Indian territory as described in the National
Constitution without any exception. No sentimental black-
mailing or no-emotional black-mailing be tolerated at the
National Level or below up to the Gram level or at the
bottom up to an individual citizen level.

88
12 3 4
2.a The Gram Nyayalaya has to mean a Gram level The Act, after its enactment, would be applicable
Judicial System to be established for every citizen as to all citizens of India despite the year of birth
recorded in the gram-citizenship register, including all the from the date that comes into force.
infants born on or before the first official day of each
new year, for the year 2007, those born on  or before
31st March, 2007.
2.b The Gram Panchayat, has to mean an institution of No comments.
self Government constituted at the village level, under the
article 243 B of the Constitution for the Rural areas; but
necessarily to mean to elect one representative per ten
citizens at the root level in the village, these ten sub-group
representatives to elect one representative at the Group of
100 citizens; these ten group representatives to elect one
representative at the Gram-cluster level for 1000 citizens
and these 10 cluster gram representatives to for a Gram
Panchayat for 10000 citizens within the geographical
area of 10 x 10 = 100 square kilo meters in Rural area
and 1 x 1 = square kilo meters in the towns city urban/
metro areas.
2.b.a The Taluka Panchayat/court means an institution of
self Government constituted at the Taluka constituting No comments.
30 x 30 = 900 square kilo meters of geographical area
containing neine grams each of 10 x 10 = 100 square
kilo-meters; and administering the Social Law and Order
and awarding Social and legal Justice to the people within
the Taluka geographical area.
2.b.b The District Panchaya t/Zilla Panchayat/co urt mea ns No comments.
an institution of self government constituted at the District
constituting 100 x 100 = 10, 000 kilo meters, containing
100 Grams/villages each of l0 x 10 = 100 square kilo
meters.

89
2.b.c The Vibhag – Panchayat/Divisional Court means an No comments.
institution of self Government constituted at the Divisional
level constituting 300 x 300 = 900 square kilo meters
consisting of nine districts each of 100 x 100 = 10,000 sq
km and 900 villages each of 10 x 10 = 1000 sq kms.
2.c High Court means in relation to any State constituting No comments.
900 x 900 = 8,10,000 sq kms consisting of nine Divisions
each of 300 x 300 = 900 sq. kms.
2.d Supreme Court of India means, the Highest Court
over and above the level of the State High Courts, and all
such geographical areas which are not included in any of
the State Areas, and including the Coastal and Border areas
of the Nation; 100 kilo-meters from the National Coastal
area be considered national Border of the Nation and Land
Border area be considered National Border of the Nation
and Land Border area be notified as straight lines demarking
minimum one kilo-meter in length and one kilo-meter in
width, as adjoining to the recognized independent Nation/
country by the National Statute. All the Coastal areas and
National Border areas of less than 10000 sq kms i.e. of
the minimum size of a District area be declared as the
Union Territory directly under the administration of National
Defence/Security Administration.
3. At the National Level, the Central Government by The establishment and jurisdiction of Gram
official notification, will authorize the State Law and Justice Nyayalyas would be in accordance with the
Administrative system to direct the District level Law and provisions of Chapters II and III as envisaged
Justice Administrative systems within the State to constitute in the Bill. The Law Commission of India in its
Gram Nyayalayas at each of the Gram level of 100 sq kms 1 14th Report on Gram Nyayalaya suggested
within the district. In the urban areas such area can be establishment of Gram Nyayalayas so that
of 1 x 1 sq kms for a group of population of 10000 speedy, inexpensive and substantial justice could
within the geographical area. be provided to the common man. The Gram
Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 is broadly based on the

90
12 3 4
3.2 The Gram Nyayalaya to be established shall be in recommendations of the Law Commission. The
addition to the civil and criminal courts established under Gram Nyayalaya is to be the lowest court of
any other law for the time being in force. subordinate judiciary in the State in respect of
criminal and civil jurisdication. The Presiding
3.3 A Gram Nyayalaya shall be the primary court of Officer of Gram Nyayalaya i.e. Nyayadhikari
subordinate judiciary at the village level in the State for will periodically visit the villages falling under
awarding justice and to ensure Law and Order within the his jurisdiction and conduct proceedings at any
Geographical area of the Gram village. place which he considers is in close proximity
to the place where the parties ordinarily reside.
4. The headquarters of every Gram Nyayayalaya should The Gram Nyayalaya will function as mobile
be located at the Headquarters of the concerned Gram– court. In order to make the system of
geographical area of l0 x 10 sq. kms and necessarily participatory justice a reality, legal aid and
within the residential/institutional area ate citizens residing m echanism of conciliation at the grassroots
in the Gram village. level would be a part of Gram Nyayalaya.
Justice to the poor at their doorstep is a dream
5. The Gram Nyayayala should be Presided over by the of the poor. Setting up of Gram Nyayalaya
President to be elected by the 10 repesentatives from the (at the Headquarters of intermediate Panchayat)
citizens within the Gram jurisdiction of l0 x 10 i.e. 100 sq with mobility in the rural areas would bring to
kms and should be guided by the Nyayadhikari to be people of rural areas speedy, affordable and
appointed by the Taluka level Panchayat court in substantial justice. The Gram Nyayalya Bill,
consultation with the Taluka level Bar council of the 2007 seeks to achieve the above objects and
Advocates Law Practitioners Law Advisers; Nyayaadhikari the entire aspects relating to the same have been
must be necessarily qualified in Law with minimum five covered in the present Bill.
years of experience in Judicialprocess, either as an
employee or Practicing Advocate consultant.
6. The Gram Nyaya Parishad for Gram Nyayalay: Tobe
constituted of ten elected representatives from the citizens
of the Gram; five members from the Female and five
members from the male categories; for the purpose of
female and male categorization, one who is not a female
be considered as male. Eligible representative to mean one
from the age group of 10 to 15 years; second from the
age group of 16 to 20 years; third from the age group

91
of 20 to 40 years; fourth age group of 16 to 20 years;
fourth from the age group of 40 to 60 years; and fifth
from the age group of over 60 years. The president should
be necessarily from the age group of over 60 years.
6.a Qualification for appointment : A representative from the
age group of 10 to 15 years must be minimum above
4th standard; a representative from the age group of 16
to 20 years must be above 10th standard; a representative
from the age group of 40 to 60 years must be of
graduation level, a representative from the age group of
above 60 years must be of Post-graduation level.
6.c. The National constitution should recognize only two
castes/categories of recognized other than that of the
MANA V – DHARMA (THE HUMAN RELIGION). No
person below the age of 20 years taking education,
compulsory education in the Gram Shikshan Sanstha
(Village school); be branded any Religion, caste, classification
on the basis of his/ her parents.
7. Constitution of category of citizen:  Classification of
any citizen should be only on the basis of the Jobs/work
profession undertaken by the respective person whether
female or male, restricted only to that concerned person
and not to whole of his/her family. Non working persons
i.e. house-wives, retired persons, physically handicapped,
any person over the age of 60 years, should not be branded
with the Religion, caste or classification of the working
person in the family.
8. Gram Nyaya Parishad:  Gram Nyaya Parishad should
be constituted as per the Notification to be taken out by
the taluka level Public Representation election Administration

92
12 3 4
duly appointed by the respective State Governments at the
Taluka Level. Terms of office of the elected member should
be restricted for a period of three years, or till such
member cross the age group as defined.
9. Removal of Nyaya Parishad Member:  Removal of
Nyaya Parishad member: the Taluka level Panchat/Nyayalay
should appoint the Nyayadhikari to monitor and supervise
the functioning of the gram Nyayalay such nyayadhikar
should be empowered authorized to recommend suitable
action against any member including the President of the
Gram Nyayalay and in turn the Taluka level Panchayat/
court Pesiding Officer shall take suitable action against
such Gram Nyayalaya Parishad member, including action
to remove such member from the office of the Gram
Nyayalay and also to punish and or impost fine and any
other suitable action, as per the powers vested with such
authority, by the State level Law and Order and Justice
Administrative system.
10. Restrictions on the Gram Nyayalaya Parishad Members
and the nyayadhikari: No person should be considered as
eligible for getting elected for second term in the same
category of the age group; no person should be considered
as eligible for getting elected for second immediately on
completion of earlier term. No person should be allowed
to function as member on the Gram nyayalay in any
capacity, if he she is concerned with the case directly
or indirectly. No two members from the same family be
allowed to get themselves elected at a time to represent
any of the other group. No citizen charged by the Gram

93
Surakshya dal (village security administration) be allowed
to contest election on any of the public body including the
Gram Nyayalay Parishad or even as Nyayadhikari.
11. Proceedings of the gram Nyayalaya: On every day, at
about 8.30 to 9.30 
A.M the Gram Nyayalaya should function
to take a review of the Precautionary measures, preventive
measures, corrective measures, redress measures and
reformative measures for the citizens within the Gram
jurisdiction of 100 sq kms based on the written applications/
complaints or oral say of any citizen of any age, including
the tiny toddler of any age who can express own sentiments
grievances, says, complaints etc.; or any report from any
family member or neighbour, or any wel-wisher or the
gram surakshya rakshyak. The President will ask the
Secretary of the gram Nyayalaya to record such oral or
written petition and may direct any of the member of
the gram Parishad to conduct further enquiry, to collect
the evidence, proof, witness within a day or two and to
submit to the gram-nyayalaya for further action. In any
case suitable justice should be awarded within a period of
seven days from the date of filing of the petition, recording
the case. The Gram Nyayalay should carry out the judicial
process on Sunday for three hours duration from 8.30 to
11.30 
A.M. As far as possible, entire process of awarding
the Justice should be carried in single sitting, including
recording the facts, examination of the evidence, proofs,
witness, examinations and cross examinations etc. The
proceedings should be carried out in the local Gram
Bhasha (village language) all the records should be prepared
in the State Official Language (Rajya Bhasha)) if the
village language and the State official language are different,
all the documents must be prepared in the bi-langual form
i.e. in the village language as well as in the State official

94
12 3 4
language. All the proceedings should be restricted for
the citizens officially recorded as residents within the
geographical area of the concerned gram of 100 sq. kms. the
property of such persons within the gram area, any
incidence occurred within the gram geographical area.
12. Seal of Gram Nyayalas: Every gram nyayalaya
established under this act should use a seal of the court in
such form and dimensions as may be prescribed by the
State Government, but necessarily mentioning the Name
of the Gram, Name of the Taluka, Name of the District,
Name of the State, all the mentions in the Gram-Bhasha
(village language); State Official Language and National
Official Language. For the purpose of non-Indians those
who may not follow the village language, State official
language and or National language, translated from either
in English or in the mother tongue of such foreign person
may be provided, subject to treat the document in the
National official language as authenticated and final for the
purpose of any type of interpretation or meaning thereof.
CHAPTER-III : JURISDICTION, POWERS AUTHORITY
OR GRAM NYAYALAYA :
13. Limits of Jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas:
 The
State Government shall by notification, define the local
territorial limits of the jurisdiction of each gram nyayalaya,
but necessarily of 10 x 10 = 100 square kilo-meters in size
land shape, in consultation with the State level High court
and may from time to time depending on the workload,
alter or readjust the local territorial limits in like manner,
at the bottom level to the extent of 1 x 1 = one square
kilo-meter in the town/city urban areas for a block of
population of 10,000; which ever is less.

95
14. Subject Jurisdiction:  The Gram Nyayalaya, shall be
empowered to deal with any type of case/complaint
from any of the
 citizen within the area related to(a) Civil
matters (b)  Criminal matters (c)  Social justice matters (d)
any other matter that may be accepted by the President
of the Gram Nyayalaya for awarding the social justice to
the concerned person.
15. Justice :  The Gram Nyayalaya may award by majority
(President to have powers of casting vote, in case of equal
members on the divided issues) punishment and or fine
or both to the charged person along with monitory
compensation to the aggrieved/complaining/suffering person/s
and also recovery of Judicial proceeding fees, each at the
rate of Rupees one thousand per day, monitory compensation
to the application to the extent of actual monitory loss or
minimum Rupees ten thousands, if not paid instantly, to be
recovered in the form of Gram-Runa-Patra (village debt
bond) bearing interest @ 1% per month, from the date
of occurrence of the concerned incidence/lodgement of
case/complaint which ever is earlier. The Gram Nyayalaya
can also award/impose judgement on the charged person to
render the SHRAMA-DAN in the form of physical labour
to serve the Public utility places in the Gram area, including
cleaning of the toilets, waste-water flow-pipes/nallies,
roads, water harvesting systems including water tanks,
ponds, canals, rivers etc; plantation of trees in the village
area minimum ten trees plantation per day for ten days,
shra-dan for twelve hours from sun-rise to sunset for a
period of ten days, cleaning/sweeping of the public utility
places for ten days, to undergo the training program/
education program of corrective measures for a period of
ten days. In case of period criminal offence, the Gram-
Nyayalaya may award punishment of KAL-KOTHADI,
i.e. dumping the concerned charged person in the air-
tight underground cell of 2 meters in length x 2

96
12 3 4
meters in width x 2 meters in height with no light, no life
essential including food, any other cloth for  a period of
30 days, immediately on awarding  such punishment, with
a fine of  money to compensate the aggrieved person and
recovery of the judicial process fee out of the sale proceeds
of the property, investments, income of the charged
person.
16. Powers to amend schedules:
 The State Government/
Law and Order and Justice Administration may by official
notification direct the higher court above the Gram Nyayalaya
to deal with the case in the form of an appeal, retrial etc.
17.
 Gram Nyayalaya to have exclusive civil, criminal, social
jurisdiction in all  matters related any of the citizen within
the gram area  concerned with the person, the property
within the gram area, the occurance of the incidence
within the Gram area of any person or property, may not
be from the Gram area.
18.
 Certain disputes not to be tried by Gram Nyayalayas:
Disputes out of the geographical areas of the concerned
Gram area should not be tried by the Gram Nyayalayas;
such applications, petitions, says be recorded and be
forwarded to
 the taluka level Panchayat/courts for  further
disposal.
19. Gram Nyayalaya to close a case in certain circumstances:
If the Nyayalaya is satisfied  that it is necessary in the
interest of public  justice to close a  case, it may on its own
motion or on an application by either party to the civil
dispute
 pass order  closing the case at the gram level and
may refer the matter to the taluka panchayat/court for
further disposal.

97
20. Limitation: The Provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963
and the provisions of Chapter XXXVI of the code of
criminal procedure 1973 may be applicable to the Gram
Nyayalayas, subject
 to deal with each case necessarily
within a period of seven days, and execution of the final
order or
 awarded justice immediately in next seven days,
unless there is stay order  from the higher court over and
above the Gram Nyayalaya.
21. Transfer of Pending cases:  Normally no case should
remain pending over a period of seven days  for disposal
and next seven days  for execution of final order of
awarded Justice; however, in  any case if any case remains
pending over  a period 30 days from the date of filing
petition, recording the case in the gram nyayalaya, such
case should be transferred to the taluka Panchayat/court
for further disposal duly recorded with appropriate reasons
for such pendency.
22. Duties of Members on the Gram Nyayalaya:  Each
of the ten
 members  on the Gram Nyayalaya be allowed
to record own opinion of the issue of the case independ-
ently duly supported with own judgement, the Secretary
has to circulate the opinion of each to all other members
on the Gram
 Nyaya Parishad and to the Nyayadhikari,
further to list out common points out of the individual
judgement and also to record separately uncommon points;
each member should be given second opportunity
to rethink on the
 uncommon points listed and offer new
opinion and to finalise by majority the final verdict to
award the justice in the concerned case. While doing so,
each member
 should study the primary say of the
complainant, the evidence supported to the case, the
proofs proved, the
 witness tested through the examination
and the  cross examination and application of common sense
for awarding civil/criminal/social justice. Each member on

98
12 3 4
the Gram Nyayalaya be paid an  Honorarium @ Rupees fifty
per day for  six days and rupees one hundred for Sunday
sitting for  a period three hours  to conclude the case. No
member on  the Gram Nyayalaya be allowed to visit any
place, or person or property, located out of the geographical
area of the Gram Jurisdiction i.e.
 10 x 10 = 100 square
kilo-meters for the purpose of dealing with the case.
CHAPTER - IV: PROCEDURE IN CRIMINAL CASES.
23. Gram  Nyayalaya to follow summary procedure to
deal with the case on day to day basis and every case
must be
 disposed off necessarily in the Sunday sitting  of
three hours.
24. Pronouncement of Judgement: Only the Chairman/the
President of the Gram Nyaya Parishad of ten represen-
tatives should be empowered to pronounce the Judgement
on behalf of the Gram Nyayalaya.
 The Pronouncement
of the Judgement  must in the Gram-Bhasha (village
language); the Judgement  should be documented in the
village language as well as the State Official language, if
the state official language is differentfrom the village
language.
25. Power of Gram Nyayalaya to transfer case: By majority
the
 Gram Nyayalaya may the decision to record the facts,
the final opinion  and to transfer the case to the taluka
level panchayat/court for  further disposal, is  not dealt  with
within a period of  30 days  from the date of recording
such case at the Gram Nyayalaya level.
26.  Legal aid to parties: The applicant and also the
defending parties  may take assistance  of the gram-level
aid society to represent and defend own side, through
the legally qualified person in India.

99
27. Power to compound cases:  Gram Nyayalaya may
compound other cases related to the same person or the
same property or the same incidence or the same place
of occurance with in
 the geographical jurisdiction of the
gram i.e. 10 x 10 = 100 square kilo meters.
28. Gram Nyayalayas not to take  cognizance of certain
cases:  Such cases which  are not related to the citizens
resident of the gram, property not  within the geographical
jurisdiction of the  Gram Nyayalaya, the place of  occurance
of the incidence  not within the  geographical jurisdiction
of the Gram Nyayalaya,  should not be dealt with by the
Gram Nyayalaya and as  such no cognizance be taken in such
cases by the Gram Nyayalaya; but after recording the facts
and recording own opinion thereon, may  refer the cases for
further disposal to the taluka panchayat/court.
29. Power of Gram Nyayalaya to order amount of fine
to be applied for expenses:  The Gram Nyayalaya should
order amount of fine to be applied for case proceedings
against the charged party/person/s minimum @ rupees one
thousand per day for entire period of  the judicial proceedings
and also compensation to  the applicant/sufferers minimum
rupees ten thousands or  amount of loss suffered  which ever
is higher, to be recovered out  of the property of charged
person, or to be recovered from the income or investments
of the charged person/s.
CHAPTER – V : PROCEDURE IN CIVIL CASES:
30.  Duty of Gram Nyayalaya to make efforts for
conciliation and settlement  of civil and social disputes.
The Gram Nyayalaya should put up efforts to settle the
civil issues amicably through the consultations to be
offered by the members of the Gram Nyayalaya Parishad.
31. Appointment of Conciliators:
 The President of the Gram
Nyayalaya may appoint officially three members from the

100
12 3 4
Gram Nyayalaya or even from the general public within
the gram area to  function as conciliators for  and on
behalf of the Gram Nyaya Parishad.
32. Procedure generally:  The general procedure to be
followed  to deal with the case trial be as per the civil
procedure code as in force,  but entire process must be
completed within a period of seven days from the date
of recording the case.
33. Special Procedure in civil disputes:  The Gram
Nyayalaya shall undertake the summary proceedings in
each of the matters on day to day basis, one hour per
day from 8.30 
A.M. to 9.30 A.M. and deal finally on each
of the Sunday  through the continuous  sitting of three
hours from 8.30 a.m.  to 11.30 a.m., entire process  of
says of the complainants, the recording and verification
of the evidences, proofs, witness examination
 and cross
examination etc.  should be completed with a period of
seven days.
34. Transfer of any dispute case:  The Gram Nyayalaya
may after recording the facts and recording the opinion
of each of the member, transfer any case out of the gram
area jurisdiction
 to the taluka panchayat/court, necessarily
within 30 days from the date  of recording the case for
trial.
35. Payment of interest in money decrees:  The Gram
Nyayalaya may allow  the charged person to convert the
money decree in the form of gram-run-patra; (village
debt bond) to
 carry interest @ 1% per month, from the
date of recording the  case or from the date of loss to
the applicant, which ever is earlier, including for recovery
of the Gram Nyayalaya judicial fees of rupees one thousand

101
per day  for entire period of the trial of the case; such
amount be recovered either from the income expected to
be generated in future but necessarily within a period of one
from the date of awarding the final judgement, otherwise
to be recovered from the sale proceeds of the property and
or investments of the charged person/s, or out of the
compulsory shrama-dan/employment guarantee scheme in
the village payable @ rupees one hundred per day for a
period of 300 days during the year. Food of only half a kilo
in weight be provided to
 such charged person/s per  day at
about 12.30 in the noon, with no other support for cloth
or shelter, but under the physical control of the gram
suraksha dal i.e.
 village security administration in the
correction house for entire period of the recovery.
36. Power of the Gram Nyayalaya to issue commissions:
In terms  of the provisions of the code of civil procedure
the Gram Nyayalaya may have all the powers  of the civil
court to issue commission  but strictly to function within
the geographical areas of the gram i.e. l0 x 10 = 100  square
kilometers and within the stipulated time period of one
day and to submit the report on the next day for further
process.
CHAPTER VI : PROCEUDURE GENERALLY:
37. Proceedings to be in the Gram-Bhasha:  The Gram
Nyayalaya shall carryout
 entire proceedings in the case in
the gram-bhasha an also to record the same for
documentation purpose in the state official language, if
the gram bhasha i.e. village language is different from the
state official language.
 If the person/s  concerned is not
aware of the gram bhasha  or the state official language, the
proceedings be pronounced for such concerned person in
his/her mother-tongue also subject providing the efficient
translator of the gram  bhasha and state official language
and the mother language of the concerned person/s.

102
12 3 4
38. Evidence to be on oath:  The Gram Nyayalaya should
record the evidence on oath or on solemn affirmation  of
any person/personality/worshiped diety  by such concerned
person/s.
39. Gram Nyayalayas to have the power of judicial
magistrate of first class for summoning any person for
recording witness or for providing any proof in the case.
CHAPTER – VII : APPEALS
40.
 Appeal in criminal cases:  The aggrieved parties in the
case may put up appeal with the higher court at the taluka
panchayat/court  over the judgement pronounced by the
Gram Nyayalaya, necessarily  within 30 days from the date
of issue of final order, stay order appeal must be
necessarily moved
 before the Gram  Nyayalaya carry out
execution of the judgement awarded by Gram Nyayalaya
within next seven days from the date of the final order.
41. Appeal in civil cases: The aggrieved parties in the case
move the higher
 court at  the Taluka level Nyaya  Panchayat/
court for further appeal over the judgement pronounced by
the Gram Nyayalaya,
 within a period of 30 days; but
necessarily before the Gram  Nyayalaya  executes  own
judgement in next seven days, by bringing stay order on
the execution of such final order.
CHAPTER – VIII : MISCELLANEOUS:
42. Pending cases: Cases pending in or disposed by other
courts: Any case pending with the Gram Nyayalaya over a
period of 30 days from the date of registering the case,
must be transferred to the taluka panchayat/court with
remarks
 for such pendency; any case  disposed by other
courts  out of the geographical jurisdiction of the gram

103
Nyayalaya but  referred to the Gram  Nyayalaya for the
purpose  of execution, must be  executed by the Gram
Nyayalaya within  a period of seven days from the receipt
of such case from any other court, however, Gram
Nyayalaya should not accept any such case
 directly from
other gram nyayalaya, but should accept only receiving
through the concerned own taluka panchayat/court, duly
endorsed by such
 court for  taking the suitable action
against any person citizen with in the jurisdiction of the
gram-parishad, or the property charged for the purpose of
the recovery, which is located within
 the geographical
jurisdiction of the Gram Parishad.
43. Assistance of police to Gram Nyayalayas: the local gram
suraksha  dal the village police personnel shall render  all
types of assistance to the Gram  Nyayalaya as per the orders/
directives issued by the secretary of the Gram Nyayalaya.
44. Nyayadhikari and members on the Gram Nyayalaya
are to be public  servants: During the tenure of each of
the member  of the  Gram Nyayalaya each member shall  be
treated as  public servant for the purpose of dealing with
the case.
2. Dr. Pramod Kumar Nyaya Panchayat
Aggarwal, IAS
Principal Secretary We have a very ancient tradition
 of Panchayat in  our The concept of Gram Nyayalya is different form
and Land Reforms country.  We had panchayats in ancient times and the that of Nyaya Panchayats. The Law Commission
Commissioner, country was governed through them. The motto “Panch of India in its 114th Report on Gram Nyayalaya
Land and Land is Parmeshvar” was well established in the society. The suggested establishment of Gram Nyayalayas
Reforms Department,tradition of Panchayat was destroyed during the British so that speedy, inexpensive and substantial
Government of period. After independence, our popular leaders reconstituted justice could be provided to the common man.
West Bengal, the panchayats. The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 is broadly
Writers’ Buildings, based on the recommendations of the Law
Kolkata. Mahatama Gandhi said, “The village Government will be Commission. The Gram Nyayalaya is to be the
the panchayat of five people. All the adults of the village lowest court of subordinate judiciary in the

104
12 3 4
will elect the panchs  for a year.  There shall be some State in respect of criminal and civil jurisdiction.
minimum prescribed qualifications for the panchs. During The Presiding Officer of Gram Nyayalaya i.e.
its tenure, the panchayat will act as legislative assembly, Nyayadhikari will periodically visit the villages
court and executive simultaneously. falling under his jurisdiction and conduct
proceedings at any place which he considers is
If both the parties are agreed, the Nyaya Panchayat in close proximity to the place where the
will pass
  the decree as per the agreement. The forecast parties ordinarily reside. The Gram Nyayalaya
of the Father of Nation is more relevant today than that will function as mobile court. In order to make
time. the system of participatory justice a reality,
legal aid and mechanism of conciliation at the
Today, so many cases are pending in the courts at grassroots level would be a part of Gram
every stage that the poor don’t have the capability to face Nyayalaya. Justice to the poor at their doorstep
litigations at departmental, district or commissionary levels is a dream of the poor. Setting up of Gram
in the courts. They cannot even think of going to High Nyayalaya (at the headquarters of intermediate
Courts or Supreme Court. Panchayat) with mobility in the rural areas
would bring to the people of rural areas
If the landless or tenants are evicted because of vested speedy, affordable and substantial justice. The
interests or they are troubled by some other ways, that Gram Nyayalya Bill, 2007 seeks to achieve the
become helpless and our courts deliver the judgments above objects and the entire aspects relating to
against them due
 to lack of sufficient documents,  evidences the same have been covered in the present Bill.
or proper advocates. If the number of courts is increased
at tehsil or
 district level, the poor  beneficiaries shall not
be benefited from it because neither they have financial
resources nor they have any knowledge of legal tricks.
The decentralization of judicial system is a very
important issue for judicial and administrative reforms.
The people of our country are dissatisfied as they can’t
get prompt and easy access to justice. Thus, along with
the reconstitution of Panchayati Raj System, it is very
important to reconstitute the Nyaya Panchayats.
The importance of reconstitution is more essential
in disposing of the petty quarrels and disputes because the

105
illiterate poor are fully exploited while disposing these cases.
They are forced to  visit police stations, tehsils and courts
several times. As a  result, hatred spreads in them  and the
atmosphere of the village is polluted. And in these petty
disputes and quarrels, sometimes there is a large scale
bloodshed also.
Keeping
 in view the above, for the solution of the
village problems, various governments have  proposed the
constitution of the Nyaya Panchayats.
Provision in the Constitution
There is a provision in article 39A of Part IV of
the Directive Principles of  State Policy of the  Constitution
that the State  shall secure that the operation  of the legal
system promotes justice on the basis of equal opportunity,
and shall, in particular ensure that opportunities for securing
justice are not denied to
 any citizen of economic  or other
disabilities.
Article 40  directs that the State shall take steps to
organize village panchayats and endow them with such
powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them
to function as units of self-government.
In
 compliance of these directives of the Constitution,
several States  constituted the Nyaya Panchayats. Uttar
Pradesh was the first State which established the institution
of ‘Nyaya Panchayat’ through “U.P. Panchayat Rajya
Adhinium, 1947”.
 The establishment of Nyaya Panchayat
was on regional level or Block level and its members
were either elected by the Panchayat Samiti or nominated
by the officers.
 The jurisdiction of these Nyaya  Panchayats
was to dispose of petty civil and criminal cases besides
the disputes of measurement of land.

106
12 3 4
The Nyaya Panchayats in U.P. settled 37.3 lakh
litigations out of 47.32 lakh litigations during the period  of
35 years from 1949 to 1984. Fifteen lakh cases were
agreed upon.
Constitution of Nyaya Panchayat
Balwant Rai Mehta
 Committee observed, “In some
States the village panchayats have been given the rights
of the court as regards
 some civil and criminal cases, but
due to  certain reasons their  work has not been found
satisfactory.” Therefore, the committee recommended,
“The scope of the Nyaya Panchayats should be widened.”
The establishment of a Nyaya Panchayat has been
recommended by clubbing two or three Gram Sabha
Mandals. Therefore, every State Government or there posted
a designated officer in the district shall bifurcate the
district into circles and constitute one Nyaya Panchayat
in every circle.
Nyaya Panchayat shall have the jurisdiction to settle
both civil and criminal cases. Each Nyaya Panchayat shall
consist of 5 members who shall be nominated amongst
the Gram Sabha members by the District collector in
consultation with the District Judge.
Among these five members, there shall be two members
representing the special category.
 One member shall be
from the Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe or Backward
castes while another member shall be a woman.
The member should essentially possess a degree in
law
 or must be a graduate  from any recognized university
or he  should be a reputed  person of that area or he
should be a reputed social worker.

107
In certain  States there is a provision of Khand Nyaya
Panchayat controlling over two or three Nyaya Panchayats
for which those retired judicial officers or Government
officers shall be appointed
 who have served as Magistrates
for at least three years.
Functioning of Nyaya Panchayat
Generally, Civil Procedure Code,  1908, Penal Procedure
Code, 1973 and Indian Evidence Act,  1872, shall not be
applicable in the Nyaya Panchayats as is in the courts.
However, the State  Government can provide to enforce
a provision of the above code or Act as per the requirement.
Civil Jurisdiction of Nyaya Panchayat
Nyaya Panchayat can decide the following civil matters
disputes:
1. If the transaction of money is not more than Rupees
Fifty Thousand;
2. Matter pertaining to the payment  of wages to the
worker;
3. Dispute over the lease of land between the owner
and the tenant;
4. Matters relating to irrigation;
5. Matter related to demarcation of land and irrigation;
6. Matter related to purchase and sale of up to five
acres of land without irrigation and up to two and
half acres of land under irrigation.
7. Various family matters related to marriage and custody
of children.
8. Matter related to maintenance.
9. Such civil matter in which both the sides have
expressed their willingness to settle the matter
through mutual consent.
10. Matter pertaining to reacquire the movable property.

108
12 3 4
11. Matter pertaining to the encroachment of cattle.
12. Matter pertaining to  the charging of arrear  of rent on
immovable property.
13. Any other matter determined by the Government.
Criminal Jurisdiction of Nyaya Panchayat
The Nyaya Panchayat  can hear the following
criminal matters under Indian Penal Code directly or
through police report:
1. To cheat posing as a Government servant
 or a
constable (section 170 and 172); quarrelling noisily
on the road (section 160);
2. Polluting the public
 water sources or pond (such
as water falls or water tank) (section 277);
spreading diseases by negligence (section 269);
3. Causing harm to health by means of polluting the
surroundings (section 278);
4. Creating hindrance to ordinary road or shipping routs
(section 283);
5. Adopting a careless approach towards handling of
dangerous material (section 284);
6. Careless attitude towards fire or inflammable materials
(section 283);
7. Careless towards explosives (section (286);
8. Carelessness with machinery (section 287);
9. Carelessness while demolishing or getting a building
repaired (section 288);
10. Carelessness with living creatures (section 289);
11. Creating public nuisance (section 290);
12. Starting of a public nuisance by a Government
servant (section 290);
13. Indecent act or indecent singing in a public place
(section 294);

109
14. Hurting deliberately or out of anger (section 323, 334);
15. Creating hindrance to someone (section 341);
16. Detaining a person (section 342);
17. Beating, attacking or using criminal force (section
352,358);
18. Making scare someone of divine power (section 508);
19. Indecent behavior by a drunk person in a public
place (section 510);
20. Committing a theft where the cost of the stolen
property is not
 more than fifty thousand rupees
(section 379);
21. Misappropriating someone’s  handed property by
improper means (section 403);
22. Breaking into someone’ s land  or house in an
unauthorized manner (section 447);
23. Criminal threat to kill someone or causing serious
injury (section 506);
24. Making an attempt  for insulting or outraging a
woman’s modesty by words, acts or deeds
(section 509);
25. Where the loss of  a property by mischief is not
more than fifty thousand rupees (section 426);
26. Setting the issues regarding maintenance (section 125,
Indian Penal Code);
Procedure for hearing of civil cases
The hearing of a case in front of Nyaya Panchayat
is very simple and clear.
1. The applicant shall present his case in writing in brief.
He shall also
 give the names and addresses of both
the parties in writing. If there is any prescribed
proforma then he shall submit his application in the
same.
2. No fee shall be charged for hearing in front of the
Nyaya Panchayat;

110
12 3 4
3. The Nyaya  Panchayat shall listen  both the parties
after sending a copy of the application to the
opponent party;
4. If the case is ordinary, the Nyaya Panchayat  shall
give the judgment on the same day after hearing
both the parties and taking note of the evidence;
5. If both the parties wish to produce an oral
 or a
written evidence, then the Nyaya  Panchayat shall
hear both the parties on a fixed date;
6. The Nyaya Panchayat has the  right under Civil
Procedure Code (Diwani Prakriya  Sanhita) to ask
for the production of opponent's witnesses or
necessary documents at the time of hearing the civil
cases.
7. The decision of the Nyaya
 Panchayat shall be with
the majority of the members.
Procedure for hearing the criminal cases
(a) During the hearing, if the criminal accepts his crime,
then the Nyaya Panchayat  shall record his argument,
will fix necessary penalty and punishment and thereby
pass an order.
(b) If the criminal does not accept his crime, then he
shall have to present the details in his defence.
(c) The Nyaya
 Panchayat shall make a record only
through the procedure medium (section 260 to 265
of Penal Procedure Code).
(d) The hearing in front of Nyaya Panchayat shall take
place on daily basis and all the cases will be
investigated/inquired into within six weeks. After that,
the Nyaya Panchayat shall deliver its judgement
within a week.

111
(e) During the history, if the Nyaya  Panchayat feels that
a particular case needs to be heard upon by a Class I
Judicial Magistrates, then it shall send the case to
him.
(f) If, in a case, there is a possibility of reconciliation
between the two parties, then the same can be
achieved with the consent of the Nyaya Panchayat.
The merits of hearing procedures in front of  the Nyaya
Panchayat
1. No lawyer  or advocate or solicitor can present himself
before the Nyaya Panchayat.
2. If a district judge or Magistrate feels that a particular
case be heard by Nyaya Panchayat, then he can
transfer it to that.
3. If there exists another level for appeals to Nyaya
Panchayat, then after it, the
 appeals shall be heard
by the district and session judge.
4. If the case has already been decided by certain other
court, then these cannot be taken up by Nyaya
Panchayat.
5. If on request the district and sessions judge wishes,
the case
 can be transferred from  one Nyaya Panchayat
to another.
Execution of Decrees
The decree or  order given by Nyaya Panchayat shall
be so acted upon/executed as per the norms set by it.  If
the property  of the defendant does not fall  under  the
jurisdiction of the Nyaya Panchayat who has given the
order of decree, then the decree  or the order  can be
transferred for execution to that Nyaya Panchayat in
whose jurisdiction lies the property, and if a Nyaya
Panchayat does not exist there, then accordingly it can
be transferred to the Munsif court in whose jurisdiction
lies the property.

112
12 3 4
Contempt of Nyaya Panchayat
When a person, at any stage, during the judicial
procedures, when a meeting of the Nyaya Panchayat is
being held according to Nyaya Panchayat or in its presence,
deliberately insult the
 Nyaya Panchayat  or any of its
members or refuses to take oath meant for all or refuses
to sign his own statement, when it is legally mandatory,
then the Nyaya Panchayat at any time before concluding
its meeting on the very
 same day, may take cognizance
of the offence.
The expenditure of the Nyaya Panchayat shall be borne
by the village fund
1. The expenditures of Nyaya Panchayat will be borne
by the village fund or  by the village fund of Gram
Panchayats included  in the circle, in such  a
proportion as decided by the competent authority.
2. Under this Act, the  court fee in the contemplations
case and all the money collected in the form of fine
shall be deposited in the account of State Government.
But the State
 Government from  the amount thus
collected shall pay in the form of grant but not more
than 50% of the amount to the concerned Gram
Panchayat as fixed by it to meet the expenditures of
Nyaya Panchayat.
The compulsion of setting up the Nyaya Panchayats
It is
 clear from the above  analysis that establishing
the Gram Nyayalayas in the village is essential. Our judicial
system is so expensive and laborious that it is difficult
for the poor and simple villagers to get justice through
this medium. Also, majority of the cases in the villages

113
are petty and bitterness develops when these are not settled
and sometimes heavy blood-shed too takes place due to
these petty
 in-fights.  Secondly, the neighbours in the
villages are well aware  of who owes  whose money who
has committed which crime. So, it is unlikely for these
courts to err.
 Thus, through these Nyaya Panchayats, we
can easily develop the American jury  system for the Indian
judicial system,  so that the evidences are based on truth
and not on lies and myth, and in the cases too proper
justice is
 done. Justice must not depend  upon the arguments
of the lawyers, but always shine like a true star. Gradually,
all the matters
 related to the revenue too  should be disposed
of by the Nyaya Panchayats.
The concept of the above mentioned Nyaya Panchayats
is an ideal code. It is hoped that very soon the State
Governments shall draft the necessary legislature in their
States for establishing these Nyaya Panchayats.
9. Shri Ramdev Gupt, Judicial system for Gram Sabhas
Pariyojana Nideshak,
Population and Social In the pre-Buddha period the Panchayats used to be The concept of Gram Nyaylyas is different
Development Nationalvery
 powerful.  The  panchayat  judicial  system  of those from that of Gram Sabhas. The Law Commission
NGO, Wadhawa days was in the hands of elite only . The servants or the of India in its 1 14th Report on Gram Nyayalaya
Business Centre underprivileged labour class did not have any right. They suggested establishment of Gram Nyayalayas
D-288-89/l0, Laxmi used to bear the maximum punishment for the minor so that speedy, inexpensive and substantial
Nagar Vikash Marg, offences.
 They did not have any of their own voice.  They justice could be provided to the common man.
Delhi–110092. silently tolerated all the punishments. There was no scale or The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 is broadly
code for punishment. It was purely as per the whim  of based on the recommendations of the Law
the person awarding the punishment or  at the mercy of the Commission. The Gram Nyayalaya is to be the
panchayat. For the same offence, someone  used to get lowest court of subordinate judiciary in the
the capital punishment and someone else was allowed to State in respect of criminal and civil jurisdication.
go free or some were given minor punishments. The Presiding Officer of Gram Nyayalaya i.e.
Nyayadhikari will periodically visit the villages

114
12 3 4
With the passage of time, came the era of Republics falling under his jurisdication and conduct
and them that of Rajas and Maharajas. The law was proceedings at any place which he considers is
codified. Village courts to District courts and Supreme in close proximity to the place where the
Court came into existence. The King used to be the head parties ordinarily reside. The Gram Nyayalaya
of Supreme Court. It was not necessary in those days too will function as mobile court. In order to make
that all the poor get the justice.  If the dispute was the system of participatory justice a reality,
between the equals then there has to be justice but legal aid and mechanism of conciliation at the
between the powerful and the weak, the weak never got grassroots level would be a part of Gram
the justice. Even today, when we have democracy in India Nyayalaya. Justice to the poor at their doorstep
and the people are  powerful but in comparison  to the is a dream of the poor. Setting up of Gram
powerful and mafias, the weak never gets the justice, Nyayalaya (at the headquarters of intermediate
except in those  areas where some revolutionaries, after Panchayat) with mobility in the rural areas
organizing the public,  made their power felt.  In those would bring to the people of rural areas
areas, these Government courts fail to  deliver them justice speedy, af fordable and substantial justice. The
but they get it through these public courts.  The Govern- Gram Nyayalya Bill, 2007 seeks to achieve the
ment courts somehow provide the justice to the weak above objects and the entire aspects relating to
people due to the fear of these public courts. the same have been covered in the present Bill.
We have surveyed most of the remote areas of the
country and studied the living pattern, activities and their
social traditions minutely. The law-makers in your Parlia-
ment prepare the drafts after hearing their rituals,
 customs
and tribal laws or by way of reading them from the
books, but their customs and traditions gradually change
with the time and place.
 This invisible change, however
brings a big change in the coming time. For example,
reading the Birhore tribe of Hazari Bagh district, Colonel
Dalton has written in ‘Anthropology of Bengal’ that they
used to eat the flesh of their parents after their death
 so
that their  parents may take rebirth in their families.
However, today this custom is no more prevalent in their
tribe. Their population too is limited to certain thousands.
Keeping in view these customs and social order,  we
feel that today such a Gram Nyayalaya is the demand of

115
hour which can  function under  the provisions of law.  If
its executive violates its any of  the smallest provisions,
there should be a provision of harsh punishment for him.
This Gram Nyayalaya should not
 have any financial powers.
However, this Gram  Nyayalaya shall  look after the finances
of Gram Sabhas.  The purpose of monitoring any member
of the village can intimate the Gram Nyayalaya regarding
the irregularities.
There should be a Gram Sabha for the population of
one thousand. However, it will be proper to have different
form for Gram Nyayalaya.
 Practically it will be appropriate
to constitute a Gram  Nyayalaya for the population of one
lakh or at the Block Development level.  There should be
Jan-Panchayat for the population of one lakh or at the
Block Development level.
 There should be an arrangement
to have one member  from each  village body for this Jan-
Panchayat.
Thus,  there will have to be an arrangement for a
Gram Sansad/Panchayat  of 100 members.  The jurisdiction
of this Jan-Panchayat should be the subject  matter of the
Concurrent List of the Constitution.  Under this Jan-Panchayat,
an executive will  have to be constituted under the Block
Development Officer. Also, the police of that area has to
work under it. However, the revenue department will have
to be kept
 separate and will function under/from  Tehsildar
to District Magistrate.
The M.P. and M.L.A.  fund, which enables them to
have special powers for loot, has converted all the M.Ps,
MLAs into contractors. Except 5% MPs, MLAs and
communists, all the MPs and MLAs are getting commission
from 20 to 50%. If once some one has become MP or
MLA,
 he becomes the owner of splendid bunglows  and
costly ears.  They don’t have any concern with the public

116
12 3 4
service.  The only reason for the success of Mafias and
criminals in this very MP/MLA fund. We have observed that
even the good people who become MP or MLA are not an
exception to it. Thus they don’t bother about “Pap or Punya”.
This MP/MLA fund should be abolished and shall have to
be allocated to the Block-Development. If an MP or MLA
feels that some construction
 work is necessary in his
constituency, he will inform the head of that regional
panchayat. If that regional panchayat feels that the work
should be done on priority basis, it
 may order so urgently.
The right to withdraw  the funds will rest with the Block
Development officer and the right of inspection of the
work will rest with all the members
 of Nyaya Panchayat
along with the people  of that area where the work is
being done. After the inquiry at the grassroots and
technical level of the work,
 if it is found that there is
some financial irregularity  or misuse of funds, the same
should be recovered from the Block Development Officer/
Chairman of that regional panchayat. For this purpose, an
arrangement will have to be
 made for a separate penal
authority so that the culprits are punished without any delay.
The arrangement of providing money directly to any
Gram Sabha will have to abolished. About which develop-
ment work has to be done in that area, will be referred
to regional panchayat after the proposal being approved
by Gram
 Sabha with full majority.  The Regional Panchayat
within seven days, with its comments, will start the work
if money is available for that work. Each Gram Sabha
will have its
 separate  allotted fund which  shall not be
diverted to any work for another Gram Sabha. The regional
panchayat will get the work accomplished under the
supervision of Gram Sabha.
 The right to examine the
quality of work will rest  with the Gram Sabha and its
people. If a member of Gram Sabha questions the quality

117
of work for some other reason, then after  getting the
work examined by the authority,  the guilty  will be
punished within fifteen days.
With such provisions,  we feel that there shall be
improvement but at any cost the principle of accountability
will have to be strictly followed. In the present days,
 the
officers/employees are  more reliable than the politicians.
The fear  of loosing their service  will keep  them under
control. A politician is elected by the people and hence he
does not have  any fear of his service.  He is always busy
in maneuvering.  If he does  not have the financial powers,
the mafias/goondas can never  be claimants for that post.
Thus the selected person will not only be a good regulator
but will work as a messenger for the social dynamism.
Hence, we want that the Gram Nyayalaya be deprived
of the financial powers and it should be made Gram
Nyayapalika.
10. Shri Chet Singh The samiti felt that the time limit for deciding cases in other
Rana, President, courts should also be
 fixed so that the litigation does not
Bijwasan Gram linger for decades.
Vikas Samiti,
Near Railway Chapter II – clause 3(1)
Crossing, Kamal While considering the process of establishment of Gram The aspect about the need of more Gram
Tent House, Nyayalaya, the intensity of population
 and the area to be Nyayalyas in an area has already been covered
Bijwasan, covered by a Nyayalaya could be specified. This provision under the proviso to clause 3(1).
New Delhi-110045. may be useful to  assess the need  of one or more Nyaya-
layas in an area.
Clause 10
In this clause a provision could be made about pointing May not be required as the provision i.e. clause
out to the Nyayadhikari or the District Judge that the 10 is already self-contained.
Nyayadhikari has an interest in the case or is related to
any of the parties in dispute. This act could be taken by
any body even if he/she is not a party in the case. This

118
12 3 4
provision may be useful where the Nyayadhikari might have
some interest in the dispute or any of the party and the
opponent party might not be aware of the fact while any
person, though not connected with the dispute, might
 be
having knowledge about it.
Chapter IV clause 26
A sub clause may be added at the end after sub-clause (3) The services provided by the State Legal
as under: Services Authority under clause 26(3) is free
“(4) The Nyayadhikari shall provide legal assistance, free legal aid.
of cost to a party
 who expresses inability to hire/or
obtain legal assistance at his cost.”
Chapter V clause 32
A sub  clause may be added after sub-clause (3)  of
this clause as suggested below:
“(4) The Nyayadhikari may inspect the site of dispute, May not be required as clause 32(2) is already
consult neighbourer, if considered necessary to find the self contained.
facts and  truth about  the dispute, and record his findings
appropriately while deciding the case  of while forwarding
the case to the District Judge if the Nyayadhikari finds
that he cannot/or not competent to decide the dispute.”
Sub clause (12) of clause 33 is contradictory to
clause 24(2) of Chapter IV
General
Provision
 should be made in the Bill for providing Sub-clause (12) of clause 33 relates to special
assistance to  the aggrieved party for framing and writing procedure in civil disputes and sub-clause (2)
his  application when he presents himself before the of clause 24 relates to criminal cases and
Nyayadhikari and makes an oral complaint. hence there exists no contradiction.
The States  excluded from the operation  of this law
shall deprive the population  of the concerned States  of
this easy access to justice.

119
11. Dr. K.C. Sunny In order to serve the purpose of the Bill in its
Reader and Head entirety the following modifications may be made:
Department of Law
University of Kerala
Kariavattom P.O.
Trivandrum 695 581. 1. At present
 there is provision for reservation  of the Subject to consideration of the Standing
post of Gram Nyayadhikari to Scheduled Castes/ Committee.
Scheduled Tribes and Women.  This benefit of
reservation may be extended to Backward  Class  of
citizens under Article 16(4) of the Constitution.
2. Gram Nyayadhikari may be treated as the  part of The post of Nyayadhikari is a statutory
the cadre of State Subordinate Judicial Service. provision based.
Nyayadhikari may be the first point  of entry in that
service.
3. Population shall  be the criteria  for sanctioning The criteria to decide upon the need to establish
additional Gram Nyayalaya in each Block Panchayat. additional Gram Nyayalaya may differ on various
aspects from State to State and from area to
area. Hence, the proviso to clause 3(1) is self
contained as it presently exist to meet any
situation.
4. Provision should
 be made insisting  that there should Clause 11(1) of the Bill envisages that the
be at least one sitting of Gram  Nyayadhikari at each Nyayadhikari, appointed at the intermediate
headquarters of Gram Nyayalayas in every month. Panchayat, level shall periodically visit the
villages falling under his jurisdiction and conduct
proceedings (including taking of evidence,
deciding of cases and the holding of mobile
court if considered necessary) at any place
which it considers is in close proximity to the
place where the parties ordinarily reside or
where the whole or part of the cause of action
had arisen.
5. In order to ensure informal atmosphere in Gram May not be feasible as it may go against the
Nyayalaya it should be insisted that neither the Presiding professional ethics and dress code prescribed
Officer nor the advocates should be in robes. for Advocates.

120
12 3 4
6. The qualification of conciliators must be prescribed Due to its technical nature the mode of
in the Act. appointment of conciliators has been envisaged
under clause 31 (l) of the Bill to rest with
District Judge in consultation with District
Magistrate in accordance with the qualifications
and experience prescribed by the High Court in
that respect.
7. Selection of the Nyayadhikari must be made by Public The decision was that the Nyayadhikari shall
Service Commission. be appointed by the Governor of the State in
consultation with the High court was arrived at
in view of the different practices followed in
various States.
8. In addition to the provision
 for appeal included in the It would amount to increase in the pendency
Bill a provision for Revision may be included.  It may of litigations. Redressal to prefer writ petition
be noted that in spite of the fact that there is no under article 226 and to prefer revision under
provision of appeal from the Senior civil judge or article 227 are left open to the litigants under
Assistant Sessions Judge, High Court may exercise the Constitution of India.
its jurisdiction under Art. 226 and 227 of the
Constitution.
Setting up of Gram Nyayalayas at the level
 of Panchayat The Gram Nyayalyas has become imperative to
at intermediate level through  out the  country will require provide justice to common man at the grass
huge funds both from the  Central and the State Exchequers root level in rural areas in order to render
for the following items; justice at the door steps of the people living in
1. Buildings – both for
 residential and courtroom pur- such rural areas. Strengthening of existing
poses. subordinate judicial system, though is a welcoming
2. Setting up of additional Police Stations/Police out- suggestion, may not sub-serve the aforementioned
posts, lock-ups and malkhanas. object of the Act.
3. Creation of additional posts under police,  both for
prosecution and for handling the accused including
their movement from jails
 located in District towns
to Gram Nyayalayas.

121
4. V ehicles for  Nyayadhikaris, Police, Public Prosecutors
etc.
Providing adequate legal  service to litigants  at the  level
of Gram Nyayalays will be an uphill task as lawyers  function
either in the District towns or in the Tehsil towns and
courts cannot function without lawyers.
Gram
 Nyayalayas propose to deal with the civil  and
criminal cases. While in reality the number  of revenue cases
is usually much higher than the civil ad criminal cases in
rural areas.
The preamble of the bill suggests
 that the proposed
law ill provide access to justice, both civil and criminal and
will ensure that
 opportunities for  securing justice are not
denied to any citizen by reason of social, economic or
other disabilities.
 This is far  from being a rational  and
practical basis to undertake the setting  up  of Gram
Nyayalayas. The existing judicial system at the subordinate
level ends at the Tehsil/Taluka level. More and more
new Tehsils/Talukas are being
 carved out by State
Governments from time to  time and as a result the distance
between a village and the  Tehsil/Taluka is gradually reducing.
This distance cannot be said to be an impediment in providing
access to justice. Similarly, it is not correct to say that
Gram Nyayalayas will help secure justice to citizens who
suffer social, economic or other disabilities. The fact of life
is that no one in the village gives up his
 civil right merely
because the existing civil court is about a few kilometers
from the village or he is economically too poor to afford
going to the Tehsil/Taluka level civil court.
 Similarly, even
in a criminal case, if one is victim of a criminal offence
he would not mind going to
 the Tehsil/Taluka level criminal
court to seek relief Also, it is  the responsibility of the police
to present the accused and the witnesses in the court  and,

122
12 3 4
therefore, it is immaterial whether the  criminal court is a
kilometer away or 5–10 kilometers away from the  village
of the complainant/victim. It is,  therefore,  wrong to say
that the new arrangement of Gram Nyayalayas  will  in
any way provide an  easier access  to justice as compared
to the existing arrangement  or, in any  way, help  rural
population to secure justice  despite social, economic  or
other disabilities.
The proposed decentralization of subordinate judiciary
from the existing Tehsil/Taluka level to  the Panchayat  at
the intermediate level  will create more problems than it
is likely to solve as the existing  judiciary at the  Tehsill
Taluka level will be bifurcated in  two levels in terms  of
the criminal cases and the powers of the civil court viz.
Tehsil/Taluka level and the level  of intermediate panchayat
and some litigants will have to come to Tehsil/sTaluka level
courts for civil and criminal
 cases and  also for revenue
cases.
The alternative
Instead of setting up Gram Nyayalayas at the inter-
mediate panchayat level, the need  of the hour is to
strengthen the existing system of subordinate judiciary,
which forms the major chunk of our judicial system, by
crating additional courts a the Distt./Tehsil/Taluka level
depending upon the extent of pendency of cases to ensure
that the litigants get quick justice at reasonable cost. This
can be done over a period of, say,
 five years.  Simul-
taneously, the High Courts need to  effectively review  and
monitor the progress of disposal  of cases by subordinate
judiciary on regular basis.  This will  entail much less
expenditure on the creation of Gram Nyayalayas.  In addition,
the strength of Judges in the High  Courts and the

123
Supreme Court must also be increased to ensure that the
disposal of cases gets speeded up to a reasonable extent.
Also, we must lay much greater emphasis on the creation
of alternative redressal mechanism.
In the end, it needs to be understood that the rule of
law in the country cannot be established unless we improve
the efficiency of our judicial system by creating additional
courts commensurate with the load of work. In fact, our
aim has to be to put our country at par with the developed
countries I the matter of number of courts per million of
population. Eventually this is going to improve the gover-
nance in the country which is the crying need of the
country today.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.