PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 47
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
FORTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE JUDICIAL STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2010
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2011/BHADRAPADA, 1933 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2011/BHADRAPADA, 1933 (SAKA)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30 ,  AUGUST, 2011)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 30 , AUGUST, 2011)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30 ,  AUGUST, 2011)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 30 , AUGUST, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
FORTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE JUDICIAL STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2010
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 30 TH AUGUST, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 30 TH AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2011/BHADRAPADA, 1933 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-93

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—12
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 13—16
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 17—35
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 37 —151
A. The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 ............................................ 39—84
B. Comments of the Department of Justice on the views/suggestions contained
in memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on the provisions
of the Bill ..................................................................................................................... 85—146
C. Replies of the Department of Justice to the Questionnaire of the Committee on
the Bill ........................................................................................................................... 147—151

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi* — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shri Amar Singh
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri O.T. Lepcha
8. Vacant
∧
9. Vacant @
10. Vacant &
LOK SABHA
11. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
12. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
13. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Dr. Monazir Hassan
16. Shri Shailendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
18. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
19. Ms. Meenakshi Natarajan
20. Shri Devji M. Patel
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Lalu Prasad
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
25. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
26. Shri Manish Tewari
27. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
28. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
29. Vacant
#
30. Vacant $
31. Vacant %
* Nominated as Chairman of the Committee w.e.f.  26 th July, 2011.
∧ Vacancy caused due to passing away of Shri M. Rajasekara Murhty w.e.f. 7 th December, 2010.
@ V acancy caused due to induction of Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan in the Council of Minister w.e.f. 12 th July,  2011.
& V acancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik w.e.f. 28 th July, 2011.
# Vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Arjun Munda from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 26 th February, 2011
$ V acancy caused due to passing away of Shri Bhajan Lal w.e.f. 3 rd June, 2011.
% Vacancy existing since the constitution of the Committee on 31 st August, 2010.
As on 29th July, 2011

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Forty Seventh Report on The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010.  The Bill
seeks to lay down judicial standards and provide for accountability of Judges, and, establish credible
and expedient mechanism for investigating into individual complaints for misbehaviour or incapacity of
a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and to regulate the procedure for such investigation;
and for the presentation of an address by Parliament to the President in relation to proceeding for
removal of a Judge and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the
1st December, 2010  and pending therein, to this Committee on the 30 th December, 2010  for examination
and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communiqué
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, a press communiqué was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies, in response
to which memoranda containing suggestions were received, from various organizations/individuals/
experts, by the Committee.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry of
Law and Justice on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on 2
nd February, 2011. The Committee
heard the views of experts/NGOs on the Bill on 16 th March, 2011.The Committee also heard the views
of legal luminaries and experts on the Bill on 6 th April, 2011.
5. The Committee heard the views of Shri G.E. Vahanvati, Attorney General of India on 28 th April,
2011 and also heard the views of Shri Parag P. Tripathi, Additional Solicitor General of India on
1
st June, 2011.
6. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information placed
before it :–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Justice thereon;
(iii) V iews/suggestions by the institutions, individuals and experts during their personal
presentations/hearing before the Committee;
(iv) Reply furnished by the Department of Justice to the Questionnaire forwarded by the
Secretariat.
(v) Other reference material/ documents related to the Bill.
♣ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 48026) dated the 30 th December, 2010.

7. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 25 th August, 2011.
8. The Committee would also like to thank those who responded to the Committee’s Press
Communiqué, and appeared before  the Committee and thereby enriched the discussions of the
Committee through their valuable observations on the Bill.
9. For convenience of reference, the observations and recommendations of the Committee have
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
25th August , 2011 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 was introduced* in the Lok Sabha on the
1st December, 2010. It was referred ♣  by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice Committee on the
30
th December, 2010 for examination and report.
2. The Bill seeks to lay down judicial standards and provide for accountability of Judges, and,
establish credible and expedient mechanism for investigating into individual complaints for misbehaviour
or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and to regulate the procedure for
such investigation; and for the presentation of an address by Parliament to the President in relation
to proceeding for removal of a Judge and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
3. The Statement of Objects and Reasons, appended to the Bill reads as under:–
“The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968  was enacted with a view to lay down a procedure
for removal, for proved misbehaviour or incapacity, of Judges of the High Courts and the
Supreme Court by way of address of the Houses of Parliament to the President. There is,
however, no legal provision at present for dealing with complaints filed by the pubic against
Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court. The need for a statutory mechanism to
address complaints of the public in this regard has been felt to bring greater transparency in
the judiciary.
The Full Court meeting of Supreme Court of India on 7
th May, 1997 had adopted “the
Restatement of Values of Judicial Life”. The above Restatement lays down certain judicial
standards which are to be followed by the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
However, this Restatement of Values  of Judicial Life does not have any legal authority and
cannot be enforced. It is felt that the judicial standards also be made a part of the statute
to give it the requisite legal sanction. This measure  is also likely to increase public confidence
in the judiciary considerably as the Judges would be required to follow the  prescribed judicial
standards.
There is also no legal provision at present that requires Judges of the Supreme Court
and High Courts to declare their assets and liabilities. The Resolution adopted at the Full
Court meeting of the Supreme Court of India on 7  May, 1997  requires every Judge to declare
his assets within a reasonable time of assuming office and thereafter whenever acquisition
of substantial nature is made. The Second Administrative Reforms commission, in its fourth
Report on Ethics in Governance, endorsed the above resolution after noting that independence
of Judiciary by the citizens and, therefore, the conduct of a judge should be above reproach.
In the Writ Petition (C) No. 288/09 filed on behalf of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the
Delhi High Court challenging the order date 6
th January, 2009 passed by the Central
Information Commission under the Right to Information Act, 2005, it has been asserted on
behalf of the Supreme Court that the Judiciary has no objection to the disclosure of assets
of Judges provided this is done in a formal manner by an Act of Parliament with adequate
safeguards. In this backdrop, it is considered necessary to enact a law in this regard to meet
with the larger public interest as well as ensuring and maintaining the independence of the
judiciary.
* Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 1 st December, 2010.
♣  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.48026) dated the 30 th December, 2010.

2
The Judicial Standards the Accountability Bill, 2010 seeks to repeal the Judges
(Inquiry) Act, 1968,  while retaining its basic feature and aims to achieve all the above
objectives of creating a statutory mechanism for enquiring into individual complaints against
Judges of the High Court and the Supreme Court and recommending appropriate action,
enabling declaration of assets and liabilities of Judges and laying down the judicial standards
to be followed by the Judge. All these measures will increase accountability of Judges of the
High courts and the Supreme Court thereby further strengthening the independence of the
judiciary. The proposed Bill would strengthen the institution of judiciary in India by making
it more accountable thereby increasing the confidence of the public in the institution” .
4. The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Justice on the 2
nd February, 2011. The
Secretary while making presentation before the Committee explained how the Bill seeks to ensure
accountability in judiciary while preserving the basic principle of judicial independence.
5. In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/suggestions
from desirous individuals/organisations on the Bill. Accordingly, a press release was issued inviting
views/suggestions. In response to the press release published in major national and regional newspapers
in the country during the first half of January , 2011, a number of representations/memoranda number
of representatives were received.
6. The major points raised in the memoranda are summarized as follows:–
• Definition of Misbehaviour needs to be made more inclusive.
• Scope of the definition of the Judicial Standards as provided in the Bill should not be
confined only to the restatement of values of judicial life set up in the Chief Justices
Conference, 1999.
• The idea of statutorily providing for judicial standards, irrespective of their content, is
violative of the independence of the judiciary. Thus, clause 3 of the Bill be deleted for
being violative of Judicial Independence.
• Judicial Standards need to be interpreted in a much wider context in accordance with
prevalent international best practices.
• The National Judicial Oversight Committee may be assigned the task of laying down the
Judicial Standards.
• Definition of Judicial Standards needs to be enlarged as it says very little about the
conduct of judges in matters before them in court.
• Membership of the complaint scrutiny panel should not be reserved for the members of
the judiciary only.
• The reports of the complaint scrutiny panel should be subject to a review by the
Oversight Committee.
• The reports of the complaint scrutiny panel stating that the complaint was frivolous
depend only on the concurrence of the Oversight Committee. Rather such reports should
be subject to further investigation to prevent the harassment of complainant in case of
improper assessment by the scrutiny panel.
• Composition of the National Judicial Oversight Committee should be made more broad
based.
• Members of the Legislature and Bar should also have representation in the National
Judicial Oversight Committee.

3
• Experience of the other countries may also be considered while deciding upon the
composition of the National Judicial Oversight Committee.
• The National Judicial Oversight Committee should be a permanent and independent body.
• The National Judicial Oversight Committee may be given investigative powers as contained
in the Criminal Procedure Code.
• Composition of the Investigation Committee should be clearly mentioned. There should be
guidelines for selecting the Members of the Committee.
• Clause 29(4) mandates only for the Investigation Committee to complete the inquiry with
in the prescribed period without mentioning the period of submission of its report. The
clause be extended to cover both inquiry and submission of report based on the inquiry.
• Besides stopping judicial work there should also be stoppage of any promotion or
elevation of the Judge during the pendency of the complaint. There should also be a
provision to direct the judge to proceed on leave.
• Irresponsible use of provisions pertaining to making complaints against judges by a
disgruntled litigant may endanger the Judicial Independence and may cripple down the
entire administration of  Justice.
• Clause 9 of the Bill may be amended suitably to check the complaints which seem to
emanate from  a mere grievance/dissatisfaction with regard to a judgment.
• The punishment proposed in the Bill for frivolous/vexatious complaints should be diluted
because such a severe punishment may work as a deterrent and discourage the people
from taking initiative against the corrupt judges.
• Prevailing judiciary driven method of appointments of Judges needs to be reviewed as it
holds the key to the entire judicial reforms agenda.
• The Bill does not clearly prescribe whether a Judge removed by an order of the President
may appeal to the Supreme Court.
7. The Committee forwarded select memoranda to the Department of Justice for their comments
thereon. The list of such memoranda along with the gist of views and suggestions contained therein
and the comments of the Department of Justice, thereon is placed at Annexure-B.
8. A Questionnaire on the Bill was also prepared by the Secretariat and forwarded to the Ministry
for their replies. The reply to the Questionnaire was furnished by the Ministry on 15
th March, 2011
and the same was considered by the Committee.
9. The Committee heard the views/suggestions of following non-governmental organizations/
individuals on the provisions of  the Bill in its meeting held on the 16 th March, 2011.
1. PRS Legislative Research
2. Citizens Rights Association
3. Pre Legislative Briefing Service
4. Campaign for Judicial Accountability and Reform
5. Shri Subash Chandra Agrawal
6. Shrimati Indira Unninayar
7. Shri Deepak Khosla

4
8. Shri Dilbagh Singh
9. Shri M.D. Devappa
10. Moreover, the Committee also had discussions with some leading legal luminaries on the Bill
namely, Shri K.T.S. T ulsi, Shri Anil B. Divan and Shri Shanti Bhushan Senior Advocates, Supreme
Court in its meeting held on 6 th April, 2011. The Committee heard the views of the Shri Goolam
E. Vahanvati, Attorney General of India and Shri Parag P. Tripathi, Additional Solicitor General of
India on the provisions of the Bill in its meetings held on 28
th April, 2011 and 1 st June, 2011,
respectively.
11. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 25 th August, 2011.
Major Issues Examined by the Committee
Codification of the Judicial Standards
12. The Committee observed that the judicial standards enumerated in the Bill were primarily based
on the “the Restatement of Values of Judicial Life” adopted in the Conference of Chief Justices 1999,
albeit with an addition of some new parameters. Such standards were considered vital for the impartial
administration of justice and judges were expected to adhere to them. The Attorney General of India
while deposing before the Committee emphasized the historical significance of the Bill as it, for the
first time, proposed to provide a statuary back-up to judicial standards which hitherto have been
subject to the discretion of judges.
12.1 However, during Committee’s deliberations, some witnesses termed the said restatement of
judicial values outdated and suggested that if defined in such an exhaustive manner, the judicial
standards would be a closed domain of judicial ethics having no scope for new progressive standards
to be incorporated within its fold. Some witness also argued that, in future, there may be instances
where behavior of judges, despite not being in consonance with commonly accepted ethical norms,
might not fall in the ambit of judicial standards defined in the Bill.
12.2 The Committee takes note of the views placed before it by the witnesses. The Committee
appreciates that this Bill provides statutory backup to the Judicial Standards hitherto having
sanction of the Restatement of Values as adopted in the Conference of Chief Justices in 1999.
The Committee also appreciates that the Bill incorporates some new parameters essential to
ensure judicial accountability. The Committee further observes that the Government should
also consider the concerns of the witnesses raised before it. The Committee recommends that
Government should remain alert and willing to update the judicial standards as and when
required in future.
12.3 During the deliberations some Members drew the attention of the Committee towards growing
instances where judges have made unwanted remarks in open Courts against other constitutional/
statutory bodies or persons who were not before them. In this connection, the Committee took note
of judicial standard specified in the Para 4 of the schedule to this Bill and clause 3(2)(f) of the
proposed Bill. Para 4 of the schedule to this Bill states that “Judgment should speak for themselves”
and the clause 3(2) (f) of the proposed Bill provides that “a judge shall not enter into public debate
or express his views in public on political matters or matters which are pending or likely to arise for
judicial determination by him”.
12.4 The Committee discussed this issue in detail and felt that such instances of unwarranted and
uncalled for remarks by the judges are unfortunate and should be avoided. The Chairperson of the
Committee observed that “such unwarranted remarks create tremendous problems for legislature,
specific individuals, and senior leaders”.

5
12.5 In this context, the Committee feels that there is a need to bring such behaviour of
judges within the purview of the judicial standards. The Committee feels that Clause 3(2)(f)
should be expanded by specifically mentioning that judges should restrain themselves from
making unwarranted comments against other constitutional/statutory bodies/institutions/ persons
in open Court while hearing cases.
12.6 The Committee also observed that the clause 3(2)b of the Bill provides that no judge shall have
close association with individual members of the Bar. The Committee is of the view that the
expression ‘close association’ is very vague in nature and it may invite varying interpretations.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the said words may be replaced by the expression
‘close social interactions’ to avoid unwarranted ambiguity.
12.7 While deliberating upon the Bill, the Committee felt that that the proviso ( i) of the
clause 3(2)(1) needs to bring out more clearly and distinctly what is meant by the term
“individual capacity” as the line of distinction between a judge’s official capacity and individual
capacity is quite thin. Likewise, the Members were of the view that the expressions ‘private
forum’ and ‘academic forum’ may be defined to bring more clarity in the meaning implied in
these expressions.
12.8 The Committee, recommends that the proviso ( i) of the clause 3 (2)(f) may be re done
so as to provide more clearly the implications of expressions like “individual capacity”, “private
forum”, “academic forum” used therein.
Declaration of Assets
13. Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to make it mandatory for judges to declare their assets and liabilities
as well as those of his/her spouse and dependent children. During the deliberations a witness stated
that there is no mechanism prescribed in the Bill to scrutinize whether the declaration is proper or not.
He also suggested that the bill should specifically mention about a mechanism to regularly scrutinize
the declaration made by the judges.
13.1 The Committee endorses that the Bill makes the declaration of assets a statutory
responsibility for the judges. The Committee also acknowledges that the clause is in consonance
with the people’s “right to know” and would facilitate greater transparency in judiciary. The
Committee taking note of the suggestion that has come before it is of the view that the
Government should include a mechanism to ensure that scrutiny of the declaration of assets
is possible and implementable. Such a mechanism may involve any designated executive agency
and can be made to report to either the Complaints Scrutiny Panel or the Oversight Committee.
National Judicial Oversight Committee:
(a) Composition of the Committee
14. The composition and nature of the Oversight Committee was one of the main debated issues
during the deliberations of the Committee on the Bill. The witnesses that appeared before the
Committee and Members of the Committee expressed serious reservation over the proposed composition
of this body. A Member of the Committee raised his concerns as under:
“...In the composition of the Judicial Oversight Committee, almost all the Members are nominated
by the Chief Justice of India. That is also a very serious issue. The President can nominate only
one person. Almost all other persons are nominated by the Chief Justice of India”... ...
14.1 There was a common feeling among the Members that proposed composition of the body is
biased in favor of judiciary and it needs to be made more representative and broad based. There was

6
a suggestion to have in it a representative from Legislature. Some witnesses who appeared before the
Committee suggested to include atleast one member from the Bar in the Oversight Committee.
14.2 Members of the Committee also raised concerns that proposed composition of the National
judicial Oversight Committee also restricts the power of Parliament in a sense as it provides for no
role for the Members of Parliament in contrast to the Judges Inquiry Act 1968 in which the power
to constitute an inquiry committee lies in Speaker of Lok Sabha or the Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
14.3 The Committee noted that that the approach of the Government is hardly any different from
that of Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 which provided for a similar mechanism in the name of National
Judicial Council, having sole representation from the judiciary. The Committee in its 21
st report (para
23.9) on that Bill inter alia observed as under:
“…the Chief Justice of India is the Chairperson of the Council and other members of the
Council are two senior most Judges of the Supreme Court and two Chief Justices of the High
Courts to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India. The Committee is of the considered
opinion that either the National Judicial Council should be made broad based by including
non-judicial Members representing Parliament, and Executive or another additional body be
created with representation from Judiciary, Executive, Parliament and Bar to work in
co-ordination with the National Judicial Council.”
14.4 The Committee, however, notes a small improvement in the constitution of the present NJOC
i.e., it has Attorney General of India as one of the member. But it does not have a representation from
legislature. When asked, the Department of Justice in its written reply to the questionnaire of the
Committee mentioned that inclusion of a Member of Parliament was not proposed in the Bill as it was
felt that ultimately Parliament is the deciding authority.
14.5 The explanation of Department of Justice is not acceptable to the Committee. The
Committee is of the opinion that Parliament’s responsibility as a deciding authority in the
impeachment process does not prohibit it having a role in the National Judicial Oversight
Committee which is the very first stage where the fate of a complaint against a judge is to
be decided. Further, in its opinion, the screening level is as important as the final stage, when
impeachment process commences. The Committee, accordingly, recommends amendment of
clause 18 of the Bill so as to enable the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Chairman of the
Rajya Sabha to nominate, respectively, one Member of Parliament from each House, having
legal expertise and high standing in the legal arena to the Oversight Committee.
(b) Independence of the Oversight Committee
15. Independence of Committee was another important issue which invited considerable debate
during deliberations in the Committee. Most of the witnesses that appeared before the Committee were
in favor of making the Oversight Committee an independent and a full time body. Some witnesses
expressed their apprehension over the independent functioning of the Oversight Committee as in their
view this Committee was neither independent of the Government nor of the judiciary. They were
apprehensive about how the impartiality would be maintained as a complaint against a judge is to be
examined by sitting judges who are his/her colleagues.
15.1 Instead, the witnesses emphasized the need of  making the Committee a full time body
independent of  both the judiciary and the Government. A witness suggested an alternative procedure
for selecting the members of  the Judicial Oversight Committee. He placed his views as follows:
“...We have said that let the Chairman be selected by a committee of all the Judges
of the Supreme Court; let a second member be selected by a committee of the Chief Justices
of the High Courts; let the third member be selected by the Union Cabinet; let the fourth

7
member be selected by a committee of Leaders of Opposition in both the Houses of Parliament,
the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and the Speaker of Lok Sabha; let the fifth member be
selected by a committee of NHRC Chairman, Chief Election Commissioner, Comptroller and
Auditor General, etc. So, this way, you have five different committees selecting five members
who will  be full time members, not ex-officio Members”.
15.2 Another witness raised the concern that sitting judges who are members of the Oversight
Committee would be busy with enough judicial work. In that case, if they have to enquire into
complaints against some other Judge, it would take a lot of time. It is also possible that the Oversight
Committee would not even be able to easily meet.
15.3 Having gone through the material placed before it, the views expressed by the experts
and in-house discussion amongst the Members, the Committee strongly recommends for a
broad based and independent National Judicial Oversight Committee. The Committee insists
that all the three organs of the Government namely executive, judiciary and legislature have
to be represented in that Committee. The Committee hopes that such a balanced body would
ensure the independent and transparent functioning of the Committee and also brace people’s
faith in redressal of complaints against the erring judges. The Committee, reiterates, that the
expansion suggested by it in para 14.5 above should be read contextually into this paragraph
also.
Complaint Scrutiny Panel
16. The Bill provides that the Complaint Scrutiny Panel in the Supreme Court shall consist of a
former Chief Justice of India and two judges of the Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice
of India and in every High Court the Scrutiny Panel shall consist of a former Chief Justice of that
High Court and two Judges of that High Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of that High Court
to scrutinize the complaints against a judge received under this Act.
16.1 It was noted that on the issue of the membership of the complaint scrutiny panel, the Bill
makes no provision for the representation of the non-judicial Members. The witnesses raised serious
concerns over such composition which makes the CSP totally a judges affair. The views expressed
by the legal experts who appeared before the Committee were critical of such a composition. Most
of them were in favor of making CSP more broad based having non judicial members. A witness
appeared before the committee placed his views as under:
“…Unfortunately, this Scrutiny Panel does not have a provision for a public man or the
Advocate General. I wish even it was also a little more broad-based. At the moment, the
proposal is that the Scrutiny Panel of the Supreme Court will consist of a former Chief Justice
of India, two Judges of the Supreme Court, nominated by the Chief Justice. So, it becomes
all judges’ affair. I don’t know if it is feasible. I would request you to consider the possibility
of associating, at least, one public person. Similarly, the High Court level Scrutiny Panel is
consisting only of a former Chief Justice of a High Court and two Judges of the High Court.
There is no one else who is a member of that Committee”....
16.2 In reply to the questionnaire of the Committee, the Department of Justice clarified that such
a provision would ensure the judicial independence and judges would be in a better position to
understand the allegations from judges’ perspective.
16.3 The Committee notes that under the present Bill, the complaint against a judge would
be scrutinized by his colleagues only. Further, the CSP forms the pivot of the mechanism
proposed in the Bill as it is only on the report on the CSP, the Oversight Committee will
proceed or not proceed with the complaint. Also, the power to declare a complaint as frivolous
or vexatious are vested in this panel.

8
16.4 The Committee feels that it would not be prudent to reserve the membership of CSP
only for member of the judiciary merely in name of preserving judicial independence. Rather
the principal of judicial independence needs to be balanced with the ideal of judicial accountability.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should include the non-judicial
members in the CSP so as to enhance the credibility of such an important body in the eyes
of the people. The Committee further recommends to Government to consider expansion of
the CSP in the same manner as suggested by it in respect of the Oversight Committee in para
14.5 above.
16.5 Further, Clause 11(2) of the Bill states that the Scrutiny panel in every High Court
shall consist of a former Chief Justice of that High Court and two Judges of that High
Court. The Committee feels that such a provision in the Bill undermines the aspect of
impartiality in the inquiry process as allegations of corruption against a judge would be
scrutinized by his/her own colleagues. The Committee is of the view that in place of two
judges of that High Court, the CSP should include judges from another High Court so as to
ensure the element of impartiality in the inquiry process. The Committee therefore
recommends that the expression “two judges of that High Court” should be replaced by “two
judges of another High Court.”
16.6 The Committee also takes note of Clauses 9 and 19 which provide for reference of a
complaint by the Oversight Committee to the Complaint Scrutiny Panel. The Committee feels
that both these clauses deal with a common situation and therefore it would be appropriate to
review the relevance of Clause 9 in its existing format under chapter IV for the sake of better
coherence.
16.7 The Committee also noted that the Bill does not provide for in camera proceedings in
investigation under CSP. The Committee feels that making such arrangements is necessary to
protect the judge concerned from unwarranted defamation at this initial stage of investigation.
In view of this, the Committee recommends that the word “in camera” should be added
appropriately either in Clause 12 or 14 of the Bill to ensure the element of the confidentiality
in the proceedings of the CSP.
Investigation Committee
17. Clause 22 of the Bill provides for an Investigation Committee to be constituted by the
Oversight Committee for the purpose of inquiry into misbehaviour by a judge. The Investigation
Committee would investigate the complaint in respect of which the Complaint Scrutiny Panel has
recommended in its Report for making inquiry against the judge. Further, clause 29 of the Bill lays
down an elaborated inquiry procedure to be adopted by the Investigation Committee.
17.1 The Committee was told that the Bill does not mention about who would be the Member of
the Investigation Committee nor docs it provide for any such selection procedure to be prescribed by
rules. During the deliberations of the Committee, some witnesses and a few Members made a case
for making the Investigation Committee a permanent body so as to strengthen the proposed mechanism
for investigating into individual complaints against the judges.
17.2 The Committee is unhappy in so for as the provisions of the Bill relating to the
constitution and composition of the Investigation Committee are concerned. The Committee is
constrained to note that the Bill provides no guidelines for the Oversight Committee in the
matter of the constitution of the Investigation Committee. The Committee impresses upon the
Government to indicate the constitution of the Investigation Committee in the Bill itself for
the sake of objectivity and uniformity and to prevent uncertainty or the exercise of unnecessary
discretion.

9
Confidentiality in Complaint Procedure
17.3 Clause 39 of the Bill provides that every person who participates in the scrutiny or investigation
or inquiry as a witness or as a legal practitioner or in any other capacity shall undertake to the
Oversight Committee or Scrutiny Panel or investigation that he shall not reveal his own name, the
name of  the judge complained against, the contents of the complaint or any of  the document or
proceedings to any of the documents or proceedings to anybody else including the media without the
prior written approval of the Oversight Committee.
17.4 The Committee, while deliberating upon the Bill, felt that the scope of this clause
should be widened to ensure the accountability of the media in relation to the divulgence of
the information while complaints are under investigation. The Committee apprehends that
besides the persons mentioned in the clause, media may also be a source of the divulgence
of information at various stages of investigation/inquiry. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that an explanation may be added suitably to ensure that the prohibition prescribed applies to
the Media also.
Punishment for Frivolous and Vexatious Complaints
18. The Committee observed strong discontentment among the stake holders who submitted their
views in writing and also those who appeared before the Committee, over the quantum of punishment
prescribed in the Bill to penalize for frivolous/vexatious complaints. A witness expressed his
discontentment as:
“With this kind of provision, even the perfectly genuine complaints will not be made. It says
that if the complaint is found to be frivolous or vexatious, he will be sent to jail for five
years. To my mind this is very draconian. It should be removed. If somebody makes a totally
frivolous or vexatious complaint and if  he publicises it, he will be liable for defamation. If
his complaint is frivolous, this Oversight Committee will throw it into the waste…”
18.1 Referring to the Judges Inquiry Bill, 2006, a Member of the Committee also opined that the
penalty prescribed in the present Bill is too high. In his own words “the penalty significantly exceeds
as compared to the one in the Judges Inquire Bill, 2006. In that Bill it was only one year penalty”.
18.2 Another suggestion made by a witness on this issue was that the prescribed penalty in this clause
should not exceed the penalties prescribed for contempt of court. The witness was of the view that the
punishment should be confined up to six months imprisonment only. He elaborated his point as under:
“...the punishment, prescribed in this Bill, is much higher than that in the Contempt of Courts
Act, which is six months imprisonment and fine of Rs 2,000. It is also higher than that
proposed in the 2006 Bill and the Law Commission’ s 195th Report which was one year
imprisonment and a find of Rs.25,000...”.
18.3 The Committee took note of the concerns raised by the witnesses and Members. This issue
was discussed in detail in the Committee’s interaction with the Attorney General of India. Replying to
the question of a Member over this issue, the Attorney General of India defended the provision for
punishment in case of frivolous or vexatious complaints. He made the case in favor of the provision
in the following words:
“...This provision has been kept so that the Judges should feel that they will not be exposed
to frivolous complaints. The provision does not say that punishment shall be five years. It may
extend to five years depending on the nature of the complaint. And if a complaint is found
to be vexatious then a .five years sentence may be imposed. The provision is necessary for the
purpose of having a deterrent action against frivolous complaints because there are a lot of
disgruntled litigants who are constantly litigating and complaining…”

10
18.4 The Department of Justice, in its reply to the questionnaire of the Committee on the Bill, also
defended the provision saying the provision is to protect judges from frivolous and vexatious
complaints/allegations filed by some disgruntled elements.
18.5 An apprehension was raised by a Member on the likely damage to the administration of justice,
if the complaints against judges are made irresponsibly by disgruntled litigants. The Member emphasized
the need to examine the issue with an administrative perspective. He stated:
“...is not there an apprehension, leave aside whatever apprehensions the judges may have
about their independence, a concern which the Government has, that this may cripple the entire
administration of justice in the long run? Is not the process going to bring about a paralysis
in the administration of justice because given the fact that every decision, at every level, a
High Court or the Supreme Court, is always in favor of somebody or hurts somebody...”
18.6 The Committee took note of the apprehensions raised in relation to the frivolous complaints
causing threat to the very process of dispensation of justice. The Committee acknowledged the need
to check the complaints seemingly emanating from the dissatisfaction of litigants related to a judgment
so as to preserve the judicial independence. Some Members of the Committee were of the view that
the Oversight Committee should be given the task to scrutinize such complaints so as to prevent them
from causing unwarranted pressure on the administration of the judicial system.
18.7 A Member of the Committee suggested that the Bill should specifically provide that if
complaints are proved to be frivolous or vexatious but found to be made in good faith, the same
should be protected. Such cases should not attract the punishment envisaged for vexatious/frivolous
complaints. He was also of the view that the term ‘good faith’ needs to be interpreted as ‘with due
care and caution and a sense of responsibility’ in line with Section 79 of the Indian Penal Code.
18.8 The Committee endorses the rationale of making a provision for punishment for
making frivolous or vexatious complaints. The Committee, however, expresses its reservation
over the prescribed quantum of punishment both in terms of imprisonment which is up to 5
years and fine which is up to 5 lakh rupees. The severe punishment prescribed in the Bill may
deter the prospective complainants from coming forward and defeat the very rationale of the
Bill. In view of this, the Committee recommends that Government should substantially dilute
the quantum of the punishment so as not to discourage people from taking initiatives against
the misbehaviour of a judge. In any case it should not exceed the punishment provided under
the Contempt of Court Act. The Government may also consider specifically providing in the
Bill a proviso to protect those complainants from punishment/penalty who for some genuine
reasons fail to prove their complaints. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Bill
should specifically provide for protection in case of complaints made ‘in good faith’ in line with
the defence of good faith available under the Indian Penal Code.
Appeal against punishment under Clause 53
18.9 Clause 56 of the Bill provides that appeal from a person convicted on a trial held under the
clause 53(1) shall be directly to the Supreme Court. The Committee while discussing this clause
felt that the existing provisions of the Bill were curtailing the right of challenge of the
complainant to one only. The Committee feels that the complainant’s normal right of judicial
review on jurisdictional grounds both under article 226 of the Indian Constitution and under
the apex Court judgement in Chandra Kumar vs Union of India and others is not intended to
be circumscribed or eliminated, as indeed it cannot be by a mere Act of Parliament. Hence,
while maintaining appellate recourse to the apex Court as already provided, a small Explanations
may suitably clarify the availability of judicial review on jurisdictional grounds apart from the
apex Court appeal.

11
Method of appointment of Judges
19. The method of appointment of judges in the higher judiciary was the issue which was raised
in almost all the meetings of the Committee while deliberating upon the Bill although this matter is not
a part of the present Bill. Be it the Members of the Committee or the witnesses, all were unanimously
in favour of replacing the present judiciary driven collegium system of appointment of judges. It was
categorically opined by the witnesses and Members that present Bill is just a primary remedial step
while the real cure lies in reforming the prevailing process of appointment of judges in the higher
judiciary.
19.1 A Member of the Committee made very serious remark in these words:
“...I think, what needs to be dealt with is, really, the appointment process because it is out
of the appointment process that the entire question of integrity, probity, following, what are
called, accepted norms of conduct would really emanate. So, this Bill, actually, places the cart
before the horse. Till the time you really do not deal with the process of appointment and you
allow the scheme of the Constitution, which has been upset by the Advocates-on-Record I, the
Advocates-on-Record II, the Presidential Reference judgments, I think this would be an exercise
in complete futility …”
19.2 It was a common feeling among the Members of the Committee that the present system of
appointment of judges was opaque and in effective and thus has taken away the faith of the people
in the institution of judiciary.
19.3 The Committee has repeatedly emphasized on this issue in its earlier reports but the Government
is yet to make a beginning in this regard. In its recently presented report on the Constitution 114th
(Amendment) Bill, 2010, the Committee emphasized the need to review the procedure for appointment
of the judges in the higher judiciary and also to put in place some mechanism so as to optimize the
output in their performance. It was also indicated in that Report that to attain this objective the
Government may consider creation of a National Judicial Commission having representation from the
judiciary, executive, Bar and the Parliament.
20. As far as the present Bill is concerned, the Committee feels that the Bill deserves
appreciation for prescribing an elaborate procedure for investigating into individual complaint
for misbehavior or incapacity of judges. It also deserves appreciation as it empowers the
common man to expose the misbehavior of judges. It is clearly an initiative in the right
direction and endeavours to strike a reasonable balance between the demands of accountability
and of judicial independence.
21. However, the Committee finds some serious shortcomings in the mechanism proposed
in the Bill as pointed out in foregoing paras. Such shortcomings need to be rectified in order
to enhance the efficacy of the Bill and to realize the right to know.
22. The Committee was also of the considered and unanimous opinion that for the various
bodies created under this Bill, the Government will see that its appointees are as broad based
as possible, including in particular appointment of SC/ST/OBC/minority sections and other
weaker sections as feasible.
23. The Committee also unequivocally feels that the present Bill deals only partially with the
problem and the main systematic lacunae remain unaddressed. The most significant lacuna
relates to the present method of appointment of judges in the higher judiciary. The Committee
is of the considered opinion that the present Bill is bound to end up with limited success because
of the piecemeal nature of the proposed legislation, despite the genuineness of its objectives. The
issue of judges’ appointment, therefore, needs to be addressed comprehensively, though separately,
at the earliest because without it the efficacy of this Bill is seriously impaired.

12
24. The Committee is of the view that the Government has to move beyond an incremental
approach and give urgent and due thought to a holistic legislation encompassing the appointment
process and other related matters to ensure judicial accountability for improved administration
of justice.

13
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee takes note of the views placed before it by the witnesses. The Committee
appreciates that this Bill provides statutory backup to the Judicial Standards hitherto having
sanction of the Restatement of Values as adopted in the Conference of Chief Justices in 1999.
The Committee also appreciates that the Bill incorporates some new parameters essential to
ensure judicial accountability. The Committee further observes that the Government should
also consider the concerns of the witnesses raised before it. The Committee recommends that
Government should remain alert and willing to update the judicial standards as and when
required in future. [Para 12.2]
2. In this context, the Committee feels that there is a need to bring such behaviour of
judges within the purview of the judicial standards. The Committee feels that Clause 3(2)(f)
should be expanded by specifically mentioning that judges should restrain themselves from
making unwarranted comments against other constitutional/statutory bodies/institutions/persons
in open Court while hearing cases. [Para 12.5]
3. The Committee also observed that the clause 3(2)b of the Bill provides that no judge shall have
close association with individual members of the Bar. The Committee is of the view that the
expression ‘close association’ is very vague in nature and it may invite varying interpretations.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the said words may be replaced by the expression
‘close social interactions’ to avoid unwarranted ambiguity. [Para 12.6]
4. While deliberating upon the Bill, the Committee felt that that the proviso ( i) of the
clause 3(2)(f) needs to bring out more clearly and distinctly what is meant by the term
“individual capacity” as the line of distinction between a judge’s official capacity and individual
capacity is quite thin. Likewise, the Members were of the view that the expressions ‘private
forum’ and ‘academic forum’ may be defined to bring more clarity in the meaning implied in
these expressions. [Para 12.7]
5. The Committee, recommends that the proviso ( i) of the clause 3 (2)(f) may be re done
so as to provide more clearly the implications of expressions like “individual capacity”, “private
forum”, “academic forum” used therein. [Para 12.8]
6. The Committee endorses that the Bill makes the declaration of assets a statutory
responsibility for the judges. The Committee also acknowledges that the clause is in consonance
with the people’s “right to know” and would facilitate greater transparency in judiciary. The
Committee taking note of the suggestion that has come before it is of the view that the
Government should include a mechanism to ensure that scrutiny of the declaration of assets
is possible and implementable. Such a mechanism may involve any designated executive agency
and can be made to report to either the Complaints Scrutiny Panel or the Oversight Committee.
[Para 13.1]
7. The explanation of Department of Justice is not acceptable to the Committee. The
Committee is of the opinion that Parliament’s responsibility as a deciding authority in the
impeachment process does not prohibit it having a role in the National Judicial Oversight
Committee which is the very first stage where the fate of a complaint against a judge is to
be decided. Further, in its opinion, the screening level is as important as the final stage, when
13

14
impeachment process commences. The Committee, accordingly, recommends amendment of
clause 18 of the BHI so as to enable the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Chairman of the
Rajya Sabha to nominate, respectively, one Member of Parliament from each House, having
legal expertise and high standing in the legal arena to the Oversight Committee.  [Para 14.5l
8. Having gone through the material placed before it, the views expressed by the experts
and in-house discussion amongst the Members, the Committee strongly recommends for a
broad based and independent National Judicial Oversight Committee. The Committee insists
that all the three organs of the Government namely executive, judiciary and legislature have
to be represented in that Committee. The Committee hopes that such a balanced body would
ensure the independent and transparent functioning of the Committee and also brace people’s
faith in redressal of complaints against the erring judges. The Committee, reiterates, that the
expansion suggested by it in para 14.5 above should be read contextually into this paragraph
also. [Para 15.31
9. The Committee notes that under the present Bill, the complaint against a judge would
be scrutinized by his colleagues only. Further, the CSP forms the pivot of the mechanism
proposed in the Bill as it is only on the report on the CSP, the Oversight Committee will
proceed or not proceed with the complaint. Also, the power to declare a complaint as frivolous
or vexatious are vested in this panel. [Para 16.31
10. The Committee feels that it would not be prudent to reserve the membership of CSP
only for member of the judiciary merely in name of preserving judicial independence. Rather
the principal of judicial independence needs to be balanced with the ideal of judicial accountability.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should include the non-judicial
members in the CSP so as to enhance the credibility of such an important body in the eyes
of the people. The Committee further recommends to Government to consider expansion of
the CSP in the same manner as suggested by it in respect of the Oversight Committee in para
14.5 above.  [Para 16.4]
11. Further, Clause 11(2) of the Bill states that the Scrutiny panel in every High Court
shall consist of a former Chief Justice of that High Court and two Judges of that High Court.
The Committee feels that such a provision in the Bill undermines the aspect of impartiality
in the inquiry process as allegations of corruption against a judge would be scrutinized by his/
her own colleagues. The Committee is of the view that in place of two judges of that High
Court, the CSP should include judges from another High Court so as to ensure the element
of impartiality in the inquiry process. The Committee therefore recommends that the expression
“two judges of that High Court” should be replaced by “two judges of another High Court.”
[Para 16.5]
12. The Committee also takes note of Clauses 9 and 19 which provide for reference of a
complaint by the Oversight Committee to the Complaint Scrutiny Panel. The Committee feels
that both these clauses deal with a common situation and therefore it would be appropriate to
review the relevance of Clause 9 in its existing format under chapter IV for the sake of better
coherence. [Para 16.6]
13. The Committee also noted that the Bill does not provide for in camera proceedings in
investigation under CSP. The Committee feels that making such arrangements is necessary to
protect the judge concerned from unwarranted defamation at this initial stage of investigation.
In view of this, the Committee recommends that the word “in camera” should be added
appropriately either in Clause 12 or 14 of the Bill to ensure the element of the confidentiality
in the proceedings of the CSP. [Para 16.7]

15
14. The Committee is unhappy in so for as the provisions of the Bill relating to the
constitution and composition of the Investigation Committee are concerned. The Committee is
constrained to note that the Bill provides no guidelines for the Oversight Committee in the
matter of the constitution of the Investigation Committee. The Committee impresses upon the
Government to indicate the constitution of the Investigation Committee in the Bill itself for
the sake of objectivity and uniformity and to prevent uncertainty or the exercise of unnecessary
discretion. [Para 17.2]
15. The Committee, while deliberating upon the Bill, felt that the scope of this clause
should be widened to ensure the accountability of the media in relation to the divulgence of
the information while complaints are under investigation. The Committee apprehends that
besides the persons mentioned in the clause, media may also be a source of the divulgence
of information at various stages of investigation/inquiry. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that an explanation may be added suitably to ensure that the prohibition prescribed applies to
the Media also. [Para 17.4]
16. The Committee endorses the rationale of making a provision for punishment for
making frivolous or vexatious complaints. The Committee, however, expresses its reservation
over the prescribed quantum of punishment both in terms of imprisonment which is up to 5
years and fine which is up to 5 lakh rupees. The severe punishment prescribed in the Bill may
deter the prospective complainants from coming forward and defeat the very rationale of the
Bill. In view of this, the Committee recommends that Government should substantially dilute
the quantum of the punishment so as not to discourage people from taking initiatives against
the misbehaviour of a judge. In any case it should not exceed the punishment provided under
the Contempt of Court Act. The Government may also consider specifically providing in the
Bill a proviso to protect those complainants from punishment/penalty who for some genuine
reasons fail to prove their complaints. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Bill
should specifically provide for protection in case of complaints made ‘in good faith’ in line with
the defence of good faith available under the Indian Penal Code. [Para 18.81]
17. Clause 56 of the Bill provides that appeal from a person convicted on a trial held under
the clause 53(1) shall be directly to the Supreme Court. The Committee while discussing this
clause felt that the existing provisions of the Bill were curtailing the right of challenge of the
complainant to one only. The Committee feels that the complainant’s normal right of judicial
review on jurisdictional grounds both under article 226 of the Indian Constitution and under
the apex Court judgement in Chandra Kumar Vs Union of India and others is not intended to
be circumscribed or eliminated, as indeed it cannot be by a mere Act of Parliament. Hence,
while maintaining appellate recourse to the apex Court as already provided, a small Explanations
may suitably clarify the availability of judicial review on jurisdictional grounds apart from the
apex Court appeal. [Para 18.9]
18. As far as the present Bill is concerned, the Committee feels that the Bill deserves
appreciation for prescribing an elaborate procedure for investigating into individual complaint
for misbehavior or incapacity of judges. It also deserves appreciation as it empowers the
common man to expose the misbehavior of judges. It is clearly an initiative in the right
direction and endeavours to strike a reasonable balance between the demands of accountability
and of judicial independence. [Para 20]
19. However, the Committee finds some serious shortcomings in the mechanism proposed
in the Bill as pointed out in foregoing paras. Such shortcomings need to be rectified in order
to enhance the efficacy of the Bill and to realize the right to know. [Para 21]

16
20. The Committee was also of the considered and unanimous opinion that for the various
bodies created under this Bill, the Government will see that its appointees are as broad based
as possible, including in particular appointment of SC/ST/OBC/minority sections and other
weaker sections as feasible. [Para 22]
21. The Committee also unequivocally feels that the present Bill deals only partially with
the problem and the main systematic lacunae remain unaddressed. The most significant lacuna
relates to the present method of appointment of judges in the higher judiciary. The Committee
is of the considered opinion that the present Bill is bound to end up with limited success
because of the piecemeal nature of the proposed legislation, despite the genuineness of its
objectives. The issue of judges’ appointment, therefore, needs to be addressed comprehensively,
though separately, at the earliest because without it the efficacy of this Bill is seriously
impaired. [Para 23]
22. The Committee is of the view that the Government has to move beyond an incremental
approach and give urgent and due thought to a holistic legislation encompassing the appointment
process and other related matters to ensure judicial accountability for improved administration
of justice. [Para 24]

17
MINUTES

19
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 2 nd February, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
5. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
6. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
7. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
8. Dr. Monazir Hassan
9. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
10. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
11. Shri S. Semmalai
12. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
13. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
14. Shri Manish Tewari
15. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
16. Adv. P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
Ministry of Law And Justice
• Department of Justice
1. Shrimati Neela Gangadharan, Secretary;

20
2. Shrimati Snehlata Srivastava, Joint Secretary; and
3. Shri S.C. Srivastava, Joint Secretary.
***
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, Department of Justice, and the officers
of other two Departments of the Ministry of Law and Justice on behalf of the Committee. After an
introduction of the officers present, the Secretary made a presentation on The Judicial Standards and
Accountability Bill, 2010.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M. to meet again on the 14 th February, 2011.
*** Relate to some other matters.

21
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16 th March, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Dr. Monazir Hassan
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
8. Shri Devji M. Patel
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
11. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
12. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
A. Non-Official Witnesses
1. PRS Legislative Research Centre for Policy Research.
(i) Dr. M.R. Madhavan; and
(ii) Shri Anirudh Burman.
2. Shri Subash Chandra Agrawal.
3. Citizens Rights Association
Shri M.L. Gupta.
21

22
4. Shrimati Indira Unninayar, Advocate, Supreme Court and Delhi High Court.
5. Pre Legislative Briefing Service
(i) Shri Prashant Reddy; ami
(ii) Shri V arun Hallikari.
6. Shri Deepak Khosla.
7. Shri Dilbagh Singh.
8. Shri M.D. Devappa, Advocate.
9. Campaign for Judicial Accountability and Reform
Shri Prashant Bhushan.
B. Official Witnesses
I. Ministry of Law and Justice
• Department of Justice
1. Shrimati Snehlata Srivastava, Joint Secretary; and
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Deputy Secretary.
••••• Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
2. Shri Divakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses
who were invited to appear before the Committee for tendering oral evidence on the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010. She also welcomed the representatives of the Department of Justice and
the Legislative Department of the Government of India. Thereafter, she requested the witnesses to
apprise the Committee of their views on the Bill. The witnesses, then, made brief presentations before
the Committee on the various provisions of the Bill as contained in the succeeding paragraph.
3. Outlining the broad objectives of the Bill, the representative of the PRS Legislative Research
raised his concerns over the composition of the Oversight Committee, the Scrutiny Panel and the
Investigation Committee proposed in the Bill. Referring to the Parliamentary Standing Committee’s
recommendations on the Judges Inquiry Bill (2006), he suggested for making the composition of these
mechanisms more broad based by including non judicial members. He also argued for reducing the
penalties prescribed in the Bill for frivolous complaints saying that higher degree of penalty may
discourage people from making complaints.
4. The representative of the Citizens Rights Association despite being in agreement with the judicial
standards as laid down in the Bill, was critical of the mechanism provided for ensuring accountability
in the Bill. He emphasized on the simplification of removal procedure.
5. Mrs Indira Unninayar, in her presentation stated that the Bill does not lay down judicial
standards in precise and specific terms, and the mechanism and procedures proposed in the present
Bill to ensure the accountability of the judges were cumbersome and not transparent enough. She
strongly emphasized upon the need for a credible and independent mechanism for the purpose.
6. Shri Subhash Chhandra Agrawal while acknowledging the need for the present Bill, suggested
that the Bill requires to be redrafted if corruption in judiciary is to be addressed effectively. Shri
Aggarwal suggested that the Oversight Committee and the Scrutiny Panel could be made more
representative or alternatively, be replaced with a permanent National Judicial Commission empowered
to finally recommend to President for removal of the guilty judges.

23
7. Next in turn were the representatives of the Pre-Legislative Briefing Service (PLBS). During
their presentation they suggested that some of the terms mentioned in the Bill such as “misbehaviour”
and “Judicial Standards” needed to be defined inclusively and emphasized that judicial standards should
be strictly prescribed in the Bill. They also drew the attention of the Committee towards the penalty
clause in the Bill for dealing with frivolous complaints which according to them was too harsh and
needed to be reconsidered. The Members sought some clarifications vis-a-vis the points made by
them.
8. Sharing some of his experiences with the judiciary, Shri Deepak Khosala pleaded for vlaeo
recording of court proceedings so as to maintain transparency and drew the attention of the
Committee towards some provisions, particularly the provisions of clause 53 of the Bill (punishment
for frivolous and vexatious complaints) which according to him needed to be redefined if the Bill was
to be made an effective legislation. Shri Dilbagh Singh, another witness, emphasized upon the need
to strengthen the implementation of the Bill if, the objectives of the Bill were to be achieved. He also
pleaded for amendment of Articles 124(4) the Constitution of India and for a precise definition of
“misbehaviour”. The Members took note of the points made by them.
9. Referring to the mechanism proposed in the Bill to establish the accountability of Judges,
representative of the Campaign for Judicial Accountability and Reforms pointed out that the Bill
addresses the problem only partially. He stated that the system proposed in the Bill has problems at
several fronts. He was apprehensive over the independence of the Oversight Committee and the
Scrutiny Committee. In contrast to the procedure mentioned in the Bill regarding selection of the
Members of the said Committees, he proposed an alternative method which, in his view, would be
more viable in keeping the functioning of such Committees impartial. He also favoured the idea that
the Oversight Committee should be made a permanent body. The Members sought clarifications vis-
a-vis the points made by him.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.

24
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Department Related Parlmmentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday the 6 th April, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Shailendra Kumar
5. Shri Bhajan Lal
6. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
7. Shri Devji M.Patel
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Dr.Prabha Kishor Taviad
11. Shri Manish Tewari
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. Non-Official Witnesses
1. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Senior Advocate
2. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi, Senior Advocate
3. Shri Anil B, Divan, Senior Advocate
B. ** *
2. * * *
24
*** Relate to some other matters.

25
3. The Chairperson welcomed the legal luminaries who were invited to appear before the
Committee for sharing their views/suggestions on The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010.
She also welcomed the representatives of the Department of Justice and the Legislative Department
of Government of India. Thereafter, she requested the witnesses to apprise the Committee of their
views on the Bill.
4. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India made a power-point presentation
before the Committee on the various provisions of  the Bill. Referring the Bill as a big step forward
in the right direction, he expressed his whole hearted support to the proposed legislation. Applauding
the mechanism proposed in the Bill to deal with the individual complaints against the corrupt Judges,
he also specifically appreciated the Judicial Standards codified for the first time in the Bill. However,
he also gave some suggestions to make the proposed Bill more effective, like making the Scrutiny
Panel more broad based by associating people from public or the Advocate General.
5. Shri Anil B. Divan, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India favoured the need for a
permanent independent investigation agency instead of the mechanism as proposed in the Bill. He also
argued that the prevailing judiciary driven method of appointments of Judges needs to be reviewed as
it holds the key to the entire judicial reforms agenda.
6. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of  India while acknowledging the
relevance of the Bill in the present scenario indicated some issues which, in his view need to be
addressed if the Bill is to be an effective legislation. He did not favour the setting up of multiple
Committees as proposed in the Bill. Instead, he suggested a more empowered Committee equipped
with adequate power of conducting investigation, this Committee could even have investigative powers
as contained in the Criminal Procedure Code. He also opined that proper scrutiny of the declaration
of the assets by the Judges should be ensured to make them more accountable.
7. The Members took note of the points made by the witnesses. Thereafter, some Members
sought clarifications viz-a-viz the points made by them. The witnesses responded to the Members’
queries in detail.
8. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 12.36 
P.M.

26
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday the 28 th April, 2011 in Room No. ‘53’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
6. Dr. Monazir Hassan
7. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
8. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
9. Shri Lalu Prasad
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Shri Manish Tewari
13. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
14. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. WITNESSES
Shri Goolam E. Vahanvati, Attorney General of India.
B. ** *
26
*** Relates to some other matter.

27
• Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel; and
2. Shri Divakar Singh, Depurty Legislative Counsel.
C. ** *
I. The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Attorney
General of India who was invited to share his views/suggestions on the provisions of the Judicial
Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010. She also welcomed the representatives of the Department of
Justice and the Legislative Department of Government of India. Thereafter, she requested the Attorney
General of India to apprise the Committee of his views on the Bill.
3. The Attorney General made a brief outline of the objectives of the Bill under three categories-
to make judicial standards statutory, to ensure declaration of assets of the judges to promote
transparency, and to provide for a mechanism for  making complaints against individual judges. He,
thereafter, highlighted the various associated aspects of these objectives. Sharing his views on the
procedures/mechanisms provided in the proposed Bill, the Attorney General of India emphasized how
such mechanisms would pave the way for  taking cognizance on individual complaints against Judges
without compromising the sovereignty of Parliament. The Attorney General also shared his views on
the method of appointment of Judges and opined that the present method has been unable to function
effectively.
4. The Members took note of the points made by the witness. Thereafter. some Members sought
clarifications. The Attorney General of India responded to the Members’ queries in detail.
(The witness then withdrew)
II. ** *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 12.00 N
OON.
*** Relate to some other matters.

28
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th May, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Dr. Monazir Hassan
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
8. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
13. Shri Manish Tewari
14. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She informed the
Members of the Solicitor General’s inability to depose before the Committee on The Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010 in this meeting and his request for grant of exemption. Given the
28

29
constraint of time, it was decided to obtain written suggestions on the Bill from the Solicitor General
of India and also to work out another convenient date for his appearance before the Committee.
B. ** *
3. * * *
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The Committee adjourned at 12.42 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

30
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday the 1 st June, 2011 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
2. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
3. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
4. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
5. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
8. Shri Devji M. Patel
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri Lalu Prasad
11. Shri S. Semmalai
12. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh – In the Chair
13. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
14. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
15. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. WITNESS
Shri Parag P. Tripathi, Additional Solicitor General of India.
B. ** *
30
*** Relates to some other matter.

31
2. In the absence of Chairperson of the Committee, Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh chaired the meeting.
He welcomed the Members of the Committee and Shri Parag P. Tripathi who had been invited to
appear before the Committee for  tendering a presentation on The Judicial Standards and Accountability
Bill, 2010. Thereafter, the Chairman requested Shri Tripathi to apprise the Committee of his views on
the Bill.
3. Shri Parag P. Tripathi began with a brief comment on the need for  the introduction of the
present Bill. He was of the view that the Bill provides for  the much needed balance between the
principles of judicial accountability and judicial independence. In this context, he at the outset opined
that the title of the Bill may be modified as “The Protection of Judicial Independence, Standards and
Accountability Bill, 2010” as, such a nomenclature would allay the apprehensions of judges vis-a-vis
the objectives of the Bill.
4. He also suggested some changes in the preamble of the Bill. He suggested for  substituting the
words “A Bill to lay down and regulate the procedure” for  the words “A Bill to ensure and enhance
the independence of the judiciary to lay down and regulate the procedure”. He also requested the
Committee to consider the inclusion of the word “knowingly” in the sub-clauses (c), (d), (e), (h), (m)
and (n) of clause 3 of the Bill to give more clarity and to avoid conflicting interpretations in future.
5. While appreciating the Bill for  having mandatory provision for  judges to declare their assets,
he suggested few  more additions to bring greater transparency in the process prescribed for  declaration
of assets in the Bill. On the composition of the proposed National Judicial Oversight Committee, he
was of the view that the Member who is to be nominated by the President should be a distinguished
jurist.
6. Thereafter, some Members sought clarifications on the subject which were responded to by
the witness.
(The witness then withdrew)
7. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 12.09 
P.M.

32
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 8 th August, 2011 in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
4. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
7. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri S. Semmalai
10. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
11. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
12. Shri Manish Tewari
13. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
I. Consideration of the draft Report on Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010
2. At the outset, Members congratulated the newly appointed Chairman of the Committee. The
Chairman also extended welcome to the Members of the Committee and sought their co-operation in
the conduct of business of the Committee.
He then informed the Members regarding the business to be taken by Committee i.e. consideration
and adoption of the 4
th Report of the Committee and requested them to share their views/suggestions
32

33
*** Relates to some other matter.
on the draft Report on the Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010. The Members thereafter
made comments/suggestions on the draft Report as contained in the succeeding paragraphs.
3. Some Members were of the view that the mechanism of the Complaint Scrutiny Panel needs
to be made more transparent and balanced to ensure its effective functioning. They also suggested
alternative frameworks to deal with the individual complaints against the misbehaviour of Judges.
4. Apart from the issues pertaining to the Bill, a Member of the Committee emphasized that the
objective of the Bill remains incomplete until the core issue regarding the method of the appointment
of judges in the higher judiciary is not addressed. He was of the view that the prevailing method of
the appointment of judges should be replaced with a transparent process. These views were endorsed
by the Committee. It was noted that this issue was already before the Committee, separately.
5. There was a discussion on the provisions of the Bill which provide for the punishment in case
of frivolous/vexatious complaints. The Committee explored the ways to differentiate the complaints
made in good-faith which turn out to be false from those complaints that were frivolous/vexatious in
nature accompanied with bad intent and eventually to keep the former away from the penalty.
6. The Committee discussed the provisions contained in Sections 3(2), 19 and 39 of the Bill.
Some Members sought modifications in the language of certain paras of the Report to bring more
clarity and enhance the efficacy of the Committees’ recommendations.
7. The Committee finalized most of the recommendations of the Committee and desired modifications
in the draft Report taking into consideration the views/suggestions made by the Members. The
Committee, therefore, decided to have another sitting to finally discuss the draft report as revised on
the basis of the day’s discussions.
II. ** *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 5.18 
P.M.

34
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Thursday, the 25 th August, 2011 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
6. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
7. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
8. Dr. Monazir Hassan
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
11. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
13. Shri Devji M. Patel
14. Shri Harin Pathak
15. Shri S. Semmalai
16. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
17. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
34

35
2. * * *
Consideration and adoption of draft 47 th Report
3. The Committee then took up for consideration its draft 47 th Report on “The Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010”. The report was adopted unanimously with some minor changes.
4. The Committee decided to lay the said draft Report before the two Houses of Parliament on
the 30 th August, 2011. The Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence
Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte/Shri O.T. Lepcha in the Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi and
in her absence Shrimati Chandresh Kumari to lay the same on the table of the Lok Sabha.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the discussions was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 4.44 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

ANNEXURE

39
ANNEXURE-A
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
01 Dec. 2010
Bill No. 136 of 2010
THE JUDICIAL STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2010
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
JUDICIAL  STANDARDS  TO BE FOLLOWED  BY JUDGES
3. Judicial standards.
CHAPTER III
DECLARATION  OF ASSETS  AND LIABILITIES  BY JUDGES
4. Declaration of assets and liabilities.
5. Making available document or information in relation to a declaration of assets and
liabilities of Judges on website.
6. Maintenance of records.
CHAPTER IV
MAKING  OF COMPLAINT
7. Complaints.
8. Manner of making of complaint.
9. Reference to Scrutiny Panel.
CHAPTER V
S
CRUTINY  P ANEL
10. Constitution of Scrutiny Panel.
11. Composition of Scrutiny Panel.

40
CLAUSES
12. Functions of Scrutiny Panel.
13. Procedure of Scrutiny Panel.
14. Power relating to scrutiny of complaints.
15. Provision for officers and other employees for Scrutiny Panel.
16. Provision regarding frivolous and vexatious complaints.
CHAPTER VI
A. N
ATIONAL J UDICIAL  O VERSIGHT  C OMMITTEE , ITS POWERS  AND FUNCTIONS
AND PROCEDURE  FOR INQUIRY OF COMPLAINTS
17. Establishment of Oversight Committee.
18. Composition of Oversight Committee.
19. Forwarding of complaint relating to misbehaviour to Scrutiny Panel.
20. Records of complaints forwarded to Scrutiny Panel.
21. Certain complaints not to be forwarded to Scrutiny Panel.
B. C
ONSTITUTION  OF INVESTIGATION  COMMITTEE , ITS POWERS  AND FUNCTIONS
AND PROCEDURE  FOR INVESTIGATION
22. Investigation by investigation committee.
23. Powers of Oversight Committee and investigating committee.
24. Search and seizure by investigation committee.
25. Assistance to investigation committee by Government agencies.
26. Ex parte investigation.
27. Investigation into act or conduct of certain other persons in certain cases.
28. Submission of report by investigation committee.
C. I
NQUIRY  PROCEDURE  OF INVESTIGATION  COMMITTEE
29. Procedure in inquiries by investigation committee.
30. Investigation committee to have power to regulate its own procedure.
31. Central Government to appoint an advocate to conduct cases against Judge.
D. S
TAFF OF O VERSIGHT  C OMMITTEE
32. Staff of Oversight Committee.
E. P ENALTIES ON CONCLUSION  OF INQUIRY
33. Stoppage of assigning judicial work in certain cases.
34. Procedure on receipt of report of investigation committee.
35. Advice to President for removal of Judge.
36. Filing of complaint against complainant in certain cases.

41
F. O THER PROVISIONS  RELATING TO INQUIRY
CLAUSES
37. Proceedings before Oversight Committee to be judicial proceedings.
38. Power to call for assistance.
39. Confidentiality in complaint procedure.
40. Keeping identity of complainant confidential.
41. No action for contempt to lie in certain cases.
42. Investigation and inquiry by Oversight Committee not to affect criminal liability.
43. All records, documents; etc., related to complaint, scrutiny, investigation and inquiry
to be confidential.
44. Protection of action taken in good faith.
CHAPTER VII
P
ROCEDURE  FOR PRESENTATION OF AN ADDRESS  FOR REMOV AL OF A J UDGE
45. Laying of advice of Oversight Committee before Parliament.
46. Motion for removal of a Judge.
47. Investigation into misbehaviour or incapacity of Judge by investigation committee for
removal of Judges.
48. Consideration of report and procedure for presentation of an address for removal of
Judge.
49. Power of Joint Committee to make rules.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
50. Intentional insult or interruption to Oversight Committee.
51. Penalty for violation of confidentiality in complaint procedure.
52. Power of Oversight Committee to try certain cases.
53. Punishment for frivolous and vexatious complaints.
54. Offences by companies.
55. Offences by societies or trusts.
56. Appeal to Supreme Court.
57. Power of Central Government to make rules.
58. Power to remove difficulties.
59. Repeal and saving.
THE SCHEDULE.

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 136 of 2010
THE JUDICIAL STANDARDS ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to lay down judicial standards and provide for accountability of
Judges, and, establish credible and expedient mechanism for
investigating into individual complaints for misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court and to regulate the procedure for such investigation;
and for the presentation of an address by Parliament to the
President in relation to proceeding for removal of a Judge
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Judicial Standards and
Accountability Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
43
Short title and
commencement.

44
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “assets” includes immovable and movable property;
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) “immovable property” includes the land and
any building or other structure attached to the land or
permanently fastened to anything which is attached to
the land, and tenancies, lease holds or any other interest
in immovable property;
(ii ) “movable property” includes any other
property which is not immovable property as also
corporeal and incorporeal property of every description
and household goods and personal effects of the value
of each item of more than fifty thousand rupees;
(b) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Council of
States;
(c) “competent authority” means in relation to,—
(i) the Judge of the High Court, the Chief Justice
of that High Court;
(ii) the Chief Justice of the High Court, the Chief
Justice of India;
(iii) the Judge of the Supreme Court, the Chief
Justice of India;
(iv) the Chief Justice of India, the President of
India;
(d) “incapacity” means physical or mental incapacity
which is, or is likely to be, of a permanent character;
(e) “investigation committee” means the investigation
committee constituted under section 22;
(f) “inquiry” means an inquiry for proof of
misbehaviour or incapacity;
(g) “Judge” means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of
a High Court and includes the Chief Justice of India and the
Chief Justice of a High Court;
(h) “judicial standards” means the values of judicial life
specified in section 3, and the Schedule;
(i) “liabilities” includes financial guarantees given and all
loans raised from any bank, financial institution or any other
source;
(j) “misbehaviour” means,—
Definitions

45
(i) conduct which brings dishonour or disrepute
to the judiciary; or
(ii) wilful or persistent failure to perform the
duties of a Judge; or
(iii) wilful abuse of judicial office; or
(iv) corruption or lack of integrity which includes
delivering judgments for collateral or extraneous
reasons, making demands for consideration in cash or
kind for giving judgments or any other action on the
part of the Judge which has the effect of subverting
the administration of justice; or
(v) committing an offence involving moral
turpitude; or
(vi) failure to furnish the declaration of assets
and liabilities in accordance with the provisions of this
Act; or
(vii) wilfully giving false information in the
declaration of assets and liabilities under this Act; or
(viii ) wilful suppression of any material fact,
whether such fact relates to a period before assumption
of office, which would have bearing on his integrity; or
(ix) wilful breach of judicial standards;
(k) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette;
(l) “Oversight Committee” means the National Judicial
Oversight Committee established under section 17;
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(n) “Scrutiny Panel” means a panel constituted under
sub-section ( 1) or subsection ( 2) of section for the scrutiny
of complaints;
(o) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the
People.
CHAPTER II
J
UDICIAL STANDARDS TO BE FOLLOWED  BY J UDGES
3. ( 1) Every Judge shall continue to practice universally
accepted values of judicial life as specified in the Schedule to this
Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provision, no Judge shall—
(a) contest the election to any office of a club, society
or other association or hold such elective office except in a
society or association connected with the law or any court;
Judicial
standards.

46
(b) have close association with individual members of
the Bar, particularly with those who practice in the same
court in which he is a Judge;
(c) permit any member of his immediate family
(including spouse, son, daughter, son-in-law or daughter-in-
law or any other close relative), who is a member of the Bar,
to appear before him or associated in any manner with a
cause to be dealt with by him;
(d) permit any member of his family, who is a member
of the Bar, to use the residence in which the Judge actually
resides or use other facilities provided to the Judge, for
professional work of such member;
(e) hear and decide a matter in which a member of his
family, or his close relative or a friend is concerned;
(f) enter into public debate or express his views in
public on political matters or on matters which are pending or
are likely to arise for judicial determination by him:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall
apply to,—
(i) the views expressed by a Judge in his
individual capacity on issues of public interest (other
than as a Judge) during discussion in private forum or
academic forum;
(ii) the views expressed by a Judge relating to
administration of court or its efficient functioning;
(g) give interview, to the media in relation to any of his
judgment delivered, or order made, or direction issued, by
him, in any case adjudicated by him;
(h) accept gifts or hospitality except from his relatives;
(i) hear and decide a matter in which a company or
society or trust in which he holds or any member of his
family holds shares or interest, unless he has disclosed his
such holding or interest, and no objection to his hearing and
deciding the matter is raised;
(j) speculate in securities or indulge in insider trading in
securities;
(k) engage, directly or indirectly, in trade or business,
either by himself or in association with any other person:
Provided that the publication of a legal treatise or any
activity in the nature of a hobby shall not be construed as
trade or business for the purpose of this clause;
(1) seek any financial benefit in the form of a perquisite
or privilege attached to his office unless it is clearly available
or admissible;

47
(m) hold membership in any organisation that practices
invidious discrimination on the basis of religion or race or
caste or sex or place of birth;
(n) have bias in his judicial work or judgments on the
basis of religion or race or caste or sex or place of birth.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, “relative”
means—
(i) spouse of the Judge;
(ii) brother or sister of the Judge;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the Judge;
(iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of
the Judge;
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the Judge;
(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the
spouse of the Judge;
(vii) spouse of the person referred to in clauses
(ii) to (vi).
CHAPTER III
D
ECLARATION OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  BY JUDGES
4. ( 1) Every Judge shall make a declaration of his assets and
liabilities in the manner as provided by or under this Act.
(2) A Judge shall, within thirty days from the date on which
he makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation to enter upon his
office, furnish to the competent authority the information relating
to—
(a) the assets of which he, his spouse and his dependent
children are, jointly or severally, owners or beneficiaries;
(b) his liabilities and that of his spouse and his
dependent children.
(3) A Judge holding his office as such, at the time of the
commencement of this Act, shall furnish information relating to
such assets and liabilities, as referred to in sub-section ( 2) to the
competent authority within thirty days of the coming into force of
this Act.
(4) Every Judge shall file with the competent authority, on or
before the 31st July of every year, an annual return of such assets
and liabilities, as referred to in sub-section ( 2), as on the 31st
March of that year.
(5) The information under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3)
and annual return under sub-section ( 4) shall be furnished in such
form and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
Declaration of
assets and
liabilities.

48
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “dependent
children” means sons and daughters who have no separate means of
earning and are wholly dependent on the Judge for their livelihood.
5. The competent authority shall exhibit the document or
information in relation to a declaration of assets and liabilities of
Judges,
(a) in the case of Judges and Chief Justices of the High
Courts, on the website of the High Court in which such
Judges and Chief Justice are serving;
(b) in the case of Judges of the Supreme Court and
Chief Justice of India, on the website of the Supreme Court.
6. The competent authority shall keep the documents or
information forms containing M the details of the assets and
liabilities and other particulars in relation thereto filed by of the
Judges in its safe custody for such period as may be decided by the
Oversight Committee.
CHAPTER IV
M
AKING OF COMPLAINT
7. Any person making an allegation of misbehaviour or
incapacity in respect of a Judge may file a complaint in this regard
to the Oversight Committee.
8. The complaint under section 7 shall
(a) be in such form and filed in such manner as may
be prescribed;
(b) set forth particulars of the misbehaviour or
incapacity which is the subject matter of allegation;
(c) be verified at the foot of the complaint by the
complainant and shall specify, by reference to the numbered
paragraphs of the complaint, what he verifies of his own
knowledge and what he verifies upon information and shall
refer to the source of the information.
9. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the Oversight
Committee shall refer R all such complaints to the appropriate
Scrutiny Panel constituted under Chapter V for scrutiny.
CHAPTER V
S
CRUTINY  P ANEL
10. There shall be constituted a panel to be called “Complaints
Scrutiny Panel” in the Supreme Court and in every High Court
to scrutinise the complaints against a Judge received under this
Act.
Making available
document or
information in
relation to a
declaration of
assets and
liabilities of
Judges on
website.
Maintenance of
records.
Complaints.
Manner of
making of
complaint.
Reference to
Scrutiny Panel.
Constitution of
Scrutiny Panel.

49
11. ( 1) The Scrutiny Panel in the Supreme Court shall consist
of a former Chief Justice of India and two Judges of the Supreme
Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India.
(2) The Scrutiny Panel in every High Court shall consist of a
former Chief Justice of that High Court and two Judges of that
High Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of that High Court.
12. ( 1) If the Scrutiny Panel, after scrutiny of the complaint
referred to it for scrutiny under section 9, and after making scrutiny
of the complaint, as it deems appropriate, is satisfied that—
(a) there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against
the Judge, it shall, after recording reasons therefor, submit a
report on its findings to the Oversight Committee for making
inquiry against the Judge in accordance with the provisions of
this Act;
(b) the complaint is frivolous or vexatious, or, is not
made in good faith, or there are not sufficient grounds for
inquiring into the complaint, or the complaint relates only to
the merits of the judgment or a procedural order, and, then,
it shall after recording reasons therefor submit a report on its
findings to the Oversight Committee for not proceeding with
the complaint and treating the matter as closed.
(2) The Scrutiny Panel shall submit its report under clause ( a)
or clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1), to the Oversight Committee in this
behalf within a maximum period of three months from the date of
receipt of the complaint from the Oversight Committee.
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Scrutiny Panel
shall have power to regulate its own procedure in scrutinising the
complaints referred to it for scrutiny under section 9.
14. The Scrutiny Panel shall, while scrutinising the complaints
forwarded to it for scrutiny under section 9, have all the powers of
a civil court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
and in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person from any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof
from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or other documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Procedure of
Scrutiny Panel.
Composition of
Scrutiny Panel.
Functions of
Scrutiny Panel.
Power relating
to scrutiny of
complaints.5 of 1908.

50
15. ( 1) The Chief Justice of India shall, determine the nature
and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist
the Scrutiny Panel referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 11 in the
discharge of its functions and provide the Scrutiny Panel with such
officers and other employees as he may think fit.
(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall, determine the
nature and categories of the officers and other employees required
to assist the Scrutiny Panel referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section
11 in the discharge of its functions and provide the Scrutiny Panel
with such officers and other employees as he may think fit.
16. If the Scrutiny Panel is of the opinion that a complaint
was filed frivolously or vexatiously or only with a view to
scandalise or intimidate a Judge, it may refer the case to the
Oversight Committee for further action.
CHAPTER VI
A. N
ATIONAL J UDICIAL O VERSIGHT  C OMMITTEE, ITS POWERS AND
FUNCTIONS  AND PROCEDURE  FOR INQUIRY OF COMPLAINTS
17. With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification, appoint, there shall be established a National
Judicial Oversight Committee.
18. (1) The National Judicial Oversight Committee shall
consist of the following, namely:—
(a) a retired Chief Justice of India appointed by the
President after ascertaining the views of the Chief Justice of
India — Chairperson;
(b) a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the
Chief Justice of India — Member;
(c) the Chief Justice of a High Court nominated by the
Chief Justice of India — Member ex officio ;
(d) the Attorney-General for India — ex officio Member;
(e) an eminent person nominated by the President —
Member:
Provided that—
(a) where the ,allegations are against a Judge of the
Supreme Court, who is a member of the Oversight Committee,
then, the Chief Justice of India shall nominate another Judge of
the Supreme Court in his place as a member of that committee;
or
(b) where the allegations are against the Chief Justice of
a High Court, who is a member of the Oversight Committee,
then, the Chief Justice of India shall nominate a Chief Justice
of another High Court in his place as a member of that
committee.
Provision for
officers and
otehr employees
for Scrutiny
Panel.
Provision
regarding
frivolous and
vexatious
complaints.
Establishment of
Oversight
Committee.
Composition of
Oversight
Committee.

51
(2) After the commencement of the proceedings relating to a
complaint against a Judge,—
(a) if any change in the composition of the Oversight
Committee arises due to elevation of a member of the
Oversight Committee, as the Chief Justice of India or a Judge
of a Supreme Court, as the case may be; or
(b) if any change arises in the composition of the
Oversight Committee due to refusal or retirement or
resignation or any other reason,
the proceedings of the Oversight Committee shall continue from the
stage from which it was pending before such change and the
Chairperson of the Oversight Committee shall make such incidental
changes, as he deems necessary, to continue the proceedings,
19. The Oversight Committee shall, within three months of
the receipt of a complaint relating to misbehaviour of—
(a) an individual Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief
Justice of a High Court, refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny
Panel of the Supreme Court to scrutinise and report thereon;
(b) an individual Judge of a High Court, refer the
complaint, to the Scrutiny Panel of the High Court in which
such Judge is acting as such, to scrutinise and report thereon.
20. The Oversight Committee shall maintain a record of the
complaints referred to the Scrutiny Panel.
21. A complaint against the Chief Justice of India shall not be
referred to the Scrutiny Panel for scrutiny but shall be scrutinised
by the Oversight Committee.
B. C
ONSTITUTION  OF INVESTIGATION  COMMITTEE , ITS POWERS AND
FUNCTIONS  AND PROCEDURE  FOR INVESTIGATION
22. (1) The Oversight Committee, shall for the purpose of
inquiry for misbehaviour by a Judge, constitute an investigation
committee (by whatever name called) to investigate into the
complaint in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel has recommended
in its report under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 12 for
making inquiry against the Judge in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
(2) The composition and tenure of the investigation committee
shall be such as may be decided by the Oversight Committee:
Provided that the number of the investigation committees, in
no case, at a time, shall exceed three:
Provided further that the Oversight Committee may, having
regard to the nature of misbehaviour of a Judge, may constitute
different investigation committees for inquiry into different complaints.
Forwarding of
complaint
relating to
misbehaviour to
Scrutiny Panel.
Investigation by
investigation
committee.
Certain
complaints not
to be forwarded
to Scrutiny
Panel.
Records of
complaints
forwarded to
Scrutiny Panel.

52
23. The Oversight Committee, shall, for the purpose of
proceedings under this Act and the investigation committee, while
conducting any investigation under this Chapter, have all the
powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 and in particular, in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person from any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof
from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or other documents;
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
24. (1) If the investigation committee has reason to believe
that any documents which, in its opinion, will be useful for, or
relevant to, any preliminary investigation or inquiry, are secreted in
any place, it may authorise any officer subordinate to it, or any
officer of an agency referred to in section 25, to search for and to
seize such documents.
(2) If the investigation committee is satisfied that any
document seized under sub-section ( 1) would be evidence for the
purpose of any investigation and that it would be necessary to retain
the original document in its custody, it may so retain the said
document till the completion of such investigation or retain a copy
of such document, as it may deem fit.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
relating to searches shall, so far as may be, apply to searches under
this section subject to the modification that sub-section ( 5) of
section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if, for the word
“Magistrate”, wherever it occurs, the words “investigation
committee or any officer authorised by it” were substituted.
25. The investigation committee shall be entitled to make a
request to the Oversight Committee for assistance to it and the
Oversight Committee may invoke its powers in this behalf under
section 38 of this Act.
26. If a Judge, to whom notice is issued by the investigation
committee referred to in section 22, refuses to appear before it or
does not co-operate with it in conducting investigation, then, the
investigation committee may proceed ex parte .
Powers of
Oversight
Committee and
investigating
committee.
Search and
seizure by
investigation
committee.
Assistance to
investigation
committee by
Government
agencies.
Ex parte
investigation.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.

53
27. The investigation committee may cause investigation into
any act or conduct of any person, other than the Judge concerned,
in so far as it considers necessary so to do for the purpose of its
investigation into any allegations made against a Judge and shall give
such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and to produce
evidence in his defence.
28. The investigation committee, after completion of the
inquiry in respect of a complaint, shall submit its findings to the
Oversight Committee.
C. I
NQUIRY PROCEDURE  OF INVESTIGATION  COMMITTEE
29. ( 1) The investigation committee shall frame definite
charges against the Judge on the basis of which the inquiry is
proposed to be held.
(2) Every such inquiry shall be conducted in camera  by the
investigation committee.
(3) Charges framed under sub-section ( 1) together with the
statement of grounds on which each such charge is based shall be
communicated to the Judge and he shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of presenting a written statement of defence within such
time as may be specified by the investigation committee.
(4) The investigation committee shall hold every such inquiry
as expeditiously as possible and in any case complete the inquiry
within a period of six months from the date of receipt of the
complaint:
Provided that the Oversight Committee, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, may extend the period for completion of the
inquiry by a further period of six months.
30. Save as otherwise provided, the investigation committee
shall have power to regulate its own procedure in making the
inquiry and shall give reasonable opportunity to the Judge of cross
examining witnesses, adducing evidence and of being heard in his
defence.
31. The Central Government may, if requested by the
investigation committee, appoint an advocate to conduct the
cases against the Judge.
D. S
TAFF OF O VERSIGHT  C OMMITTEE
32. ( 1) The Oversight Committee shall, for the purpose
of performing its functions under this Act, appoint a Secretary
and such other officers and employees possessing such
qualifications, as the President may determine, from time to
time, in consultation with the Oversight Committee.
Investigation
into act or
conduct of
certain other
persons in
certain cases.
Submission of
report by
investigation
committee.
Procedure in
inquiries by
investigation
committee.
Investigation
committee to
have power to
regulate its own
procedure.
Central
Government to
appoint an
advocate to
conduct cases
against Judge.
Staff of
Oversight
Committee.

54
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary,
officers and employees referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be such
as the President may determine, from time to time, in consultation
with the Oversight Committee.
(3) In the discharge of their functions under this Act, the
Secretary, the officers and employees referred to in sub-section ( 1)
shall be subject to the administrative control and direction of the
Oversight Committee.
(4) The Oversight Committee shall provide such number of its
officers and other employees to assist the investigation committee as
the Oversight Committee considers appropriate having regard to the
nature of investigation in a case.
E. P
ENALTIES ON CONCLUSION  OF INQUIRY
33. During the pendency of the inquiry by the investigation
committee, the Oversight  Committee may recommend stoppage of
assigning judicial work including cases assigned to the Judge
concerned if it appears to the Oversight Committee that it is
necessary in the interest of fair and impartial scrutiny of complaints
or investigation or inquiry.
34. ( 1) If the Oversight Committee on receipt of the report
from the investigation committee is satisfied that-
(a) no charges have been proved, it shall dismiss the
complaint and matter be closed and no further action shall be
taken against the Judge and the complainant shall be
informed accordingly;
(b) all or any of the charges have been proved but the
Oversight Committee is of the opinion that the charges proved
do not warrant removal of the Judge, it may, by order, issue
advisories or warnings.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
section ( 1), if the Oversight Committee, on receipt of the report
from the investigation committee is satisfied that there has been a
prima facie  commission of any offence under any law for the time
being in force by a Judge, it may recommend to the Central
Government for prosecution of the Judge in accordance with the
law for the time being in force.
(3) In a case where an inquiry or investigation against the
Judge has been initiated and such Judge has demitted office during
such inquiry or investigation, such inquiry or investigation may be
continued if the Oversight Committee is of the opinion that the
misbehaviour is serious in nature and requires to be inquired into or
investigated and the Oversight Committee may after conclusion of
inquiry forward its findings to the Central Government to take
further action in the matter under relevant law for the time being in
force.
Stoppage of
assigning judicial
work in certain
cases.
Procedure on
receipt of report
of investigation
committee.

55
35. If the Oversight Committee is satisfied that all or any of
the charges of misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge have been
proved and that they are of serious nature warranting his removal,
it shall request the judge to voluntarily resign and if he fails to do
so, then, advise the President to proceed for the removal of the
Judge and the President shall refer the matter to Parliament.
36. If the Scrutiny Panel refers a case to the Oversight
Committee under section 16, the Oversight Committee shall consider
the matter further and if it concurs with the conclusion of the
Scrutiny Panel, it may authorise the filing of a criminal complaint
against the original complainant before a competent court.
F. O
THER PROVISIONS  RELATING TO INQUIRY
37. All proceedings under this Act shall be deemed to be
judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of
the Indian Penal Code, and the Oversight Committee shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
38.  The Oversight Committee shall be entitled to take
assistance of such officers of the Central Government or State
Government or any agency thereof or authority as it deems fit.
39. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, the complainant and every person
who participates in the scrutiny or investigation or inquiry as a
witness or as a legal practitioner or in any other capacity,
whether or not he seeks confidentiality about his name, shall
undertake to the Oversight Committee or Scrutiny Panel or
investigation committee that he shall not reveal his own name,
the name of the Judge complained against, the contents of the
complaint or any of the documents or proceedings to anybody
else including the media without the prior written approval of the
Oversight Committee.
40.  The Oversight Committee or the Scrutiny Panel or
investigation committee may, at the request of a complainant, direct
that the complainant be accorded such protection, as it deems
appropriate, including keeping his identity confidential, from every
body and also the Judge against whom the complaint is made.
41. After the commencement of scrutiny of complaints under
this Act, no action for contempt of court shall lie or shall be
proceeded with in respect of the allegations, which are the subject
matter of the investigation or inquiry.
42. Any scrutiny, investigation or inquiry pending before the
Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee or Oversight Committee
shall not affect the criminal liability in respect of such allegations
which are the subject matter of the investigation or inquiry.
Advice to
President for
removal of
Judge.
Filing of
complaint
against
complainant in
certain cases.
Proceedings
before Oversight
Committee to be
judicial
proceedings.
Power to call
for assistance.
Confidentiality
in complaint
procedure.
Keeping identity
of complainant
confidential.
No action for
contempt to lie
in certain cases.
Investigation and
Inquiry by
Oversight
Committee not
to affect
criminal liability.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

56
43. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to
Information Act, 2005 or any other law for the time being in force,
all papers, documents and records of proceedings related to a
complaint, preliminary investigation and inquiry shall be confidential
and shall not be disclosed by any person in any proceeding except
as directed by the Oversight Committee:
Provided that the findings of the investigation committee and
the orders passed by the Oversight Committee under clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 34 shall be made public.
44. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Chairperson or any member of the Oversight Committee,
Scrutiny Panel, investigation committee or against any officer or
employee, agency or person engaged by such committees or panel
for the purpose of conducting scrutiny or investigation or inquiry in
respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
CHAPTER VII
P
ROCEDURE  FOR PRESENTATION OF AN ADDRESS FOR REMOVAL OF A J UDGE
45. The President, on receipt of advice under section 35, shall
cause the findings of the Oversight Committee along with the
accompanying materials to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
46. On laying of the advice of the Oversight Committee along
with the accompanying material, the Central Government may move
a motion in either House of Parliament for taking up the said advice
for consideration by the House.
47. ( 1). Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 or
section 46, if notice is given of a motion for presenting an address
to the President praying for the removal of a Judge signed,—
(a) in the case of a notice given in the House of the
People, by not less than one hundred members of that House;
(b) in the case of a notice given in the Council of
States, by not less than fifty members of that Council,
then, the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman may, after
consulting such persons, if any, as he thinks fit and after
considering such materials, if any, as may be available to him, either
admit the motion or refuse to admit the same.
(2) If the motion referred to in sub-section ( 1) is admitted,
the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman shall keep the
motion pending and the matter shall be referred to the Oversight
Committee for constitution of an investigation committee under
section 22.
(3) The Oversight Committee, after receipt of reference
under sub-section (2), constitute an investigation committee under
All records,
documents, etc.,
related to
complaint,
scrutiny,
investigation and
inquiry to be
confidential.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Laying of advice
of Oversight
Committee
before
Parliament.
Motion for
removal of a
Judge.
Investigation
into mis-
behaviour or
incapacity of
Judge by
investigation
committee for
removal of
Judges.
22 of 2005.

57
section 22 and the investigation committee shall conduct an inquiry
in accordance with the provisions contained under Chapter VI and
submit its report to the Oversight Committee for being submitted to
the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be, for consideration.
(4) Where it is alleged that a Judge is unable to discharge the
duties of his office efficiently due to any physical or mental
incapacity and the allegation is denied, the investigation committee
may arrange for the medical examination of the Judge by such
Medical Board as may be appointed for the purpose by the Speaker
or, as the case may be, the Chairman.
(5) The Medical Board shall undertake such medical
examination of the Judge as may be considered necessary and
submit a report to the investigation committee stating therein
whether the incapacity is such as to render the Judge unfit to
continue in office.
(6) If the Judge refuses to undergo medical examination
considered necessary by the Medical Board, the Board shall submit
a report to the investigation committee stating therein the
examination which the Judge has refused to undergo, and the
investigation committee may, on receipt of such report, presume
that the Judge suffers from such physical or mental incapacity as
is alleged in the motion referred to in sub-section ( 1).
48. ( 1) If the report of the investigation committee contains
a finding that the Judge is not guilty of any misbehaviour or does
not suffer from any incapacity, then, no further steps shall be taken
in either House of Parliament in relation to the report and the motion
pending in the House or the Houses of Parliament shall not be
proceeded with.
(2) If the report of the investigation committee contains a
finding that the Judge is guilty of any misbehaviour or suffers from
any incapacity, then, the motion referred to in section 46 shall
together with the report of the investigation committee, be taken up
for consideration by the House or the Houses of Parliament in
which it is pending.
(3) If the motion is adopted by each House of Parliament in
accordance with the provisions of clause ( 4) of article 124 or, as
the case may be, in accordance with that clause read with article
218 of the Constitution, then, the misbehaviour or incapacity of the
Judge shall be deemed to have been proved and an address praying
for the removal of the Judge shall be presented in the prescribed
manner to the President by each House of Parliament in the same
session in which the motion has been adopted.
49. ( 1) There shall be constituted a Joint Committee of both
the Houses of Parliament in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter contained for the purpose of making rules to carry out
the purposes of this Chapter.
Consideration of
report and
procedure for
presentation of
an address for
removal of
Judge.
Power or Joint
Committee to
make rules.

58
(2) The Joint Committee shall consist of fifteen members of
whom ten shall be nominated by the Speaker and five shall be
nominated by the Chairman.
(3) The Joint Committee shall elect its own Chairman and
shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
sub-section ( 1), the Joint Committee may make rules to provide for
the following, among other matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of transmission of a motion adopted in
one House to the other House of Parliament;
(b) the, manner of presentation of an address to the
President for the removal of a Judge;
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the
members of the Committee and the witnesses who may be
required to attend such Committee;
(d) the facilities which may be accorded to the Judge
for defending himself;
(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be,
provided for by rules or in respect of which provision is, in
the opinion of the Joint Committee, necessary.
(5) Any rules made under this section shall not take effect
until they are approved and confirmed both by the Speaker and the
Chairman and are published in the Official Gazette, and such
publication of the rules shall be conclusive proof that they have
been duly made.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
50.  ( 1) Whoever intentionally insults, or causes any
interruption, to the Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee or
Oversight Committee while the Oversight Committee or Scrutiny
Panel or investigation committee or any of their members is doing
scrutiny or conducting any investigation or inquiry under this Act,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 199 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply in relation to an
offence referred to in sub-section ( 1) as they apply in relation to an
offence referred to in sub-section ( 2) of the said section 199,
subject to the modification that no complaint in respect of such
offence shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the
previous sanction of the Oversight Committee.
Intentional insult
or interruption
to Oversight
Committee.
2 of 1974.

59
51. If any complainant or other person, who participates in
the scrutiny or investigation or inquiry as a witness or as a lawyer
or in any other capacity, contravenes the provisions of section 39
or section 40 or section 43, shall be liable for punishment with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
52. When any such offence as is described in sub-section
(1) of section 50 is committed, in the view, or, in the presence,
of the Oversight Committee, then the said Oversight Committee,
may cause the offender to be detained in custody and may at any
time on the same day take cognizance of the offence and after
giving the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause as
to why he should not be punished under this section, try such
offender summarily so far as may be in accordance with the
procedure specified for summary trials under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, and sentence him to simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
53. ( 1) Any person who makes a complaint which is found,
after following the procedure under this Act to be frivolous or
vexatious or made with an intent to scandalise or intimidate the
Judge against whom such complaint is filed, shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years and also to fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(2) The provisions of this section shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
54. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act which has been
committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence
was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that where a company has different establishments
or branches or different units in any establishment or branch, the
concerned Head or the person in-charge of such establishment,
branch or unit nominated by the company as responsible shall be
liable for contravention in respect of such establishment, branch or
unit:
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in
this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
Penalty for
violation of
confidentiality in
complaint
procedure.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Power of
Oversight
Committee to
try certain
cases.
Punishment for
frivolous and
vexatious
complaints.
Offences by
Companies.

60
consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes
a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.
55. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a society or trust, every person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the society or
trust for the conduct of the business of the society or the trust, as
well as the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where any offence under this Act has been committed by a society
or trust and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on
the part of any director, manager, secretary, trustee or other
officer of the society or trust, such director, manager, secretary,
trustee or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) “society” means any body corporate registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and, “trust” means
any body registered under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;
(b) “director”, in relation to a society or trust, means
a member of its governing board other than an ex officio
member representing the interests of the Central or State
Government or the appropriate statutory authority.
56.  Any person convicted on a trial held under sub-
section ( 1) of section 53 may, notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, appeal, within sixty days
of order of such conviction, to the Supreme Court.
Offences by
societies or
trusts.
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.
Appeal to
Supreme Court.

61
57.  ( 1) The Central Government may make rules, in
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, to carry out the
provisions of this Act (other than the provisions contained under
Chapter VII).
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, rules made under this section may provide for all
or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which, information is to be
furnished or, annual return to be filed, under section 4;
(b) the form and manner in which complaint shall be
filed under section 8;
(c) other matters in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel
shall, for the purpose of scrutiny of complaint, have powers
of a civil court under section 14;
(d) other matters in respect of which the Oversight
Committee shall, for the purpose of inquiry or investigation of
complaint have powers of a civil court under clause (f) of
section 23;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by rules or in respect of which provision is to
be made by rules.
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
58.  ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, by an order published
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
a period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Power of Central
Government to
make rules.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

62
59. ( 1) The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Judges (Inquiry)
Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the repealed Act) the rules
made by the Joint Committee under section 7 of the repealed Act
shall continue to be in force until rules are framed under section 49
of this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken or purported to have been done or taken including any order
or notice made or issued or any inquiry initiated under the repealed
Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken or initiated under
the corresponding provisions of this Act.
(4) The mention of particular matters in sub-sections ( 2) and
(3) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect
of repeal.
Repeal and
saving.
51 of 1968.
51 of 1968.
10 of 1897.

63
63
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 3 ( 1)]
JUDICIAL STANDARDS
1. Norms, including punctuality and commitment to work, guidelines
and conventions essential for the conduct and behaviour of
Judges, being pre-requisite for an independent, strong and
respected judiciary, having integrity and detachment and impartial
administration of justice as reflected in the Restatement of
Values already adopted by the Conference of Chief Justices held
in 1999 shall be practised by every Judge.
2. All times be conscious that he is under the public gaze and not
do any act or omission which is unbecoming of the high office
he occupies and the public esteem in which that office is held.
3. A degree of aloofness consistent with the dignity of his office
shall be practised by every Judge.
4. Judgments should speak for themselves.

64
64
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 was enacted with a view to lay
down a procedure for removal, for proved misbehaviour or incapacity,
of Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court by way of
address of the Houses of Parliament to the President. There is,
however, no legal provision at present for dealing with complaints filed
by the public against Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme
Court. The need for a statutory mechanism to address complaints of
the public in this regard has been felt to bring greater transparency in
the judiciary.
2. The Full Court meeting of Supreme Court of India on 7 May,
1997 had adopted “the Restatement of Values of Judicial Life”. The
above Restatement lays down certain judicial standards which are to
be followed by the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
However, this Restatement of Values of Judicial Life does not have any
legal authority and cannot be enforced. It is felt that the judicial
standards also be made a part of the statute to give it the requisite
legal sanction. This measure is also likely to increase public confidence
in the judiciary considerably as the Judges would be required to follow
the prescribed judicial standards.
3. There is also no legal provision at present that requires
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts to declare their assets
and liabilities. The Resolution adopted at the Full Court meeting of the
Supreme Court of India on 7 May, 1997 requires every Judge to
declare his assets within a reasonable time of assuming office and
thereafter whenever acquisition of substantial nature is made. The
Second Administrative Reforms Commission, in its Fourth Report on
Ethics in Governance, endorsed the above resolution after noting that
independence of Judiciary is inextricably linked with judicial ethics and
any conduct on the part of a Judge which demonstrates lack of
integrity and dignity will undermine the trust reposed in the judiciary
by the citizens and, therefore, the conduct of a judge should be above
reproach. In  the Writ Petition (C) No. 288/09 filed on behalf of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Delhi High Court challenging the order
dated 6 January, 2009 passed by the Central Information Commission
under the Right to Information Act, 2005, it has been asserted on
behalf of the Supreme Court that the Judiciary has no objection to the
disclosure of assets of Judges provided this is done in a formal
manner by an Act of Parliament with adequate safeguards. In  this
backdrop, it is considered necessary to enact a law in this regard to
meet with the larger public interest as well as ensuring and maintaining
the independence of the judiciary.
4. The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 seeks to
repeal the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, while retaining its basic features

65
and aims to achieve all the above objectives of creating a statutory
mechanism for enquiring into individual complaints against Judges of
the High Courts and the Supreme Court and recommending appropriate
action, enabling declaration of assets and liabilities of Judges and
laying down the judicial standards to be followed by the Judges. All
these measures will increase accountability of Judges of the High
Courts and the Supreme Court thereby further strengthening the
independence of the judiciary.
5. The proposed Bill would strengthen the institution of judiciary
in India by making it more accountable thereby increasing the confidence
of the public in the institution.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; M. VEERAPPA MOILY .
The 10th November, 2010.

66
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. K.11015/5/2009-US.II dated the
16th November, 2010 from Dr. M. Veerappa Moily, Minister of Law
and Justice to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of
the proposed Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010 has
recommended the introduction and consideration of the Bill under
article 117(1) and (3) of the Constitution.
66

67
67
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2.—This clause defines certain expressions used in the
proposed legislation, which, inter alla, include the expressions “assets”,
“immovable property”, “movable property”, “competent authority”,
“incapacity”, “investigation committee”, “inquiry”, “judicial standards”,
“liabilities” and “misbehaviour”, etc.
Clause 3.—This clause specifies the judicial standards. It provides
that every Judge shall continue to practice universally accepted values
of judicial life as specified in the Schedule to the proposed legislation.
The judicial standards, inter alia, include that no Judge shall-(a)
contest the election to any office of a club, society or other association
or hold such elective office except in a society or association connected
with the law or any court; (b) have close association with individual
members of the Bar, particularly with those who practice in the same
court in which he is a Judge; (c) permit any member of his immediate
family (including spouse, son, daughter, son-in-law or daughter-in-law
or any other close relative), who is a member of the Bar, to appear
before him or associated in any manner with a cause to be dealt with
by him; (d) permit any member of his family, who is a member of
the Bar, to use the residence in which the Judge actually resides or
use other facilities provided to the Judge, for professional work of
such member; (e) hear and decide a matter in which a member of his
family, or his close relative or a friend is concerned; (f) enter into
public debate or express his views in public on political matters or on
matters which are pending or are likely to arise for judicial determination
by him, etc. It further defines the term “relative” for the purposes of
this clause.
Clause 4.—This clause makes provision for declaration of assets
and liabilities by Judges. It provides that every Judge shall make a
declaration of his assets and liabilities in the manner as provided by or
under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that a Judge shall, within thirty days, from
the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation to
enter upon his office, furnish to the competent authority the information
relating to the assets of which he, his spouse and his dependent
children are, jointly or severally, owners or beneficiaries and his
liabilities and that of his spouse and his dependent children.
It also provides that every Judge shall file with the competent
authority, on or before the 31st July of every year, an annual return
of such assets and liabilities, as on the 31st March of that year in the
form and manner as may be provided in the rules.
Clause 5.—This clause provides for making available document
or information in relation to a declaration of assets and liabilities of

68
Judges on website. It provides that the competent authority shall
exhibit the document or information in relation to a declaration of
assets and liabilities of Judges in the case of Judges and Chief Justices
of the High Courts, on the website of the High Court in which such
Judges and Chief Justice are serving; and in the case of Judges of the
Supreme Court and Chief Justice of India, on the website of the
Supreme Court.
Clause 6.—This clause makes provision for maintenance of
records. It provides that the competent authority shall keep the
documents or information forms containing the details of the assets
and liabilities and other particulars in relation thereto filed by the
Judges in its safe custody for such period as may be decided by the
Oversight Committee.
Clause 7.—This clause makes provisions relating to complaints.
It provides that any person making an allegation of misbehaviour or
incapacity in respect of a Judge may file a complaint in this regard to
the Oversight Committee.
Clause 8.—This clause makes provision for manner of making
of complaint. It provides that the complaint under clause 7 shall be
filed in form and manner as may be provided in the rules made in this
behalf. It further provides that the complaints should set forth particulars
of the misbehaviour or incapacity which is the subject matter of
allegation and be verified at the foot of the complaint by the complainant
and shall specify, by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the
complaint, what he verifies of his own knowledge and what he
verifies upon information and shall refer to the source of the information.
Clause 9.—This clause makes provision for reference to Scrutiny
Panel. It provides that the Oversight Committee shall refer all such
complaints to the appropriate Scrutiny Panel constituted under Chapter
V for scrutiny.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for the constitution of the
Scrutiny Panel. It provides that there shall be constituted a panel to be
called “Complaints Scrutiny Panel” in the Supreme Court and in every
High Court to scrutinise the complaints against a Judge received under
the proposed legislation.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for the composition of the
Scrutiny Panel. It provides that the Scrutiny Panel in the Supreme
Court shall consist of a former Chief Justice of India and two Judges
of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India
and in every High Court the Scrutiny Panel shall consist of a former
Chief Justice of that High Court and two Judges of that High Court
to be nominated by the Chief Justice of that High Court.
Clause 12.—This clause specifies the functions of the Scrutiny
Panel. It provides that if the Scrutiny Panel, after scrutiny of the
complaint referred to it for scrutiny under clause 9, and after making
scrutiny of the complaint, as it deems appropriate, is satisfied that

69
there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the Judge, it shall,
after recording reasons therefor, submit a report on its findings to the
Oversight Committee for making inquiry against the Judge in accordance
with the provisions of this Act; and if the complaint is ftivolous or
vexatious, or, is not made in good faith, or there are not sufficient
grounds for inquiring into the complaint; or the complaint relates only
to the merits of the judgment or a procedural order, then, it shall after
recording reasons therefor submit a report on its findings to the
Oversight Committee for not proceeding with the complaint and treating
the matter as closed.
It further provides that the Scrutiny Panel shall submit its report
to the Oversight Committee within a maximum period of three months
from the date of receipt of the complaint from the Oversight Committee.
Clause 13.—This clause provides the procedure of the Scrutiny
Panel. It provides that save as otherwise provided in the proposed
legislation, the Scrutiny Panel shall have power to regulate its own
procedure in scrutinising the complaints.
Clause 14.—This clause vests power of civil court in the
Scrutiny Panel in respect of scrutinising the complaints forwarded to
it which include the powers of summoning and enforcing the attendance
of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;
requiring the discovery and production of any document; receiving
evidence on affidavits; requisitioning any public record or copy thereof
from any court or office; and issuing commissions for the examination
of witnesses or other documents.
Clause 15.—This clause makes provisions for officers and other
employees for the Scrutiny Panel. This clause provides that the Chief
Justice of India shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Scrutiny Panel in
the discharge of its functions and provide the Scrutiny Panel with
such officers and other employees as he may think fit.
It further provides that the Chief Justice of the High Court shall
determine the nature and categories of the officers and other employees
required to assist the Scrutiny Panel in the discharge of its functions
and provide the Scrutiny Panel with such officers and other employees
as he may think fit.
Clause 16.—This clause makes provision regarding frivolous
and vexatious complaints. It provides that if the Scrutiny Panel is of
the opinion that a complaint was filed frivolously or vexatiously or
only with a view to scandalise or intimidate a Judge, it may refer the
case to the Oversight Committee for further action.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the Central Government
may, by notification, establish a National Judicial Oversight Committee
with effect from such date as it may decide.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for the composition of the
Oversight Committee.

70
It provides that the National Judicial Oversight Committee shall
consist of a retired Chief Justice of India appointed by the President
after ascertaining the view of the Chief Justice of India as its
Chairperson; and a Judge of the Supreme Court and the Chief Justice
of a High Court, to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India and;
the Attorney General for India an, ex-officio member and an eminent
person to be nominated by the President as its Member.
It further provides that where the allegations are against a Judge
of the Supreme Court, who is a member of the Oversight Committee,
then, the Chief Justice of India shall nominate another Judge of the
Supreme Court in his place as a member of that committee and in
case where the allegations are against the Chief Justice of a High
Court, who is a member of the Oversight Committee, then, the Chief
Justice of India shall nominate a Chief Justice of another High Court
in his place as member of that committee.
It also provides that after the commencement of the proceedings
relating to a complaint against a Judge if any change in the composition
of the Oversight Committee arises due to elevation of a member of the
Oversight Committee, as the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of a
Supreme Court, as the case may be; or if any change arises in the
composition of the Oversight Committee due to refusal or retirement
or resignation or any other reason, then, the proceedings of the
Oversight Committee shall continue from the stage from which it was
pending before such change and the Chairperson of the Oversight
Committee shall make such incidental changes, as he deems necessary,
to continue the proceedings.
Clause 19.—This clause provides for procedure of forwarding
of complaint relating to misbehaviour to Scrutiny Panel. It provides
that the Oversight Committee shall, within three months of the receipt
of a complaint relating to misbehaviour of an individual Judge of the
Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court, refer the complaint,
to the Scrutiny Panel of the Supreme Court to scrutinise and report
thereon; and in the case of complaint of misbehaviour of an individual
Judge of a High Court, refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny Panel of
the High Court in which such Judge is acting as such, to scrutinise
and report thereon.
Clause 20.—This clause makes provision for maintenance of
records of complaints forwarded to Scrutiny Panel. It provides that
the Oversight Committee shall maintain a record of the complaints
referred to the Scrutiny Panel.
Clause 21.—This clause provides that a complaint against the
Chief Justice of India shall not be referred to the Scrutiny Panel for
scrutiny but shall be scrutinised by the Oversight Committee.
Clause 22.—This clause makes provision for investigation by an
investigation committee. It provides that the Oversight Committee
constitute an investigation committee to investigate into the complaint
in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel has recommended in its report

71
for making inquiry against the Judge in accordance with the provisions
of the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the composition and tenure of the
investigation committee shall be such as may be decided by the
Oversight Committee and different investigation committees may be
constituted for inquiry into different complaints.
Clause 23.—This clause vests power of civil court in the
Oversight Committee and the investigation committee in respect of
investigation of the complaints forwarded to them which include the
powers of summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
from any part of India and examining him on oath; requiring the
discovery and production of any document; receiving evidence on
affidavits; requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office; and issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or other documents.
Clause 24.—This clause empowers the investigation committee
with the power of search and seizure. It provides that if it has reason
to believe that any documents which, in its opinion, will be useful for,
or relevant to, any preliminary investigation or inquiry, are secreted in
any place, it may authorise any officer subordinate to it, or any officer
of an agency referred to in clause 25, to search for and to seize such
documents.
It further provides that the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, relating to searches shall, so far as may be, apply
to searches under this clause subject to the modification that sub-
section (5) of section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if, for
the word “Magistrate”, wherever it occurs, the words “investigation
committee or any officer authorised by it” were substituted.
Clause 25.—This clause empowers the investigation committee
to make a request to the Oversight Committee for providing assistance
to it and the Oversight Committee on such request may invoke its
powers in this behalf under clause 38 of the proposed legislation.
Clause 26.—This clause empowers the investigation committee
to proceed ex parte if a Judge, to whom notice is issued by the
investigation committee referred to in clause 22, refuses to appear
before it or does not co-operate with it in conducting investigation.
Clause 27.—This clause empowers the investigation committee
to cause investigation into any act or conduct of any person after
giving such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and to
produce evidence in his defence if it considers necessary so to do for
the purpose of its investigation into any allegations made against a
Judge.
Clause 28.—This clause provides that the investigation committee,
after completion of the inquiry in respect of a complaint, shall submit
its findings to the Oversight Committee.

72
Clause 29.—This clause lays down the procedure in inquiries by
the investigation committee. It provides that the investigation committee
shall frame definite charges against the Judge on the basis of which
the inquiry is proposed to be held and every such inquiry shall be
conducted in camera.
It further provides that the charges framed and the statement of
grounds on which each such charge is based shall be communicated
to the Judge and he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of
presenting a written statement of defence within such time as may be
specified by the investigation committee.
It also provides that the investigation committee shall complete
the inquiry within a period of six months from the date of receipt of
the complaint and the Oversight Committee may after recording the
reasons in writing extend the period for completion of the inquiry by
a further period of six months.
Clause 30.—This clause provides that the investigation committee
shall have power to regulate its own procedure in making the inquiry
and shall give reasonable opportunity to the Judge of cross-examining
witnesses, adducing evidence and of being heard in his defence.
Clause 31.—This clause provides that if it is requested by the
investigation committee, then, the Central Government may appoint an
advocate to conduct the cases against the Judge.
Clause 32.—This clause makes provision for staff of the
Oversight Committee. It provides that the Oversight Committee shall
appoint a Secretary and such other officers and employees possessing
such qualifications, as the President may determine, from time to time,
in consultation with the Oversight Committee.
It further provides that the terms and conditions of service of
the Secretary, officers and employees of the Oversight Committee
shall be such as the President may determine, from time to time, in
consultation with the Oversight Committee. The Secretary, officers
and other employees shall be under control and direction of the
Oversight Committee.
It also provides that the Oversight Committee shall provide such
number of its officers and other employees to assist the investigation
committee as the Oversight Committee considers appropriate having
regard to the nature of investigation in a case.
Clause 33.—This clause empowers the Oversight Committee, if
it considers it necessary in the interest of fair and impartial scrutiny
of complaints or investigation or inquiry, to recommend stoppage of
assigning judicial work including cases assigned to the Judge concerned
during the pendency of the inquiry by the investigation committee.
Clause 34.—This clause empowers the Oversight Committee to
dismiss the complaint or impose minor penalties. It provides that if the
Oversight Committee on receipt of the report from the investigation

73
committee is satisfied that no charges have been proved, it shall
dismiss the complaint and matter be closed and no further action shall
be taken against the Judge and the complainant shall be informed
accordingly. It further provides that if all or any of the charges have
been proved but the Oversight Committee is of the opinion that the
charges proved do not warrant removal of the Judge, it may, by order,
issue advisories or warnings.
It further provides that if the Oversight Committee, on receipt
of the report from the investigation committee is satisfied that there
has been a prima facie commission of any offence under any law for
the time being in force by a Judge, it may recommend to the Central
Government for prosecution of the Judge in accordance with the law
for the time being in force.
It also provides that the inquiry or investigation may be continued
against the Judge even if such Judge has demitted office, if the
Oversight Committee is of the opinion that the misbehaviour is serious
in nature and requires to be inquired into or investigated and the
Oversight Committee may after conclusion of inquiry forward its
findings to the Central Government to take further action in the matter
under relevant law for the time being in force.
Clause 35.—This clause makes provision for advice to President
for removal of Judge. It provides that if the Oversight Committee is
satisfied that all or any of the charges of misbehaviour or incapacity
of a Judge have been proved and that they are of serious nature
warranting his removal, it shall request the Judge to voluntarily resign
and if he fails to do so, then advise the President accordingly who
shall refer the matter to Parliament.
Clause 36.—This clause provides that if the Scrutiny Panel
refers a case to the Oversight Committee under clause 16 relating to
complaints which was filed frivolously or vexatiously or only with a
view to scandalise or intimidate a Judge, the Oversight Committee
shall consider the matter and if it concurs with the conclusion of the
Scrutiny Panel, it may authorise the filing of a criminal complaint
against the original complainant before a competent court.
Clause 37.—This clause makes provision to deem all proceedings
under the proposed legislation to be judicial proceedings within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and the
Oversight Committee shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
Clause 38.—This clause empowers the Oversight Committee to
take assistance of such officers of the Central Government or State
Government or any agency thereof or authority as it deems fit.
Clause 39.—This clause makes provision as regard to
confidentiality in complaint procedure. It provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the

74
complainant and every person who participates in the scrutiny or
investigation or inquiry as a witness or as a legal practitioner or in any
other capacity, whether or not he seeks confidentiality about his name,
shall undertake to the Oversight Committee or Scrutiny Panel or
investigation committee that he shall not reveal his own name, the
name of the Judge complained against, the contents of the complaint
or any of the documents or proceedings to anybody else including the
media without the prior written approval of the Oversight Committee.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for keeping identity of complainant
confidential. It provides that the Oversight Committee or the Scrutiny
Panel or investigation committee may, at the request of a complainant,
direct that the complainant be accorded such protection, as it deems
appropriate, including keeping his identity confidential, from every body
and also the Judge against whom the complaint is made.
Clause 41.—This clause provides that after the commencement
of scrutiny of complaint no action for contempt of court shall lie or
shall be proceeded with in respect of the allegations, which are the
subject matter of the investigation or inquiry.
Clause 42.—This clause provides that any scrutiny, investigation
or inquiry pending before the Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee
or Oversight Committee shall not affect the criminal liability in respect
of such allegations which are the subject matter of the investigation or
inquiry.
Clause 43.—This clause make overriding provision with reference
to confidentiality of informations. It provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005 or any other
law for the time being in force, all papers, documents and records of
proceedings related to a complaint, preliminary investigation and inquiry
shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed by any person in any
proceeding except as directed by the Oversight Committee. However,
the findings of the investigation committee and the orders passed by
the Oversight Committee under clause (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause
34 relating to action taken on receipt of the report from the investigation
committee shall be made public.
Clause 44.—This clause provides for protection of action taken
in good faith. It provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson or any member of the
Oversight Committee, Scrutiny Panel, investigation committee or against
any officer or employee, agency or person engaged by such committees
or panel for the purpose of conducting scrutiny or investigation or
inquiry in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended
to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Clause 45.—This clause provides for laying of advice of Oversight
Committee before Parliament. It provides that the President, on receipt
of advice under clause 35, shall cause the findings of the Oversight
Committee along with the accompanying materials to be laid before
both the Houses of Parliament.

75
Clause 46.—This clause provides for motion for removal of a
Judge. It provides that on laying of the advice of the Oversight
Committee along with the accompanying material, the Central
Government may move a motion in either House of Parliament for
taking up the said advice for consideration by the House.
Clause 47.—This clause makes provision of investigation into
misbehaviour or incapacity of Judge by investigation committee for
removal of Judges. It provides that if notice is given of a motion for
presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of a
Judge signed in the case of a notice given in the House of the People,
by not less than one hundred members of that House; and in the case
of a notice given in the Council of States, by not less than fifty
members of that Council, then, the Speaker or, as the case may be,
the Chairman may, after consulting such persons, if any, as he thinks
fit and after considering such materials, if any, as may be available to
him, either admit the motion or refuse to admit the same.
It further provides that if the motion is admitted, the Speaker
or, as the case may be, the Chairman shall keep the motion pending
and the matter shall be referred to the Oversight Committee for
constitution of an investigation committee under clause 22 and thereafter
the Oversight Committee shall constitute an investigation committee
which shall conduct an inquiry in accordance with the provisions
contained in Chapter VI and submit its report to the Oversight
Committee for being submitted to the Speaker or Chairman, as the
case may be, for consideration.
It also provides that where it is alleged that a Judge is unable
to discharge the duties of his office efficiently due to any physical or
mental incapacity and the allegation is denied, the investigation committee
may arrange for the medical examination of the Judge by such
Medical Board to be appointed for the purpose by the Speaker or, as
the case may be, the Chairman and the Medical Board shall undertake
medical examination of the Judge and submit a report to the investigation
committee stating therein whether the incapacity is such as to render
the Judge unfit to continue in office.
It also provides that if the Judge refuses to undergo medical
examination, the Medical Board shall submit a report to the investigation
committee stating therein the examination which the Judge has refused
to undergo, and the investigation committee may, on receipt of such
report, presume that the Judge suffers from such physical or mental
incapacity as is alleged in the motion.
Clause 48.—This clause makes provision for consideration of
report and procedure for presentation of an address for removal of
Judge. It provides that if the report of the investigation committee
contains a finding that the Judge is not guilty of any misbehaviour or
does not suffer from any incapacity, then, no further steps shall be
taken in either House of Parliament in relation to the report and the
motion pending in the House or the Houses of Parliament shall not be
proceeded with. It further provides that if the report of the investigation

76
committee contains a finding that the Judge is guilty of any misbehaviour
or suffers from any incapacity, then, the motion referred to in clause
46 shall together with the report of the investigation committee, be
taken up for consideration by the House or the Houses of Parliament
in which it is pending.
It further provides that if the motion is adopted by each House
of Parliament in accordance with the provisions of clause (4) of
Article 124 or, as the case may be, in accordance with that clause
read with Article 218 of the Constitution, then, the misbehaviour or
incapacity of the Judge shall be deemed to have been proved and an
address praying for the removal of the Judge shall be presented in the
prescribed manner to the President by each House of Parliament in the
same session in which the motion has been adopted.
Clause 49.—This clause empowers the Joint Committee to
make rules. It provides that a Joint Committee of both Houses of
Parliament shall be constituted in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter contained for the purpose of making rules to carry out the
purposes of this Chapter. It further provides that the Joint Committee
shall consist of fifteen members of whom ten shall be nominated by
the Speaker and five shall be nominated by the Chairman and the Joint
Committee shall elect its own Chairman and shall have power to
regulate its own procedure.
It also specifies the matter for which the Joint Committee may
make rules. It also provides that any rule made under this clause shall
not take effect until they are approved and confirmed both by the
Speaker and the Chairman and are published in the Official Gazette,
and such publication of the rules shall be conclusive proof that they
have been duly made.
Clause 50.—This clause provides punishment for intentional
insult or interruption to the Oversight Committee. It provides that
whoever intentionally insults, or causes any interruption, to the Scrutiny
Panel or investigation committee or Oversight Committee while the
Oversight Committee or Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee or
any of their members is doing scrutiny or conducting any investigation
or inquiry under the proposed legislation, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine, or with both.
It further provides that the provisions of sub-section (2) of
section 199 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 sha1l apply in
relation to an offence under this clause subject to the modification that
no complaint in respect of such offence shall be made by the Public
Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the Oversight
Committee.
Clause 51.—This clause provides for penalty for violation of
confidentiality in complaint procedure. It provides that if any complainant
or other person, who participates in the scrutiny or investigation or
inquiry as a witness or as a legal practitioner or in any other capacity,

77
contravenes the provisions of clause 39 or clause 40 or clause 43,
sha11 be liable for punishment with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees or with both.
Clause 52.—This clause makes provision relating to power of
the Oversight Committee to try certain cases. It provides that when
any offence as is described in sub-clause (1) of clause 50 is committed,
in the view, or, in the presence, of the Oversight Committee, then said
Oversight Committee, may cause the offender to be detained in custody
and may at any time on the same day take cognizance of the offence
and after giving the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing
cause, try such offender summarily in accordance with the procedure
specified for summary trials under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, and sentence him to simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees, or with both.
Clause 53.—This clause provides for punishment for false and
vexatious complaints. It provides that any person who makes a complaint
which is found to be frivolous or vexatious or made with an intent to
scandalise or intimidate the Judge against whom such complaint is
filed, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years and also to fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees.
It further provides that the provisions of this clause shall have
effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
Clause 54.—This clause contains provisions relating to offences
by companies. It provides that where any offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a company, every person who, at
the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly. It further provides that if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence, he shall not be
liable to any punishment provided in the proposed legislation.
It also provides that where any offence has been committed by
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 55.—This clause contains provision relating to offences
by societies or trusts. It provides that where an offence under the
proposed legislation is committed by a society or trust, every person

78
who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and
was responsible to, the society or trust for the conduct of the
business of the society or the trust, as well as the society or trust,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly. It further provides that if
he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence, then, such person shall not be liable to any punishment
provided in the proposed legislation.
It also provides that where any offence under the proposed
legislation is committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary, trustee or other officer of the society or trust, such director,
manager, secretary, trustee or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Clause 56.—This clause provides for appeal to Supreme Court.
It provides that any person convicted on a trial held under sub-clause
(1) of clause 53 may appeal to the Supreme Court within a period of
sixty days from the date of order of such conviction.
Clause 57.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
make rules, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, by
notification in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the provisions of
the proposed legislation (other than provisions contained under Chapter
VII). It further specifies the matters for which the Central Government
may make rules. It also provides that every rule made by the Central
Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 58.—This clause makes provisions for removal of
difficulties. It provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to
the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government
may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent
with the provisions of the proposed legislation as may appear to it to
be necessary for removing the difficulty. It further provides that such
order shall be made within a period of two years from the
commencement of the proposed legislation. It also provides that every
order made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 59.—This clause provides for repeal of the Judges
(Inquiry) Act, 1968. It further provides that notwithstanding the repeal
of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, the rules made by the Joint
Committee under section 7 of the repealed Act shall continue to be in
force until rules are framed under section 49 of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any
action taken under the said Acts shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under the corresponding provisions of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that the matters mentioned in sub-clauses (2) and (3)

79
shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of
section 6 of the General Clauses Act. 1897 with regard to the effect
of repeal.
Schedule appended to the proposed legislation specifies the
Judicial Standards to be practised by all Judges.

80
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for establishment of National
Judicial Oversight Committee comprising of a retired Chief Justice of
India as the Chairperson, a Judge of the Supreme Court and the Chief
Justice of a High Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India
and the Attorney-General for India and an eminent person to be
nominated by the President as members.
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, if
requested by the investigation committee, to appoint an advocate to
conduct the cases against the Judge.
Clause 32 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Secretary
and such other officers and employees as the President may determine,
from time to time, in consultation with the Oversight Committee.
The expenditure on account of the aforesaid provisions would
be negligible. At this stage, it is not practicable to make an estimate
of expenditure likely to be involved in the financial year 2010-2011,
both recurring and non-recurring. However, the expenditure would be
met from the Consolidated Fund of India.
80

81
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 57 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules, in consultation with the Chief Justice of
India, to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
2. Sub-clause ( 2) of clause 57 specifies the matters in respect
of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include:
(i) the form in which the information relating to assets and liabilities
is to be furnished by Judges and the form for filing annual return by
Judges regarding their assets and liabilities, (ii) the form and manner
in which a complaint is to be filed, (iii) other matters in respect of
which the Scrutiny Panel and the Oversight Committee shall have
powers of a civil court, and (iv) any other matter which is required
to be or may be prescribed for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
3. The rules made by the Central Government are to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made in
accordance with the aforesaid provisions of the Bill are matters of
procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
81

82
82
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to lay down judicial standards and provide for accountability of Judges, and,
establish credible and expedient mechanism for investigating into individual
complaints for misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme
Court or of a High Court and to regulate the procedure for such
investigation; and for the presentation of an address by Parliament to the
President in relation to proceeding for removal of a Judge and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri M. Veerappa Moily, Minister of Law and Justice)

83
LOK SABHA
CORRIGENDA
to
THE JUDICIAL STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2010
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha]
1. Page (ii), in the Arrangement of Clauses, in clause 23,-
for “investigating”
read “investigation”
2. Page 1 , in line 5 of the long title,-
for “proceeding”
read “proceedings”
3. Page 7, line 2,-
omit “ex officio”
4. Page 7, line 16,-
for “Judge of a Supreme Court”
read “Judge of the Supreme Court”
5. Page 8, in the marginal heading against clause 23, -
for “investigating committee”
read “investigation committee”
6. Page 12, line 15,-
for “both the Houses”
read “both Houses”
7. Page 13, line 22,-
for “Act which has”
read “Act has”
8. Page 19, line 8 from the bottom,-
for “provisions”
read “provision”
83

84
9. Page 20, line 13 from the bottom,-
for “provisions”
read “provision”
10. Page 20, line 11 from the bottom,-
for “Scrutiny Panel”
read “Scrutiny Panel in the Supreme Court”
11. Page 20, line 7 from the bottom,-
for “Scrutiny Panel”
read “Scrutiny Panel in the High Court”
12. Page 21, line 20,-
for “of a Supreme Court”
read “of the Supreme Court”
13. Page 24, line 18,-
for “make overriding”
read “makes overriding”
14. In the docket page,-
for “proceeding for removal”
read “proceedings for removal”
NEW D ELHI;
November 26. 2010
Agrahayana 5, 1932 ( Saka)

85
ANNEXURE-B
85
COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
1. PRS Legislative
Research (Memo
No. 1)
Issue A: Who should judge
the judges?
In the recent years, a number
of allegations of corruption
against members of the higher
judiciary have been made. These
cases have highlighted the need
for judiciary to be held
accountable. The composition of
the authorities set up to inquire
into complaints against judges
has been discussed both by the
Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice, and the Law
Commission. In all recent
attempts to frame a law on
judicial oversight, the central
issue has been to address this
need while simultaneously
protecting judicial independence.
The concept of judicial
independence, as elucidated by
the Law Commission in its 195
th
Report on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006, extends both to
individual judges and the
judiciary as a whole. The
Commission further commented
that it is this independence that
allows individual judges to freely
decide a case according to the
law and without interference. In
the same report, however, the
Law Commission also
commented that “judicial
The Bill makes higher judiciary more
accountable without interference with the
independence of the Judiciary.
The recommendations made in 195
th
Report of the Law Commission have been
considered while drafting the Bill.
Sl. Name of Comments/suggestions Response of Government
No. organization/
individual
12 3 4

86
12 3 4
independence is not absolute and
judicial accountability and
independence must go hand in
hand with the independence of
the judiciary”
The current Bill prescribes a
three-tiered structure of judicial
oversight a National Judicial
Oversight Committee composed
of judges and members of the
executive, a Complaints Scrutiny
Panel composed only of judges,
and an Investigative Committee.
The representation of members
of different organs of the State
therefore varies across the three
tiers. However, the proposed
system in the 2010 Bill is a
departure from both the
proposed structure in the Judges
Inquiry Bill, 2006 and the
recommendations made by the
Law Commission and Standing
Committee reports on the same.
The composition of
Investigative/Oversight
Authorities created by the Bill
1. Composition of National
Judicial Oversight Committee
The composition of the
Oversight Committee includes
representatives of the executive
along with judges. This differs
from the recommendations of
the Law Commission and the
Standing Committee on the
Judges Inquiry Bill, 2006. The
Law Commission had
recommended an oversight
committee consisting solely of
judges, and the Standing
Committee had recommended a
two tier system with an oversight
The National Judicial Oversight Committee
shall be responsible for dealing with
complaints against Judges through
Complaints Scrutiny Panel and the
Investigation Committees. The power of
Parliament to remove a Judge, as provided
in. the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, has
not been diluted in this Bill.
The recommendations made in 195
th
Report of the Law Commission have been
considered while drafting the Bill. The
Parliament retains its primacy in the matter
of impeachment, as provided in the
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.

87
12 3 4
committee composed of judges
and a committee to screen
complaints composed of all
organs of the State.
In its 2006 report, the Law
Commission stated that judicial
oversight should be with a
committee consisting solely of
the serving judiciary. It argued
that this is that norm on the
independence of the judiciary,
and gave the examples of the
United States, United Kingdom,
Canada, Germany and Australia,
in which judicial oversight is
exclusively within the control of
the judiciary. The Commission
was of the opinion that judicial
oversight through a committee
consisting only of judges “is
constitutionally valid and is
consistent with the concept of
independence of judiciary, judicial
accountability, and doctrine of
separation of powers.” In
addition, the committee felt that
the appropriate manner in which
to build accountability within
such a system was not by
including members from the
executive and legislature in the
oversight committee but through
the institution of an in-house
mechanism to impose “minor
measures” against judges.
The Standing Committee, while
deliberating on the Judges
Inquiry Bill, 2006 stated that
there was a “general consensus
among the Committee Members
that the proposed judicially
exclusive composition of the
National Judicial Council is not
in consonance with the principle
of accountability.” It stated that
either the oversight body should
The Bill broadly is based, inter alia , on
the ‘Restatement of V alues of Judicial
Life’ adopted by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court, the provision of the Judges
(Inquiry) Act, 1968 and the scheme of
the Constitution for removal of Judges.

88
12 3 4
be expanded to include non-
judicial members representing the
legislature and the executive, or
there should be an Empowered
Committee, with members from
the judiciary, executive,
legislature and the Bar, set up to
screen complaints before they
were investigated by the
oversight body. The Committee
suggested that including non-
judicial members as part of the
Empowered Committee would
provide “checks on judicial
screening process without
endangering the judicial
independence.”
Composition of Complaints
Scrutiny Panel
While the Bill provides for a
Complaints Scrutiny Panel to
screen complaints, the structure
and composition differences
from the proposal of the
Standing Committee on the
Judges Inquiry Bill, 2006. The
Scrutiny Panel, to be constituted
in the Supreme Court and each
High Court, will consist of a
former Chief Justice and two
sitting judges of that same
court.
The Standing Committee had
recommended the creation of an
Empowered Committee, with
members from the judiciary,
executive, legislature and the Bar,
to screen complaints before they
were investigated by the
oversight body. This proposal
was on the basis that
representation of non-judicial
members was not present in the
oversight body created by the
Bill.
This has been partly met by formation of
Scrutiny Panel in the Supreme Court and
the High Courts. The present ‘In-House’
system will be now formalised and a
more transparent system introduced.

89
12 3 4
The current Bill prescribes a
mechanism which is the opposite
of that proposed by the Standing
Committee in 2006. The Bill
does not provide for an Oversight
Committee consisting only of
judges (as proposed by the Law
Commission) or a screening
body consisting of all organs of
the state (as approved by the
Standing Committee). While
providing for non-judicial
members in the Oversight
Committee, the Bill provides only
for former and serving judges
of the same court to form the
Scrutiny Panel and screen
complaints.
Also, neither the Oversight
Committee nor the Scrutiny
Panel in the current Bill have
any member of the legislature.
Composition of the Standing
Committee
The current Bill does not
prescribe the composition of the
Investigative Committee. The
Oversight Committee has the
discretion to constitute the
investigation committee. The Bill
does not give any guidelines for
selecting members of this
committee nor does it provide
for these to be prescribed by
rules.
Issue B: How should judges
be judges?
There are two issues related to
the complaints procedure: (1)
The finality of the findings of
the Scrutiny Panel in case it
dismisses a complaint and related
over to report a frivolous or
The Judges would be in a better position
to understand the allegations from Judge’s
perspective. Therefore, it  is not felt
necessary to have members from the Bar
or the executive or from the legislature
in the Oversight Committee or Scrutiny
Panel.
The OC would decide the composition
and term of the Investigating Committee
under sub clause (2) of Clause 22 of the
Bill depending upon the nature of the
complaint and availability of competent
person.

90
12 3 4
vexatious complaint, (2) the role
of the Oversight Committee
given the fact that it has no
investigative powers of its own.
(1) The finality of the report
of the Scrutiny Panel leaves
no scope for a review of the
Panel’s decision.
Under the Bill, two of the three
members of the Scrutiny Panel
are sitting judges of the same
High Court (or Supreme Court)
as the judge complained against,
and a former Chief Justice of
that court. There is no member
independent of the judiciary to
make an assessment of the
merits of the complaint.
Additionally, the report of the
Scrutiny Panel will remain
confidential the report of the
Scrutiny Panel is not subject to
review by the Oversight
Committee. The report of the
Scrutiny Panel stating that the
complaint was frivolous or
vexatious is also not subject to
further investigation, but depends
only on the concurrence of the
Oversight Committee, This
mechanism may lead to (a) cases
where the Scrutiny Panel
incorrectly assesses that a case
has not merit (which is not
subject to review), or (b)
harassment of the complainant,
in cases where the identity of
the complainant is not
confidential.
The Standing Committee’s report
has recommended an
‘independent, high powered,
impartial, screening body’
composed of (a) a representative
of the Chief Justice of India,
The Judges would be in better position
to understand the allegations from
Judge’s. prospective. This provision is in
consonance with maintaining
independence of the judiciary.
Setting up of another body i.e.
Empowered Committee will make the
whole process very cumbersome.

91
12 3 4
(b) one member from both
houses of Parliament, (c) one
representative of the Prime
Minister, and (d) one
representative of the Bar Council
of India. The major reasons it
had given for proposing this
“Empowered Committee’ were:
a. It would be an impartial,
wider representative body;
b. It would provide for the
screening of complaints at an
initial level; and,
c. Wider representation would
ensure credibility and
transparency.
(2) The Oversight Committee
has not investigative powers,
or power to review the report
of the Scrutiny Panel.
As per the Bill, the Oversight
Committee’s main powers
include (a) referring a complaint
to the Scrutiny Panel, (b)
referring a complaint to an
investigation committee if a report
of the Scrutiny Panel finds merit
in a complaint against a judge
(c) dismissing a complaint if the
investigation committee does not
find that the charges have been
proved, (d) deciding on what
penalty to impose (including
recommending removal) if the
charges are proved, and (e)
considering frivolous or
vexatious complaints.
Under this structure, the
Committee has no investigative
role, nor can it review the report
of the Scrutiny Panel. The
committee has discretionary
The OC will have all the powers of a
civil court.

92
12 3 4
powers only in cases where (a)
the charges against a judge have
been proved by the investigation
committee, and (b) the Scrutiny
Panel reports that a complaint is
frivolous or vexatious.
The Judges (Inquiry) Bill 2006
had provided a different structure
for inquiring into complaints
against judges, which gave
investigative powers to the
National Judicial Council it
sought to create.
1. Any authority or body having
any disciplinary powers over the
higher judiciary must be
independent of the Government
as well as the judiciary. It must
be a full-time body and not an
ex-officio  body. Since persons
already engaged full time in other
responsibilities, cannot be
expected to devote adequate time
to examining/investigating
complaints against judges, which
are likely to be many, if a
credible accountability institution
were in place.
2. The bill proposes to setup
three kinds of bodies, oversight
committee, scrutiny committee
and investigation committee. The
oversight committee does not
have any functions except to
constitute the investigating
committee, in case the scrutiny
committee finds, a prima facie
case against a judge.
3. The OC and SC are both
primarily composed of sitting
judges, who would neither have
the time, nor even the inclination
to investigate and indict brother
judges, with whom they are
The National Judicial Oversight Committee
shall constitute an Investigation Committee
to investigate into the complaints in which
the Complaint Scrutiny Panel has
recommended inquiry.
The present composition of Committee
has been worked out so  that the
independence of the judiciary is not
compromised.
The object of the Bill is to discourage or
minimize filing of frivolous and vexatious
complaints against Judges. It is a
provision to protect Judges from such
complaints/allegations filed by some
disgruntled elements.
2. Shri Prashant
Bhusan,
Convenor,
Campaign for
Judicial
Accountability
and Reforms
(Memo No.2)

93
12 3 4
sitting in and out of court,
everyday. Moreover the provision
in Section 39 in the bill,
providing for confidentially of
the complaint, is totally against
public interest and will have a
chilling effect on complaints
being made to the committee.
Further provision is Section 53
of the bill, that a complaint
found to be frivolous and
vexatious with intent to
scandalize or intimidate the judge
shall be punishable, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term upto 5
years; will completely intimidate
even the honest and bonafide
complaints.
4. Further, even after finding a
judge guilty through this prolix
process, the matter will still go
for voting in Parliament. A
process which is capable of
being politicized as happened in
V . Ramaswamy’s case.
5. This constitutes our
preliminary submission regarding
the bill under consideration. We
seek an opportunity for
presenting our detailed and
comprehensive views to the
members of the Standing
Committee. Some members of
our Campaign would like to
participate and submit their oral
views, someday in the afternoon.
6. This bill purports to lay down
judicial standards, which are
totally outdated and completely
inadequate, and not in line with
prevalent international best
practices, elsewhere in mature
democracies.
The Bill is to regulate the procedure for
the removal of a Judge. Ultimately the
Parliament is the deciding authority. The
power of the Parliament cannot be diluted.
The petitioner has already appeared before
the Committee.
It is based on ‘Restatement of Judicial
Values’ resolution adopted by the Chief
Justices Conference in 1999.

94
12 3 4
Shri T.R. Thara,
Secretary, all
India Lawyer’s
Union District
Committee,
Chennai.
3. (a) One of the primary concerns
all along had been the issue
regarding transparency in the
appointment of Judges. The Bill
is not intended to deal with it at
all. The process of bringing about
accountability and standards
should commence from the stage
of appointment in order to
achieve the objective participation
of a combination of the peoples’
representatives, legislature and
the judiciary may be ideal in the
process of appointment.
(b) The stringent penal
consequences, that too, in a
summary manner may only deter
even genuine complaints. The Bill
also brings within its ambit any
company, trust or a society
within the definition of
complainant. Though any
possible misuse would have to
be averted and adequate
safeguards ought to be
incorporated, yet it should not
by itself act to preclude or
discourage even bonafide
complainants. In fact such
stringent penal consequences had
been one of the drawbacks in
the earlier Bills too.
(c) The provisions contained in
Section 43 of the Bill would
effectively deny any information
pertaining to any proceedings
under the Act. Thus, even where
Section 16 and Section 36 is
invalid to imitate action against
the complaint and despite the
fact that the punishment
contemplated is stringent and
rigorous as contained in Section
53 of the Bill, yet there is no
transparency to ascertain as to
haw the conclusions are drawn
Appointment of Judges is based on the
Judgment of the Supreme Court. The Bill
deals only with the Judges accountability
and not with the appointment procedure.
The object of the Bill is to discourage or
minimize filing of frivolous and vexatious
complaints against Judges. It is a
provision to protect Judges from such
complaints/allegations filed by some
disgruntled elements without giving
specific allegations and without any
support in document.

95
12 3 4
that the complaint is frivolous
or vexatious or meant to
scandalize. Participation of the
complaint too is limited. It is
pertinent to note that mere
inability to substantiate allegations
on account of lack of evidence
or otherwise would not
necessarily mean that the
complaint is frivolous or
vexatious. The trial is meant to
be summary in nature and the
appeal would lie only to the
Supreme court as contained in
Section 56. The findings alone
are to be made public. Thus,
the complaint could possibly be
denied reasonable opportunity in
violation of the principles of
natural justice as a result of
which he/she could be put to
serious prejudice.
(d) In the absence of any binding
effect the Act may not serve
any useful purpose. Further, a
cumulative reading of the
provision would suggest that is
only a prelude to the process of
impeachment and no final
decision can be taken on its own
under the Act. Thus, the entire
process would only complicate
further as opposed to the
persistent demand for
simplification.
(e) There is no provision
empowering the committees to
initiate any suo-motu action and
initiate the process of
investigation even if reports
surface, for example, in the
media pertaining to any
irregularities.
(f) Where close relatives of any
Judge practice in the same court,
The Bill seeks to provide statutory
mechanism to enquire into complaint filed
by the public against the Judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts.
It was not considered feasible to authorize
Judicial Oversight Committee to take up
complaints suo-moto.
The appointment of Judges is governed
by the Judgment of the Supreme and

96
12 3 4
it would be desirable that the
concerned Judge is shifted to
some other Court. That issue
also pertains to standards and
accountability. However, while
the Bill provides that the Judge
should not hear any case in
which such relatives appear,
there is no provision which
states that  where relatives are
also practicing the concerned
Judge should not hear any case
in which such relatives appear,
there is no provision which
states that where relatives are
also practicing the concerned
Judge should be transferred. The
recent Supreme Court decision
pertaining to Allahabad High court
would make such a provision all
the more necessary.
(g) The instances referred to
therein pave the way for more
cases of interpretation and this
could lead to confusion and lack
of clarity in future, Hearing of
cases of erstwhile clients too
should be brought within the
ambit of the Section.
(h) The term “misbehavior” in
Section 2(j) does not include
favoritism and nepotism. An
exhaustive definition any not be
entirely appropriate and could
give rise to difficulties in future.
(i) There is no provision for
creation of a “Performance
commission” to assess the work,
performance and suitability of a
Judge. In its absence, the acts
of misbehavior stated in (i), (ii),
(iii) and (ix) of Section 2 (j)
may be difficult to assess and
establish.
their advisory opinion. As per clause 3(2)
(c) of the Bill, a Judge shall not permit
any matter of his family or any close
relative to appeared before him.
‘Misbehavior’ has been defined for the
first time.

97
12 3 4
(j) Even in cases of proved
misbehavior of a serious nature
or incapacity, the Oversight
Committee, under Section 35 of
the act, can only request the
Judges to “voluntarily resign”
and if he fails. to do so, then
the matter would be referred to
the President to proceed for
removal of the Judge, In effect,
the entire process appears to be
only a prelude to the process of
impeachment contemplated under
the constitution. The process of
impeachment itself has been
highly ineffective. Thus, only a
duly constituted National Judicial
Commission created by the
constitution with powers to
appoint, transfer, enquire and
remove errant Judges can
effectively deal any such
eventualities.
(k) Under Section 34(3), if
before the completion of the
process of investigation the it
Judge concerned demits office,
then recommendations can only
be made for proceeding under
the relevant law for time being
in force. There is a degree of
ambiguity and it lacks clarity as
to what would be the exact legal
action that would be initiated if
there occurs a delay in
completion of investigation and
the Judge has demitted office in
the meanwhile.
(1) The provision contained in
Section 48(i) of the proposed
Act stipulates that if the report
of the investigation committee,
constituted by the Oversight
Committee under Section 47(3)
on receipt of a reference from
the Speaker or the Chairman as
The Bill is to regulate the procedure for
the removal of Judge. The Bill does not
deal with appointment and transfer of
Judges.
In a case where an inquiry or investigation
against the Judges has been initiated and
such Judge has demitted office during
such inquiry or investigation, such inquiry
or investigation may be continued if the
Oversight Committee is of the opinion
that the misbehaviour is serious in nature
and requires to be inquired into or
investigated and the Oversight Committee
may after conclusion of inquiry forward
its findings to the Central Government to
take further action in the matter under
relevant law for the time being in force.
Therefore, there is no ambiguity.
The intention is not to waste the precious
time of the Parliament when there are no
findings against the Judge.

98
12 3 4
the case may under Section
47(2), renders a finding that the
Judge is not guilty of
misbehavior or does not suffer
from any incapacity, then no
further steps shall be taken by
the Houses of Parliament and
the motion shall not be proceeded
with. It is difficult to understand
as to how the Statue can place
curbs on the powers of
Parliament to discuss and decide.
On the contrary, the endeavour
should have been to place such
report before Parliament for it
to deliberate and decide by
taking into account its contents.
(m) The time limits are
prescribed only for the initial
stages of investigation and not
for the entire process till its
culmination in all respects.
Further, there is no clarity as to
why there should be a 2nd
investigation process under
Sections 45 to 47 of chapter
VII when the motion itself is
based on the advice under
Section 35 which had been
rendered after an elaborate
process of investigation under
chapter VI.
(n) Restrictions on the right to
information under Sections 39
and 43 and the punishment
prescribed for its violation under
Section 51 are serious and
unwarranted. Denial of
information about the
proceedings and denial of
information even to the
complainant, except the findings
drawn, are highly improper. The
restrictions placed on the
information pertaining to
complaints are erroneous. Like
The Oversight Committee is a advisory
body. Motion for removal of a Judge on
the advice of the Oversight Committee
has to be moved in either House of
Parliament for consideration.
It is considered necessary to prescribe
penalties for intention officers.

99
12 3 4
in cases of financial frauds, etc,
once complaints are made
known to the public, other who
has also been adversely affected
on account of misconduct/
misbehaviour would come
forward to make known their
grievances. Similarly, the
provisions contained in Section
50(1) are vague and ambiguous
and the punishment of its
violation prescribed in Section
52 may also be improper.
Suggestions
Except in the Oversight
Committee where there is an
inclusion of an eminent member
nominated by the President, the
other Committees lack any such
representation of the People. Any
accountability in its strict sense
would require accountability to
the people and this can be
achieved only through inclusion
of people’s representatives
sufficiently.
A statutory mechanism will not
be able to effectively serve the
objects for which the Act is
sought to be enacted. Only the
constitution of a National Judicial
Commission by way of a
Constitutional amendment with
strengthened powers granted by
the Constitution itself, with
participation of the Judiciary and
the People’s Representatives
would be the ideal solution to
bring about standards and
accountability. These powers
should include powers pertaining
to Appointment of Judges,
Transfer of Judges for any
reasons, Powers to investigate
and to try and punish the erring
The Judges would be in better position
to understand the allegation from Judges
perspective. To preserve the independence
of judiciary, a Scrutiny Panel has
members from the Judiciary.
That would amount to interference in the
independence of the judiciary.
Appointment and transfer of Judges is
beyond the scope of the Bill.

100
12 3 4
individual Judges and Removal
of Judges.
Only a constitutional amendment
to create a National Judicial
Commission, which shall be in
charge of appointing Judges to
the higher judiciary, transferring
High Court Judges, drawing up
a code of ethics for Judges,
inquire into the cases of
misconduct or deviant actions
of a Judge, possess powers to
independently investigate, initiate
appropriate action and to try and
proceed against erring Judges
appropriately after such enquiry,
would only be the ideal choice
to bring about true standards
and accountability. The existing
process of impeachment which
has proved to be ineffective
should be appropriately amended
by creation a National Judicial
Commission vested with powers
including appointment, transfer,
enquiry and removal of Judges.
As long as such a national
Judicial commission is
constituted, any statutory
mechanism to bring about
standards and accountability may
tend to be perceived as a mere
illusion.
The Judicial Standards and
Accountability Bill in its present
form may never save real
purpose till it is a super-powered
body with a permanent
Secretariat at New Delhi. Its
constitution should be changed
for a wider representation. It is
a general belief that some judges
decide in favour of Government
to get post-retirement
appointments. Attorney General
Shri Subhash
Chandra Agrawal
(Memo No.4)
4. The Judges would be in a better position
to understand the allegations from Judge’s
perspective.

101
12 3 4
represents Union Government
and not the bar-body. Presence
of sitting judge of Supreme
Court and High Courts in
Oversight Committee will
adversely affect working of both
the Oversight Committee and
judicial assignment of its
member-judges. In present era
of ‘Uncle Judges’, neither
Scrutiny Panels nor Oversight
Committee should have any
sitting judge as their members.
Provision of five-years rigorous
imprisonment and a fine of
rupees five lakhs will prevent
even the genuine complaints
taking risk of complaining against
our super-powered judges
especially in an era of ‘Uncle
judges’ even including ‘Uncle
Chief Justice of India’/Present
law has sufficient provisions of
‘incamera’  proceedings will
avoid any harm to reputation of
a Judge found not-guilty
ultimately.
The Bill should incorporate
provision to compulsorily appoint
all judges of High Courts outside
from their home-states to
effectively check approaches and
influences on locally-appointed
High Court judges through their
local relations and former bar-
colleagues.
Lengthy procedure with various
channels in between like Scrutiny
Panel, Oversight Committee,
Presidential reference,
Parliamentary Committee and
then cumbersome Parliamentary
procedure to get rid of guilty-
found judge/s will provide no
reform other than to frighten
The word use in clause 53(1) of the Bill
is ‘may’. Therefore, it may note
necessary that in all cases, the term of
imprisonment would be 5 years and a
fine of Rs. 5 lakh. It may vary from
case to case. The object of the clause is
to discourage frivolous and vexatious
complaints against Judges.
The Bill deals with the Judges
Accountability and not with the
appointment of judges.
The Bill is to regulate the procedure for
removal of a Judge, while ensuring
independence of judiciary and protection
the judges from any intimidation.

102
12 3 4
those making even genuine
complaints against judges through
section 53(1). Bill in its present
form should rather be renamed
as ‘Corrupt Judges Protection
Act’. Fear-psychology should be
for erring judges rather than
judicial victims.
A permanent National Judicial
Commission (replacing both
Scrutiny’ Panels and Oversight
Committee) should be formed
with Leader, Chief Justice of
India, Bar Council with Chief
Vigilance Commissioner as ex-
officio  member, Commission’s
recommendations may be final
and sufficient for President of
India to order removal of guilty-
found judge/s apart from
confiscating wealth and assets
of such judge/s and their family
members. Rather such high-
powered Commission should be
empowered to recommend
judges for High Courts, Supreme
Court.
All judicial panels and
commissions formed by Union
or state governments should be
constituted by such a National
Judicial Commission to ensure
impartial and unbiased
investigations. Presently political
rulers appoint retired judges of
their own choice and ideology
to get a rubber-stamp
endorsement of their working by
a judicial panel.
1. Preamble: the purpose should
include “omissions and
commissions” made by the
judges while passing orders
repugnant to the articles in the
constitution of India, sections of
acts and rules passed by the
Misbehaviour has been defined to cover
such acts.
Shri N.S. Adkoli
(Memo No.5)
5.

103
12 3 4
Parliament and the State
legislature.
2. Section 1(1): “Accountability”
should include adherence to the
articles of the Constitution of
India and the provisions of acts
and rules in force.
3. Section 2(d):  Disregard to
the fundamental rights guaranteed
by the constitution of India
should get included in the
definition of “incapacity”.
4. Section 2(j):  Mis-carriage of
justice or blacking of justice
without offering any reason in
respect of guaranteed
fundamental rights may be
considered as “misbehavior”.
5. Section 2(ix):  Excessive or
misuse of article 142 of the
constitution to the subversion of
other articles or in violation of
any statute may be considered
as “breach of judicial standard”.
6. Sections 7 & 8:  Public
complaints should be allowed in
the expanded meaning of
“incapacity and misbehavior”
described at Sl. No.3 and 4
above.
7. Section 10:  the Scrutiny
panel should have equal number
of judges and eminent members
from the bar.
8. Section 15(2):  The head of
the ‘scrutiny panel’ should be a
legal luminary instead of the
Chief Justice of India.
9. Section 18:  the “Judicial
Oversight Committee” should be
This Section gives nomenclature and not
definitions.
Incapacity can be physical or mental as
defined. The suggestion is stretching it
too far. All such conduct could be
covered under clause 2(j) (1)
Public complaints are allowed to be made
to the Oversight Committee.
No role for members of the bar is
envisaged in the Bill the Judges would be
in a better position to scrutinize.
Section 15(2) does not deal with the matter
raised. The Scrutiny Panel is to be headed
by a former Chief Justice of India or
Chief Justice, as the case may be.
The Bill does not envisage any role for
the members of the bar.

104
12 3 4
from a panel of political prominent
members from the bar council.
10. Section 28:  A fixed time
frame of 6 to 9 weeks should
be fixed for submission of report
by the inquiry committee.
11. Section 29.4 The time limit
may be reduced to four months
or 100 working days.
12. Section 35:  the Oversights
Committee should be authorized
to reverse an order deemed illegal
or unconstitutional and or
recommend retail by a different
bench of the court. The committee
may be authorized to order
payment for the losses suffered
by earlier wrong orders passed
by any court. In extreme cases
of violation of any article of the
constitution of India and disregard
to the fundamental rights, the
committee should be authorized
to recommend impeachment of
the judges concerned.
13. Section 43:  application of
the RTI act should not be denied
to the sufferers of un-
constitutional or illegal orders
made by the High Courts or the
Supreme Court.
14. Section 48 (2)  May include
proceedings for impeachment.
15. Section 49:  the Joint
Parliamentary Committee should
have powers to make
recommendations to the
honorable President of India to
set aside such prima facie wrong
orders of the court, wherein the
court has dismissed even the
review petition in limini.
The Investigation Committee is to
complete the inquiry in 6 months time
which would be further extended by 6
months by the Oversight Committee.
A reasonable time of 6 months has been
allowed for the investigation.
The purpose of the Bill is to create
statutory mechanism for enquiring into
individual complaints against Judges and
not to examine the judgments reserved
by the Judges, for which appeal
provisions exist.
The provisions relate to the inquiry under
the Bill and not to other investigation
covered under the RTI Act, 2005
Consideration by the Parliament is an
action in the direction.
Such an action would amount to
interference in the independence of the
judiciary, which is not the intention behind
the Bill

105
12 3 4
Setting up a Judicial Public
Grievance Directorate” having a
10-15 Member body-one
Chairman and the rest as
members; as under the direct
control of the President of India.
The Chairman and the Members
of the directorate should be
eminent persons of highest
integrity giving past record of
ethical culture and good moral
behavior.
The Chairman should be given a
rank of Cabinet Secretary and
other Members of a Govt. of
India, Secretary level-all under
the overall control of President
of India.
Selection to be from amongst
the amiable person by inviting
application Prime Minister, Law
Minister, Leaders of all
opposition parties in the Lok
Sabha and Rajya Sabha. The
deflection to be unanimous; even
single negative vote to be taken
seriously and person should not
be selected.
President of India should issue
appointment orders after getting
recommendations from the
Selection committee.
Conduct Rules prescribed for the
Central Govt. officers/officials to
be followed for removal of the
Chairman and Members.
The directorate to be empowered
to entertain even hand written
complaints and issuing
acknowledgement for each and
every such complaint like the
present set up in the Public
Grievance Directorate, Cabinet
Such enactment will appear to be a gag
on the judiciary and hinder its functioning
without any fear or favour. The proposed
Bill has all the necessary provisions to
ensure accountability and action in a time
bound.
There is no need for such a Directorate.
The observations are also not relevant to
the Bill.
The importance of amending the
procedure for appointment of Judges has
not been lost sight of. However, it was
felt necessary to separately draft
comprehensive amendments to the
Constitution and not to combine the two
since the JSA Bill is a statutory exercise
and not a constitutional amendment.
6. Shri M.L. Gupta,
R.D. Bhatia

106
12 3 4
Sect. Rashtrapati Bhawan, New
Delhi.
The Directorate to forward the
complaint to the Cabinet
Secretary level officers (Center
and State both) who after getting
the complaint thoroughly
investigated may send a reply to
the directorate. At directorate
level, full bench should be
empowered to discuss and give
decision and intimate that
complainant of their decision. In
no case Judges or even
Advocates are required to be
involved while redressing a
complaint against any Judge.
All States to set up identical
Directorates to be headed by a
director level officer to be
answerable to the chairman of
the main Directorate. This should
be under the direct control of
the Chief Minister of the State.
The President of India office
should monitor the functioning
of the directorate and should
conduct monthly review meetings
for disposal of the complaints.
Public should be encouraged to
make complaints covering areas
to discourage the tendency of
keeping ‘’judgments reserved for
unknown periods and second for
keeping cases under the unlisted
category.
Provisions in chapter-II and
chapter-III may be retained but
with a rider that any information
will have to be given to the
Public on demand beside being
available on websites. Rest of
the Chapters of the Present

107
12 3 4
proposed bill are to be written
as stated in the proceeding
paragraphs.
Courts should not be given any
powers to make their own Rules
on any subject except laying
down procedures for filing and
hearing cases and having
administrative control on their
staff. It is the prorogating and
should continue to remain the
prerogative of the parliament to
make rules or enforce Acts.
It is the most appropriate time
to repeal (1) the Contempt of
Court Law and (ii) Present
procedure of impeachment of
judges having been proved totally
ineffective tool in the Indian
History.
1. Advocates must be compelled
to disclose their relationship if
any with the Judges so as to
prevent placing his matter before
the bench to curb bench Huting
and Uncle Judges. No Advocates
enrolled in one State should be
appointed in the same state as
High Court Judges for initial ten
years of their tenure.
2. Time bound steps in all
matters and timely disposal to
be made essential with the
recording of date institution, date
of interim orders passed, and
dates of different happening in
the matter etc. in the Judgment/
order.
3. Judgment/order to mention
future course of action available
to parties in order to streamline
future proceedings and avoid
grouping in the dark Mechanism
All Acts are enacted by the Parliament
and Rules are framed thereunder.
The Bill deals with accountability in higher
judiciary and not the appointment of
Judges.
These suggestions relate to day-to-day
functioning of the judiciary and not
relevant to the Bill.
7. Shri Vilas D.
Patkar. (Memo
No. 7)

108
12 3 4
for implementation of Judgments/
orders with time stipulation,
mentioned in the same.
4. Judges may be compelled to
pass specific common
Judgments/orders to avoid
drawing wishful inferences and
scope for convenient conclusions
giving rise to plethora of
litigations.
5. Mandated to submit and
declare of the courts web the
assets, Liabilities and other
investments of Judge, his/her
spouse and kins at least every
three years.
6. Audio recording of the court
proceedings during the court
hours. Each day with the
permission to receive the certified
copies on the same in a Disc.
7. No tag as liberal or
conservative Judge, it is the law
which should speak equally to
all. Different interpretation,
different treatment to different
litigants killed the spirit of the
enactments.
8. Time bound disposal in
matters, particularly when interim
orders are passed so as to avoid
discretion with discrimination and
to avoid perpetuation of injustice.
9. Assistants to Judges be
appointed to study the matter
and record legal provisions and
note relevant Judgments which
would work as a ready reference
in the matter for the perusal.
The self drawn principle “Judge
can decide the matter rightly or
wrongly” should be abolished.
The Bill provides that every Judge shall
declare his assets and liabilities, including
those of spouse and dependent children
every year.

109
12 3 4
10. Law of contempt in the
rarest of the rear circumstances.
.
11. Roznama of each proceeding
be maintained consisting the time
when the matter called out,
presence of the advocates, the
time of conclusion etc.
12. Committees for the evaluation
of the Judgments/orders at the
state, national level to Judge the
Judges.
13. No oral caustic, condemning
scolding, inserting comments in
open court to give food to the
press. The views and
consideration must be Exhibited
in the order Judgment rather
than image creation.
14. Removal, suspension,
dismissal of Judges must be
stricter considering the authority
and powers the chair caries.
Selection Appointment must be
made a transparent open and
brought under the RTI.
15. The obscurity and
technicality should be set aside.
Provisions should be pronounced
in the layman’s understanding to
give clarity and cleanliness to
the legal interpretation so as to
avoid disputes arising again and
again on same, similar issues,
and those arising due to different
interpretation at different levels.
(b) The Bill is not self
explanatory on points of judicial
standards e.g.
(I) On Principle, a Judge, while
on Judicial job, finding out what
is wrong or right, is above
Appointment is not the subject matter of
the Bill. Application of RTI Act, 2005 in
the case of appointment and transfer of
Judges is sub judice  at present.
The scope of the Bill is to lay down
Judicial Standards and provide for
accountability of Judges, and establish
credible and expedient mechanism for
investigation into individual complaints for
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of
the Supreme Court or of a High Court
8. Shri K.K. Mittal
(Memo No. 8)

110
12 3 4
and to regulate the procedure for such
investigation; and for the presentation of
an address by Parliament to the President
in relation to the proceeding for removal
of a Judge and matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
Pendency of court cases is a separate
issue.
narrow groves of cast, creed,
community, disposition and
aversions. The outcome vouches
for all that & reflects the quality
of being just and is based on
the resultant pulse that remains
out of the facts, brought to the
notice of the Judiciary directly
or indirectly.
(ii) Standards provide for
Judgment to be in categorical
clear terms & self speaking,
leaving no room for its
misinterpretation at any level in
future and it being not conducive
to crop-up fresh controversies,
confusions and contradiction.
(iii) Keeping consistency in
judicially proceedings and
decisions should be one of the
standards of Judiciary to avoid
dies-similar treatment to similar/
identical cases.
(iv) Judicial decisions should not
become as sources for
retardation in activities, essentially
required for survival of the
society as a nation we all live
in.
(c) (I) One of the pertinent
aspects of judicial accountability
is related to delay in making
pendency of cases analyzed.
Even on general terms, what
terms, what to say case wise!
After all it is for them to provide
justice speedily, removing/facing
obstacles, whatsoever. Availability
of law graduates/post graduates
is increasing year to year for
the cadre and a large no. of
Judges. Senior Advocates of
repute are waiting for their
promotion to High Court/

111
12 3 4
Supreme Court. While on the
other hand, pendency is either
static or on increase. What an
irony!
(ii) Constitutional authorities like
CJs, CAG , CVC etc. enjoy unique
status and are not indirect
bearing on governance.
Particularly, of those at the helm
of Judiciary. In view of this and
all fairness. Judges should not
be associated in the matter of
complaints against them requiring
their accountability for. Of
course, except giving a fair
chance to defend them. Instead,
public representatives should take
decision on that.
(iii) In matters of complaints,
the bill provides and involves
(a) Establishment of National
Oversight Committee,
(b) Scrutiny Panels and (c)
Investigating Committees, with
powers to be vested in them as
civil courts/magistrate. That all
will lead no wheel &
accountability/fixing of
responsibility on Judges would
remain a far cry in wilderness.
(iv) Establishment of a single
agency as a final authority in
itself to decide all cases of a
complaints conclusively. Its
composition may be Vice-
President of India as Chairperson,
PM/Speaker of LS, leaders of
the ruling/opposition parties and
four outstanding personalities,
well known at national Level.
(v) On receipt of the complaint,
Secretary may get it ---- then
This will amount to making the judiciary
subservient to the legislative which against
the scheme of the Constitution.
The Bill  provides for investigation and
action in accordance with the provision
of the Constitution. The suggestion is
not practicable.
Lawyers have no role to play in the
whole process. Staff requirements for

112
12 3 4
pass a speaking order, base on
the majority decision of the
commission with prior approval
of President of India, within
four months.
(vi) All sorts of assistance/details
may be provided to NCJA by
GOI & respective Court(s).
Whereas President referring the
matter to Parliament and
Speaker/Chairman admitting the
notice or refuse to admit it,
consequently the matter again
referred back to the oversight
committee for inquiry, does not
convince the complainant and it
defeats the every purpose of the
bill in achieving the objects of
judicial standards and
accountability of judges. So in
the light of this ambiguity, the
makers of the bill need to review
the bill thoroughly and instill
confidence among the public &
every citizen of India.
The Bill does not deliver on each
of these
(a) to lay down judicial
standards,
S2 (h) under the definitions
clause claims to define ‘judicial
standards’ but leaves those
standards vaguely stated in S3
& the Schedule.
S3 (1)  speaks of universally
accepted values of judicial life
as specified in the schedule,
which in turn, speaks of norms,
including punctuality and
commitment to work, guidelines
and conventions essential for the
the Oversight Committee, Scrutiny Panel
etc. have been taken care of.
There is no change with regard to the
power or the position of Parliament.
Ultimately, it is only Parliament which
can decide on removal of a Judge, as
per the Constitution.
The Bill will create a statutory mechanism
for enquiring into individual complaints
against the judges of the Supreme Court
and High Courts and provide appropriate
remedies to tackle with corruption in the
higher judiciary.
Section 3 very clearly details the Judicial
Standards to be practicised by a Judges.
The schedule gives a blanket coverage
of such standards.
9.
10.
Shri G.
Sreenivas Rao
(Memo No. 9)
Ms. Indira
Unninayar
(Memo No. 10)

113
12 3 4
conduct and behavior of judges.
The schedule however, does not
detail out these norms in terms
of the requisite conduct of
judges, such as hearing parties
with courtesy and patience, not
making personal comments on
parties, not threatening partite,
etc. Other ‘standards’ such as
“being conscious of being under
the public gaze” and “aloofness”
and that “judgments should speak
for themselves” – lack specificity
and do not lay down requisite
clear standards.
S3 (2)  only lays down few
threshold or basic rules, which
are to do with a judge’s relation
to the public dealings. Very little
is said about the conduct of
judges in matters before their
courts.
S3(2) (m), 2(n)  provides that
no judge shall (m) belong to
any organization that practices
discrimination (n) have bias in
his judgments– on the basis of
religion, or race or caste or sex
or place of birth. However, it
does not have two very crucial
factors of is- i.e.  ‘political
influence’, ‘monetary influence’,
‘socio-economic bias’ These are
important realties in the Indian
scenario today.
These provisions render it
virtually impossible to hold a
judge accountable in the face of
such vague, general standards,
and in the absence of crucial
factors.
(b) to provide for accountability
of judges.
The Bill is not aimed to interfere in day
to day working of the judiciary.
The standards are very specific and the
term ‘misbehaviour’ as defined, covers
all influences.

114
12 3 4
(c) to establish a credible and
expedient, mechanism for
investigating into individual
complaints for misbehavior or
incapacity of judges.
Requires serious and permanent
departures from judicial
standards to qualify as worthy
of complaints in this bill.
Such departures from vaguely
laid down standards that need
to be persistent and willful are
difficult to pin down and prove.
Too much would be left to the
discretion of the Committees in
question.
Incapacity is inadequately
addressed as it does not cover
‘judicial incapacity’ e.g. lack of
listening skills/ability to tackle a
problem with judicial
temperament, lack of
understanding of the law, lack
of basic courtesy, lack of
listening skills/ability to tackle a
problem with judicial
temperament, lack of
understanding of the law, lack
of basic courtesy, lack of
integrity, lack of action/inability
to regulate court proceedings
(e.g.  misconduct by lawyers,
permeated adjournments, perjury,
misrepresentations, etc.) further,
it does not denature at all in
(S22(1), and suddenly, comes
back in S35.
Video-recordings of all court
proceedings” required– To
ascertain the veracity of the
complaint/prove/disprove it, the
bill should incorporate video-
recording all court proceedings.
In order to ensure transparency
All those are expected of a Judge and if
found wanting, can be proceeded against
for misbehaviour.
The Bill does not deal with the procedure
to be followed by a court of Law.

115
12 3 4
The period is to be decided by the
Oversight Committee.
The Investigation Committee shall hold
every such inquiry as expeditiously as
possible and in any case complete the
inquiry within 6 months time which, for
the reasons “to be recorded in writing,
may be extended by 6 months by the
Oversight Committee.
and accountability of judges/
courts. Further, the investigation
proceedings of the complaint
should also be recorded.
S6 Maintenance of records–
requires the competent authority,
i.e. the Chief Justices of the
respective High court/Supreme
Court, or the President to keep
documents or information
relating to assets and liabilities
of judges as per the discretion
of the oversight committee.
Instead of doing this, it should
define a period for preserving
such documents, say 10 years
or so.
S7 Complaints– allows
complaints only with regard to
‘misbehavior’ and ‘incapacity’
both being extremely limited in
scope, as explained under S2
(d) & S2 (j), and as day to day
problems relating to judges;
duties and functions, such as
‘refusal to listen/provide careful
attention to the matter
‘inadequate preparation for
cases’, etc. that fail from
rendering justice, are completely
left out of the ambit of the bill.
The complaint mechanism,
The entire complaint mechanism
is extremely cumbersome.
Lengthy and difficult to
conclude, with ample slope for
the procedure to defeat the object
of the bill.
It lacks the independence and
impartiality that the bill purports
to achieve.

116
There are 3 Committees with
the complaint being first
submitted to the Oversight
Committee, then referred from
the Overusing Committee to a
Scrutiny Committee, then back
to the Oversight Committee, and
then to investigation
Committee(s), and then back to
the Oversight Committee.
The entire procedure could take
1-1½ years as the various
Committees can take several
months to refere/forward the
complaint to the next stage or,
conclude the matter, e.g.
(a) The Oversight Committee
could take up to 3 months to
decide whether to refer the
complaint to the Scrutiny Panel
(SI9)
(b) The scrutiny of the complaint
could take up another 3 months
[S12 (2)].
(c) Thereafter, the investigation
of the complaint could take up
to 6 months. Extendible by
another 6 months [S29 (4)].
Adequate result of complaint
inadequate, even if charges proved.
The outcome of such investigation
could very well be only issuance
of advisories/warnings even if the
charges are proved. [S34 (1) (b)].
further, there could be a
recommendation for prosecution
of the judge in case the Oversight
Committee “is satisfied” that there
is commission of an offence
[S 34(2)]. Having already
imposed extremely stringent
conditions to consider a complaint
worthy of scrutiny and
investigation, the oversight further,
requires to be “satisfied” after
conclusion of the investigation,
that the charges re incapacity or
12 3 4

117
12 3 4
misbehavior are of serious nature,
for action relating to removal.
(S35) thus, instead of clearly
specified instances of
transgression of well laid sown
judicial standards, there is
enormous discretionary power left
to the various committees, more
specifically, the oversight
committee in proving charges
against the concerned judge.
S 34(2) should read “If the
charges have been prove, but
do not warrant removal, then
the Oversight committee shall
(not may) take necessary action
against the judge by way of
reflection of the same in his/her
confidential records”.
Accordingly, “necessary action”
requires to be defined in the bill.
There should also be a provision
to reverse the damage caused by
such misconduct. In other words.
There should be consequences
to proved misconduct.
Similarly, if a judge demits office,
the investigation should continue
and its continuance should not
be left to the discretion of
the oversight committee as per
[S34 (3)].
Domination of committee by
judges.
The 3 committees are dominated
by judges, whereas there should
not be more than one judge in
each.
(a) S10.11 (1) and 11(2) – The
scrutiny committee is constituted
of judges nominated by the
Chief Justice of the concerned
court– i.e. the Supreme Court
or the concerned High Court.
2 Judges of the relevant High
Court/Supreme Court and a
former Chief justice constitute
The composition of Committees has been
worked out so that independence of the
judiciary should not be affected.
The Judges would be in a better position

118
the scrutiny committee. The very
composition of the scrutiny
committee is designed to bias
the scrutiny of the complaint.
(b) S.18– The composition of
the oversight committee is even
more ridden with bias, as a
complaint against the Chief
Justice of India (CJI) cannot be
referred to the scrutiny
committee, but must be examined
by the oversight committee itself,
2 members of which the CJI
has the power to nominate, and
1 member who is appointed by
the President only after
ascertaining the views of the CJI
(S21). Likewise, the Attorney
General is a member ex officio .
(c) S.22– The oversight
committee has the powers to
constitute one or more
investigation committees.
(d) Thus, all the committees are
constituted of colleague judges,
who call each other ‘brother’.
(e) the composition/constitution
and control over constitution of
the various committee lies with
the very category of persons
Gudges) against whom the
complaint lies. It violated basic
principles of rendering justice as
these persons have an interest-
personal and professional, in the
matter.
(f) It is recommended that in
interest of independence of the
entire complaint mechanism. That
there be only :b former judge of
the oversight committee and other
members are lay persons/
members of society with certain
stipulated qualifications, and
selected through a transparent
public mechanism based on clear
an appointment criteria.
12 3 4
to understand the allegations from Judge’s
perspective.

119
The Complainant does not have to muster
witness, records etc. It is to be done by
the relevant Committee.
The specific provision does not need to
qualify under the RTI Act, 2005. The
Oversight Committee may, however, direct
for needy action, and also the findings of
Investigation Committee and order by
Oversight Committee are to be made
public.
This has to be complainants choice.
12 3 4
Basis for conclusions. Finding/
reports.
(a) the basis for the above should
also include video-recordings of
the alleged conduct in case they
pertain to misconduct or
misbehavior in court.
(b) a provision for a rejoinder
by the complainant should also
be introduced, apart from giving
the judge an opportunity to be
heard (S29 (4).
Bound to secrecy
(a) S39– The complainant is
sworn to secrecy re: his
complaint, its content and the
name of the judge. It becomes
impossible for the complainant
to muster up witnesses, and
such needles secrecy endangers
the complainant. The entire
procedure also acquires a dark
and dangerous opacity instead
of the limulus transparency that
it demands/merits.
(b) S43– the complaint is
brought within the exemption
from the RTI Act 2005, even
though it does not qualify under
any of the exception clauses.
(c) Thus, the very object of
setting up a credible mechanism
for investigating into individual
complaints is defeated.
Confidentiality of the complaint
should be mandatory.
(a) S40– the complainant’s
identity should be kept
confidential regardless of any
application from the complainant.

120
12 3 4
(b) S40. The oversight
committee should be made
responsible for the protection of
the complainant. Should any
‘accident’ or anything untoward
happen to the complainant, then
the oversight committee should
be held responsible through
some mechanism.
(c) for this purpose too, there
should be no clause biding he
complainant to secrecy.
Detailed provisions on
punishment of the complaint– but
no clauses on punishment of the
concerned judge if found guilty.
Detailed mentors to prevent filing
of complains, or even ensure
that the complaints are dealt with
in a fair and just manner.
(a) S50 (1) – provides for
punishment of “whoever
intentionally insults, or causes
any interruption to the scrutiny
panel or investigation committee
or oversight committee” without
defining what constitutes such
‘insult’ or disruption’ and who
should decide whether such
disruption has occurred.
(b) S50 (2)– does not allow the
public prosecutor to lodge any
complaints without sanction
from the oversight committee.
(c) S51– the punishment for not
keeping the complaint secret is
costly for it invites both a 1
month jail term for the
complainant and a fine.
(e) S53.– is the most discouraging
provision, scaring away a
complainant from even thinking
This suggestion is impracticable.
Clause 46 of the Bill provides that on
laying of the advice of the Oversight
Committee along with the accompanying
material, the Central Government may
move a motion in either House of
Parliament for taking up the said advice
for consideration by the House.
This is necessary for smooth functioning
of the Committees who have the powers
of a Civil Court.
This is a confusing statement At one
place the suggestion is to keep the
complaints-confidential and at the other
penalty for violation is being criticized.

121
12 3 4
of filing a complaint, as, if after
this heavily bias ridden
procedure to deal with
complaints, it is “found” that
the complaint is “frivolous” or
“vexatious” then it invites a fine
of Rs. 5 lakh and rigorous
imprisonment for 5 years.
The Statement of Objects and
Reasons– Point 4 say that the bill
seeks to, inter alia , lay down the
judicial standards to be followed
by judges and to increase the
accountability of judges of the
High Courts and Supreme Court
thereby further strengthening the
independence of the judiciary.
However, the bill:
(a) Fails to lay down clear
standards.
(b) Sets up a very cumbersome,
difficult and lengthy procedure.
(c) Is designed to scuttle judges
accountability as it is ridden with
bias as the mechanism is
controlled by judges.
(d) in the name of independence,
the judges are being further given
unbridled control over any ability
to regulate their conduct and
hold them accountable.
(e) By handing over the entire
process of laying down Standards
and Investigation of judges
complaints, it thereby prevents any
further attempt to achieve either.
(f) Restricts itself to the
Supreme Court and High Court,
whereas it is silent about the
subordinate judiciary, which has
the  maximum number of cases
and delays with the day to day
lives of citizens. Persons.
This is meant to discourage frivolous
petitions which may result in harassment
of Judges.
The scope of the Bill is to lay down
judicial standards and provide for
accountability of Judges in the higher
judiciary and establish credible and
expedient mechanism for investigation into
individual complaints for misbehaviour or
incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme
Court or of a High Court.
Subordinate, Judiciary is controlled by
the respective state governments and the
concerned High Courts as laid down in
Article 235 of the Constitution.

122
Pre-Legislative
Briefing
Service Memo
No. 11
1.Clause 2(j)
The amended clause 2(j) should read:
(j) misbehaviour means wilful conduct of
a judge which brings dishonour or
disrepute to the judiciary as determined
by the Oversight Committee and may
include:
(ix) Wilful or persistent failure to perform
the duties of a Judge; or
(x) Wilful abuse of judicial office; or
(xi) Corruption or lack of integrity which
includes delivering judgments for collateral
or extraneous reasons, making demands
for consideration in cash or kind for giving
judgments or any other action on the part
of the Judges which has the effect of
subverting the administration of justice; or
(xii) Committing an offence involving
moral turpitude; or
(xiii) Wilful failure to furnish the
declaration of assets and liabilities in
accordance with the provisions of this
Act; or
(xiv) Wilfully giving false information in
the declaration of assets and liabilities under
this Act; or
(xv) Wilful suppression of any material
fact, whether such fact relates to the
period before assumption of office, which
would have a bearing on his integrity; or
(xvi) Wilful breach of judicial standards.
2. Clause 3
(a) Clause 3 of the Bill be deleted for
being violative of judicial independence.
(b) The task of laying down of judicial
standards be vested in the Oversight
Committee by introduction a new
provision thorough an appropriate
amendment to Chapter VI.
No amendment is required as the said
provisions are already contained in the
Bill.
Name of the Comments/views Response of the Government
organization/
individual
12 3

123
12 3
c. In the said provision, the Oversight
Committee may be directed to take into
account the illustrative standards laid down
in Clause 3 as amended by the
recommendations made in Chapter II
Section B below, while framing judicial
standards.
d. Alternatively or in addition, the
standards laid down in Clause 3 of the
Bill should be amended to safe guard the
independence of the judiciary; the added
provisions should read as follows;
(3) (2) In particular, without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing provision,
no Judge shall-
(b) permit any member of the ‘Bar with
whom he has a close association, or with
whom he had a close association as a
member of the Bar, if such person’s
appearance in his Court will reasonable
give rise to the perception of bias, to
appear before him or to be involved in
any manner with a cause to be dealt with
by him, if he has knowledge of such
involvement;
Provided that members of the Bar with
whom the judge has close academic and/
of charitable associations shall not be
considered to have a close association
with the Judge.
Provided further that the words “close
association” in this section shall include
members (whether seniors, juniors or
colleagues) of the chamber(s) to which
the Judge belonged and with whom a
Judge worked for a substantial period of
time.
(d) Permit any member of his family,
whether such person is a member of the
Bar or otherwise, to use the residence in
which the Judge actually resides as an
office or to meet clients or in any other
unreasonable or inappropriate manner as
may lower the dignity and status of the
office of the Judge; and further, permit
any such member of his family to use
other facilities provided to the Judge

124
12 3
repeatedly and in an unreasonable and
inappropriate manner as may amount to
misuse of the office of the Judge.
(f) The words “in private forum or
academic forum” be deleted from Clause
3(2) (f) (i).
The following sub-clause (iii) may also be
added:
“If a judge is known to hold strong views
on topics relevant to issues in the case,
by reason of public statements or other
expression of opinion on such topics,
possible recusal by the judge may have to
be addressed, whether or not the matter
is raised by the parties.
Provided, views expressed by the judge
in other case are not to be taken into
account.”
(h) (i) A judge and members of the judge’s
family, shall neither ask for, nor accept,
any gift, bequest, loan or favour in relation
to anything done or to be done or omitted
to be done by the judge in connection,
either directly or indirectly, with the
performance of judicial duties.
(ii) A judge shall not knowingly permit
court staff or others subject to the judge’s
indulgence, direction or authority, to ask
for, or accept, any gift, bequest, loan or
favour in relation to anything done or to
be done or omitted to be done in
connection with his or her duties or
functions.
(iii) A judge may receive a token gift or
benefit as appropriate to the occasion on
which it is made provided that such gift,
award or benefit might not reasonably be
perceived as intended to influence the judge
in the performance of judicial duties or
otherwise give rise to an appearance of
partiality.
Provided, hospitality accepted for an
educational or academic purpose is exempt
from any prohibition under this Section
unless it gives rise to an appearance of
partiality.

125
12 3
(i) hear and decide a matter in which a
company or society or trust in which he
holds or any relative holds shares or
interest; and the fact that he may have
disclosed such holding or interest and no
objection to his hearing and deciding the
matter is raided shall be irrelevant;
Provided that it shall be presumed that a
judge knows about all the shares or
interest held by his relative in a company
or society or trust, although a judge shall
be entitled to prove that he did not have
such knowledge.
e. In addition, the following clauses
inserted to the judicial standards
present in the Bill:
(3) (2) In particular, without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing provision,
no Judge shall-
(0) Permit unnecessary postponements and
shall strive to hear the case and deliver
his judgment as expediently as possible.
(p) Disclose for any other purpose not
related to the judge’s judicial duties,
confidential information acquired by him
in his judicial capacity.
(q) Withhold clear and reliable evidence
on serious professional misconduct or
gross incompetence on the part of a legal
fractioned or public prosecutor from the
Chief Justice of India or the Chief Justice
of the High Court, as the case may be.
3.Provision relating to the making of
a complaint and the complaints
Scrutiny Panel: Chapter IV and
Chapter V
A. Clause 9
The amended clause 9 should read:
9. (1) Every complaint filed under this
Act, shall be scrutinised by the Oversight
Committee to satisfy if there are sufficient
ground for proceeding against a Judge

126
12 3
within three months from the date of
receipt of the complaint.
(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) where
it deems appropriate, the Oversight
Committee any refer a complaint for
scrutiny by the Scrutiny Panel within three
months from the date of receipt of the
complaint against-
(a) an individual Judge of the Supreme
Court or the Chief Justice of a High
Court, refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny
Panel of the Supreme Court to scrutinise
and report thereon;
(b) an individual Judge of a High Court,
refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny Panel
of the High Court in which such Judge is
acting as such, to scrutinise and report
thereon.
(3) A complaint against the Chief Justice
of India shall not be referred to the
Scrutiny Panel for scrutiny but shall be
scrutinised by the Oversight Committee
within three months from the receipt of
the complaint.
b. Other aligned changes
- The new Clause 9 and existing
Clause 20 should be place in
Chapter V which should titled
“Scrutiny and Scrutiny Panel”.
- Clause 10- The words “received
under this Act” need to be replace
with “when referred to into by the
Oversight Committee”.
- Clause 13-The word “the Oversight
committee or” be added before the
words “the Scrutiny Panel”.
- Clause 14-the words “Oversight
Committee and the” be added before
the words “Scrutiny Panel”.
- Clause 22(1)-The words “Oversight
Committee is satisfied that there are
sufficient ground for an inquiry or”
be inserted before the words “the
Scrutiny Panel”

127
12 3
- Clause 36- The Clause shall be
amended as follows:
36. Upon the scrutiny of a complaint, if
the Oversight Committee is of the opinion
that a complaint was filed frivolously or
vexatiously or only with a view to
scandalise or intimidate the Judge, or if
the Scrutiny Panel refers a case to the
Oversight Committee under section 16 and
the Oversight Committee concurs with
the conclusion of the Scrutiny Panel on
further consideration, it may authorise the
filing of a criminal complaint against the
original complainant before a competent
court.
4. Provision relating to the National
Judicial Oversight Committee: Chapter
VI part A
a. Clause 17
Owing to the confidentiality requirement,
it cannot be provided that the Attorney-
General not appear in the Court of the
judge under scrutiny investigation, thus,
we believe, it is necessary that the
Attorney-General, being the first law
Officer/ of the Government, is not made
member of the Oversight Committee. His
place may be taken by a judicial member
or an eminent jurist as deemed fit by the
Honourable Standing Committee.
b. Additions to Clauses
By appropriate amendments to Chapter VI
A provisions relating to the tenure and the
possibility or re-appointment of no ex-
officio members and the remuneration and
procedure for removal of all members of
the Oversight Committee be incorporated.
By an appropriate amendment to chapter
VIA the power of the Oversight
Committee to regulate its own procedure
be incorporated.

128
12 3
5. Procedure for Inquiry or
Investigation into Incapacity of a Judge
a. Clause 22(1)
The Oversight Committee, shall for the
purpose of inquiry of misbehaviour by a
Judge, or his incapacity, constitute an
Investigation Committee (by whoever name
so called) to investigate into the complaint
in respect of which the Oversight
Committee is satisfied that there are
sufficient grounds for an inquiry against
the Judge or the Scrutiny Panel has
recommended in its report under Clause
(a) of sub-section (1) of Section 12 for
making inquiry against the Judge in
accordance with the provisions of this
Act.
b. Clauses: 47(4)-(6)
Clause 47(4) to (6) are to be place after
Clause 22 in Chapter VI Part Band should
read:
(1) Where it is alleged that the Judge is
unable to discharge the duties of his office
efficiently due to any physical or mental
incapacity and the allegation is denied, the
Council may arrange for the medical
examination of the Judge by such Medical
Board as may be appointed for the purpose
by the Oversight Committee in the case
of complaints filed under section 7, and
by the Speaker or the Chairman (as the
case may be) of either House of the
Parliament.
(2) The Medial Board shall undertake such
medical examination of the Judge as may
be considered necessary and submit a
report to the Council stating therein
whether the incapacity is such as to render
the Judge unfit to continue in office.
(3) If the Judge refuses to undergo
medical examination considered necessary
by the Medical Board, the Board shall
submit a report to the investigating
committee stating therein the examination

129
12 3
which the Judge has refused to undergo,
and the investigation committee may, on
receipt of such report, presume that the
Judge suffers from such physical or mental
incapacity as is alleged.
6. Penalties Pending and on Conclusion
of Inquiry: chapter VI part E
a. Clause 33
The amended clause 33 should read:
33. During the pendency of the inquiry,
the Oversight Committee may recommend
stoppage to assigning judicial work
including cases assigned to the Judge
concerned, or suspension or promotion
or elevation of the Judge as a Judge of
the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice
of a High Court or the Supreme Court, as
the case may be, direct the Judge
concerned to go on leave, or all of the
above, if it appears to the Oversight
Committee that it is necessary in the
interest of fair and impartial scrutiny of
complaints or investigation or inquiry.
b. Other aligned changes
To reflect the breadth of provisions in
Part E Chapter VI, it is also recommended
that the titled of the same be modified as
“Interim Measures Pending Inquiry and
Penalties on conclusion of Inquiry:
7. Offences and penalties: Chapter
VIII
a. Clause 51
The amended Clause 51 should read:
51. If ay complainant or other person,
who participates in the scrutiny or
investigation or inquiry as a witness or as
a lawyer or in any other capacity,
contravenes the provision of section 39
or section 40 or section 43, shall be liable
for punishment with simple imprisonment

130
12 3
for a minimum term of six months which
may extend to one year and also a fine of
minimum fifty thousand rupees which may
extend to one lakh rupees.
b. Clause 53
The amended clause 53 should read:
53.(1) Any person who makes a complaint
which is found, after following the
procedure under this Act to be frivolous
or vexatious or made with an intent to
scandalize or intimidate the Judge against
whom such complaint is filed, shall be
punishable with simple imprisonment for
a term of minimum six months which
may extend to one year and also a fine of
minimum fifty thousand rupees which may
extend to one lakh rupees.
8. Time limit for Investigation
Committee
Clause 29(4)
The amended clause 29(4) should read:
29(4) The Investigating Committee shall
hold every such inquiry as expeditiously
as possible and in any case complete the
inquiry and submit its report to the
Oversight Committee within a, period of
six months from the date of receipt of
the complaint:
Provided, that the Investigation Committee
for reasons to be recorded in writing,
may extend the period for completion of
the inquiry by a maximum period of six
months.
9. Clause 34 and 35: Minor Measures
a. Clause 34(1) should incorporate
clause 35 and now read as follows:
“If the Oversight Committee on receipt of
the report from the investigation committee
is satisfied that-

131
12 3
(b) All or any of the charges have been
proved but the Oversight Committee is of
the opinion that the charges proved do
not warrant removal of the Judge. It may,
by order impose one of the following
sanctions:
(i) send a letter of advice to the Judge
with a warning about the possibility of
impeachment if such misbehaviour is
repeated:
(ii) censure or reprimand the Judge by
means of private communicate:
(iii) recommend to the Chief Justice of
India to lower the seniority of the Judge
for the purpose of appointment as Chief
Justice of a High Court or promotion to
the Supreme Court of India, in case of
High Court judges;
(c) all or any of the charges of
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge
have been proved, and that they are of
serious nature warranting his removal, it
shall request the Judge to voluntarily reign,
and if he fails to do so, advise the
President to proceed for the removal of
the Judge and the President shall refer the
matter to Parliament.
b. A new clause 34(4) should be added
to provide:
(4) Any decision taken by the Oversight
Committee under sub-section (1) must be
taken within one month of the receipt of
the report of the investigation committee.
10. Formulation of a Judicial
Development Scheme
In Chapter VI.A of the Bill, the Honourable
committee be pleased to vest the Oversight
Committee with the function of
formulating, through appropriate rules, a
Judicial Development Scheme for judges
of the Supreme Court of India and the
High Courts.
Not within the scope of the Bill.

132
12 3
The Standing Committee first preparing
how to capture evidence of the conduct/
misbehaviour in the first place is a classic
example of putting the cart before the
horse.
The judicial misconduct takes place very
often “Inside” the Court Room; or to put
it differently, evidence of misconduct
outside the court-room would-very often-
be self-evident from conduct or demand
inside the court-room. But today, there is
no evidence of this misconduct “inside”
the court-room, because India has still
not started to video-recorded our court
proceedings. At best, there may be
“witnesses” who invariably are layers, and
for professional reasons, most of them
would not like to get embroiled in an
unsavoury controversy with a Judge about
his conduct.
Courts traditionally use the Contempt of
Courts Act to punish people who record
court proceedings. But this Act is an Act
that has been drafted and approved by
our Parliament, which Parliament itself
publicity airs “live” its own Parliamentary
proceedings.
The present Bill or the Rules to be made
there under, could make it mandatory
within its own body to provide for the
installation of video-recording equipment
in the courts
Part A-chapter 5 Clause 10:
A separate Agency should be constituted
in Ministry of Law and Justice instead of
Supreme Court for dealing with the
complaints against Judges because the new
system is required as the present
establishment is not working properly. This
separate Agency may be National Judicial
Oversight Committee which is enumerated
in the Bill.
Shri Deepak
Khosla (Memo
No. 12)
Shri B.L.
Samota
(Memo No.
13)
This is a procedural matter to be decided
by the courts.
Such a mechanism is not necessary. The
JSA Bill makes it possible for formalizing
the procedure for investigation into
complaints against Judges, which is
presently being done through an In House
procedure which has been criticized as
being unsatisfactory.

133
12 3
Part A- Chapter 5 Clause 11:
Power to constitute panel to the purpose
of dealing with the complaints against
Judges should be vested in above
mentioned National Judicial Oversight
Committee.
Part A-Chapter 5 clause 14:
The Panel should have power to obtain
confidential report from Central
Investigation Bureau and the Intelligence
Branch of Police of the State concerned.
Part A-Chapter 5 Clause 15:
Officers of the Panel should be appointed
by the said Agency/Committee  in place of
a Chief Justice of Supreme Court.
Part A-Chapter 5 Clause 18:
It has been provided in the Bill that the
National Judicial Oversight Committee shall
be appointed by the President in
consultation with Chief Justice of India
only. But it should be appointed by the
President in consultation with a Joint
Committee of Prime Minister, Vice
President, Speaker of Lok Sabha and the
Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha and
the Chief Justice of India as well. It
would be much better if other legal experts
and jurists (Vice Chancellors of Universities
professors of law Department of
Universities, Attorney General, Solicitor
General, Ex-Governors and there shall be
not only retired CJs qualified to be selected
as the Chairperson and members of the
oversight Committee.
Part B-Clause 22(2):
It not be proper to restrict the number of
Investigation Committees upto three. If
this provision is deleted than the number
The Scrutiny Panel will scrutinise the
complaints against a Judge received under
the Act.
The Scrutiny Panel will have all the
powers of a civil court.
Categories of officers and other staff are
to be provided by the Chief Justice of
India/Chief Justice, as the case may be.
The Agency/Committee need not be
burdened with the task of appointing
officers or staff.
The composition of the Oversight
Committee has been clearly spelt out.
One Committee will investigate, if
required, complaint against one Judge.
The maximum number of three

134
12 3
of investigation committees may be
increased or decreased according to
circumstances.
Part B-Clause 23:
The National Judicial Oversight Committee
should be empowered to obtain a
confidential report from CBI and IB
branch of state police concerned also.
Part E-Clause 35:
In this clause it may be provided that the
President will take action according to the
recommendation of Joint Parliamentary
Committee instead of the recommendation
of the Parliament.
Part E-Clause 36:
If any action is required against the
complainant then this action must be
initiated in a police station according to
law laid down instead of court.
Part E-Clause 43:
There is no justification to Bar the Right
to information Act 2005 already exists
and every information will be disclosed as
per Right to Information Act, 2005.
Part E-Chapter 8 Clause 50 & 53:
There is no need to enact this clause
because once the action under section 36
is taken the existing law will be enforced
and action may be proceeded according
to the prevailing law.
Section 1 The enactment may be brought
in force within in three months after it
receives the assent of Hon’ble President
of India.
Investigation Committees is considered
adequate.
The Oversight Committee will have all
the powers of a civil court.
Ultimately, Parliament is the deciding
authority, as per the Constitution. The
Bill does not seek to amend the
constitution.
Criminal complaint is to be filed in a
court. Since the matter would have
already been scrutinised at a higher level,
starting with filing a complaint with the
Police. will be a waste of time.
The findings of the investigation
committee and orders passed by Oversight
Committee relating to action taken on
receipt of the report from the investigation
committee shall be made public.
Section 36 refers to Section 16 relating
to vexatious or frivolous complaint,
whereas Section 50 refers to intentional
insult or interference. Section 53
prescribes penalty for such offences.
The structure of the proposed Bill is
worked out. There is no need to change/
amend the provisions of the Bill.
Shir Dilbagh
Singh Ritu
(Memo No.
14)

135
12 3
Section 2 “Incapacity” should also include
moral incapacity in addition.
Add-willful, deliberate persistence in
passing legally wrong orders in a cause.
Section 3{n} Add “A section or group in
society” form
Section 11 {2}  substitute – Sitting
Supreme Court Judge for former Chief
Justice of High Court.
Section 12{b} Delete the expression
“Procedural order”
Section 16 substitute-“drop the complaint”
for “it may refer the case to the over
sight committee”
Section 18{e} substitute former president
of India for existing clause {e}
Section 34{a} add at end the expression-
“giving clear reasons”
Section 35 Add this sentence for less
serious misbehaviour retire the Judge
compulsorily.
Section 36 Add this sentence at the end
unless it is confirmed by cogent evidence
that the complaint was false/frivolous no
action should be taken against the
complainant because it is not easy to
collect proof of misbehaviour.
Section 39 modify the language and make
provision to reveal the conclusion.
Section 45 Add the following clause: “the
Chief Justice of India shall give sanction
to prosecute the delinquent Judge to the
complainant.
Section 53 substitute “one year simple
imprisonment” for “five years rigorous
imprisonment” and “twenty thousand” in
place of five lacks.
These could be covered under
‘misbehaviour’.
The existing expression is broad enough.
This will cause unnecessary burden and
hamper judicial work.
Not acceptable.
A decision has to be taken by the
Oversight Committee.
The President (Present or past) is not to
be a member.
Not required.
Retiring a Judge compulsorily is not
provided for in the Constitution.
Scrutiny Panel has to ascertain facts and
formulate a view.
No specific suggestion is given.
Section 45 deals with laying of findings
before both Houses of Parliament.
Prosecution is a separate matter.
This provision is necessary to discourage
vexatious and frivolous complaints with
a view to scrutinize or intimidate a Judge.

136
12 3
There is no judicial remedy to frivolous
order. The only consolation at this stage
is that the Chief Justice of India may
initiate action against the said misbehaviour.
1. Guidelines to do and not to do in an
unambiguous text in writing be handed
over to Judges in writing and their
Signatures obtained to confront them when
needed.
2. Constitutional immunity to Judges and
all public servants except president of India
should automatically stand ceased on the
happening of any activity of corrupt,
immoral or malafide nature.
3. Sanctioning authority be divested of
the powers to withhold sanction for
impeachment/prosecution. In case of a
time bound delay the concerned authority
should be asked to explain the reasons
for delay.
4. Judges should refrain from attending
any party hosted by advocates and
professionals except on retirement.
5. Prior information of all the functions
to be attended by Judges should be
furnished to the concerned office.
6. A vulture’s eye should watch the
advocates and professional colluding with
judges.
7. Judges and all public servants pardoned
or lethargically proceeded with in case of
their involvement in corrupt, immoral
malafide activities will send very wrong
messages to the whole country.
8. Simply preaching ‘zero tolerance for
corruption’ will not suffice.
It will adversely affect the independence
of the judiciary.
The Judges are expected to do so.
The Bill provides that no Judge shall
have close association with individual
members of the Bar, particularly with
those who practice in the same court in
which he is a Judge.
—
—
Shri Satya
Dev
(Memo No.
15)

137
12 3
9. An addition to the constitutional
provisions may be made for the formation
of a panel of 5, 7 or 9 members of
proven repute on the matter to deal with
any extra ordinary situation arising out of
the legislative, executive or judicial organs
of the Government so that the
administration or the Government does
not feel helplessness or crippled for want
of any law on the situation posed.
10. Every judge should expose at the
earliest any influence or pressure put on
him from any corner.
11. Every judge should file a statement of
his/her income assets and liabilities
annually by the end of January of the
succeeding year.
12. Age bar should not come in way of
impeachment/prosecution of judges/all
public servant for their involvement in
corrupt immoral or malafide  activities
during their public services.
To fight judicial corruption and to bring
transparency, the Judges Protection Act
and Contempt of Courts Act need to be
abolished and a new Act – Protection of
Litigants vis-a-vis judiciary will be needed.
The Judicial Standards and Accountability
Bill, 2010 need to have provisions for
litigants protection, absolute freedom to
comment on the judges/advocates
behaviour and judgments with the fear of
attracting contempt proceedings.
The litigants view on judgments have to
be compulsorily loaded on the websites
of courts and also form part of judgments.
The Government should make it mandatory
for courts to telecast live the proceedings.
For this a separate Judiciary channel should
be there on the lines of Lok Sabha and
the Rajya Sabha channel.
Shri
Deendaya M.
Lulla
(Memo No.
16)
—
The Judges are expected to do so.
The Bill already makes a provision for
Judges to declare their assets and
liabilities.
—
The Bill is to regulate the procedure for
the removal of a Judge and also seeks to
repeal the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.
These suggestions have no bearing on
the proposed Bill.

138
12 3
The courts should undertake on a regular
basis surveys on litigants satisfaction on
courts performance. The law students and
the citizens should also have the freedom
to undertake such surveys. These surveys
should be loaded mandatorily on the courts
websites.
Today respect Judges by post names
mostly 90% are not suitable persons, on
duty by their attitude in the post of Judges
either from Lower Court or Higher Court.
The present oath Act is in favour of
wrong minded persons and this code is
not contains, name of the God in which,
and also this oath not contain, if brief of
oath its impact should be, very clearly
loss of children with names and loss of
wife with name and also loss of parents
with names should be very clear, then
definitely the grade of the judiciary stands.
The meaning of the court building and
judges are not as if judges and as if full
of brokers place and also respected
advocates are also working 60% as
brokers, which lowering the grade of the
advocates and judiciary.
It should be very clear code with regarding
against wrong judge code should be clear
step by step.
Judges should declare their assets under
the amended oath act.
Rule making power at Parliament and most
of the members of the Parliament are
illegal persons and criminals, such persons
making rules for their own conveniences
to protect the illegal person. Qualifications
for parliament members which must and
necessary to maintain the grade of the
judicial system.
These may be personal views.
It is not relevant to the Bill.
The JSA Bill makes a provision for
declaration of assets and liabilities by the
Judges.
The Parliament has its power to make
rules. It may be personal views.
The views expressed are negative and
without suggestions made.
Shri Andhe
Sathyanarayana
(Memo No.
17)

139
12 3
1. That transparency in the judiciary is
the need of today’s society of more than
120 crores Indian citizens.
2. That after more than 40 years
introduction of the Judges (Inquiry) Act,
1968 which needs important and necessary
amendments so the bill, 2010 is pending.
3. In the case of misbehaviour or
incapacity of judges which not only hurt
the feelings of litigant, to Advocates, to
court’s staff and. general public who has
deep faith in Indian judiciary.
4. That there is a strict need for removal
of some judges in some cases which they
can be proved by necked eyes of their
misbehaviour in incapacity and are liable
for immediate removal.
5. In some cases of misbehaviour can be
seen with naked eyes in the court that
how they are throwing the files of cases
after every hearing. In that type of
misbehaviour they can learn from lower
court and in case they found guilty within
48 hours they must be transferred to
lower court for 3 years after removal.
6. Because misbehaving is a part of
incapacity vice-versa and misbehaviour of
judges cannot be acceptable to society
who thinks that judge is god and god
cannot hurt in this manner or in any
manner their feeling.
7. To prove the behaviour of judges daily
recording of courts proceedings by CCTV
Camera with sound etc. must be kept
recorded for future need and proof.
8. Every judge must have good patience
and free will otherwise he will misbehave
which will prove that he is also incapacity
and on the other hand, if they have no
patience or free will that means he is
under pressure of work or in pressure of
The JSA Bill, 2010 will make higher
judiciary more transparent.
Shri Yashbir
Singh
(Memo No.
18)

140
12 3
some influential person or blindly to please-
oblige the advocate/litigants.
9. In such circumstances, no judge can
be allowed to sit as a God or Dictator in
the Indian democracy who has deep faith
and hope in the judiciary.
10. To prove that he is not incapacity he
must deliver the judgment according to
law and natural justice because he knows
the best law education very well at every
level. In case of ignoring the available law
with wrong interpretation if found by
Hon’ble supreme court he must be sent
to law school for more education upto
three years. In case where he is continued
the practice in any five cases.
11. Lastly in the race of reaching to
Hon’ble Supreme Court or near to
retirement also a cause of misbehaviour
sometimes.
Appointment of Supreme Court Judges
can be made through direct appointment
and with the consultancy of Bar Council
of India not through High Courts
promotions.
The latest judicial trend reveals that Indian
Courts are quite enthusiastic in using the
law as tool of social revolution. There is
a deep felt need to acquire a firm social
philosophy founded to humanism, socialism
and secularism of the Constitution. Social
transformation for creation a new social
order imbued with social justice. It is
inspired the poor, the weak and the
destitute to seek protection of the courts
against exploitation in justice and tyranny.
The basic principles on the independence
of the judiciary are the main aims of
the Constitutional Assembly were the
philosophy of the social revolution.
The citizens of India are frequently come
across the judicial corruption, from
Shri M.D.
Devappa
(Memo No.
19)
Appointment of Judges in higher judiciary
is another aspect not covered by this
Bill.
The Bill will make the higher judiciary
more transparent.
The JSA Bill only makes it possible for
fomalizing the procedure for investigation

141
12 3
subordinate courts to High Courts and
Supreme Court, through the print and
electronic media. Apart from this the
general public express openly about the
judicial corruptions. It is true also, “no
smoke without fire”, Even the former law
Minster and Advocate, Shanti Bhushan
alleged that eight out of sixteen Chief
Justices of Supreme Court of India were
corrupt and also expressed that things
changed drastically during the last two or
three decades during which corruption
grew in the Indian Judiciary.
Our Supreme Court possesses large power
than the American Supreme Court. Though
the High Courts were established before
independence so for not a single judge
has been removed for a proved
misbehaviour or incapacity. What
happened even ager Constitutional
procedure was started against Justice
Ramaswamy in 1991-1993. The committee
found the judge guilt, in the Lok Sabha
the Congress party abstained from voting
and so, the motion could not be passed
with requisite majority to save the Judge.
The concerned political parties who rules
this country so far, not made any legal
provisions to remove corrupt Judges. At
present there is no law for dealing with
complaints filed by the public against
judges of the subordinate court, High
Courts and Supreme Court. Even
subordinate courts judges must also have
the same provisions if the complaints filed
by the public against judges.
The general public of India must know
the transparency in all the winds of the
constitution (legislative, executive and
judiciary). Why this disperiarity, regarding
termination of an employee of the
Government, and the Judges. If an officer/
employee did a small mistake, the judiciary/
industrial tribunals etc. terminate the poor
employee, on the charges framed by the
into complaints against Judges, which is
presently being done through an In House
Procedure which has been criticized as
being unsatisfactory.
At present, the Judges (Inquiry) Act,
1968 provides the procedure for removal
of Judges in higher Judiciary. The JSA
Bill, 2010 only makes it possible for
formalizing the procedure for investigation
into complaints against Judges which is
presently being done through an ‘In
House’ procedure which has been
criticized as being unsatisfactory.
The Judiciary is an independent arm of
the State. However, the idea of the Bill is
to make the higher judiciary more
transparent.

142
12 3
authorities/departments. Without
considering the social and economical
conditions of the employee and his/her
family suffer throughout their life. Some
employees may not approach the higher
court for not having money to spend on
Advocate and Courts fesses etc.
Politicians, corrupt Executives, corrupt
judicial officers can survive. The rule of
law must be equal to all the wings of the
constitution irrespective of the executive,
judiciary or legislature or a common
employee.
One should understand what will be the
fate of India. We have most corruptive
legislatures, most corruptive executives and
most corruptive judges in the judiciary.
Many scandals prevailing and looting
economy of the country. At present we
should not think of only judicial corruption
but also other areas of corruption at large.
The legal provision is extremely
necessitated to provide provision to dealing
with complaints by the public against
judges of even subordinate courts, high
courts and the Supreme Court to bring
transparency in the judiciary as well as in
other wings of country.
The Parliament shall repeal the Judges
(inquiry) Act, 1968, so for this act is
simply a dead Act, since 1950 not a single
judge removed under this act, so this act
may be repealed. However retain the basic
features and aims to achieve the objective
of creating a statutory mechanism for
enquiring into individual complaints against
judges of High Courts, Supreme Court
including subordinate courts and
recommending appropriate action.
The judges shall declare of their assets
and liabilities and laying down the judicial
standards to be followed by the judges.
All these measures will increase
The JSA Bill is concerned with
transparency in higher judiciary only.
Subordinate courts are the responsible of
the State Government and High Courts
concerned.
The JSA Bill seeks to repeal the Judges
(Inquiry) Act, 1968 while retaining its
basic features.
The JSA Bill, 2010 makes a provision for
declaration of assets by the Judges in
higher judiciary.

143
12 3
accountability of judges of the High Courts
and Supreme Court including subordinate
Judicial officers, there by further
strengthening the independence of the
judiciary.
It is appreciated if the judiciary works as
other organs without independently like
other judicial systems of the different
countries.
1. It is regrettable that the Parliament and
all the State legislatures go on passing
various bills when the existing courts are
unable to decide on pending cases for
decades. There are over 3.5 crore cases
pending in all courts in India, including
the Supreme Court. Over smartness of
the concerned lawyers is also a factor
contributing to the delay, remaining absent
on trial day, raising hair splitting arguments
etc. But judges conducting the trial allow
such miscarriage of justice, and are
responsible for the mess.
2. The incompetence of judges is so much
that even a past chief justice of India has
stated that conviction rate in our courts is
less than 10%. On the contrary “found
not guilty” in 10% should have been the
norm.
3. Discretionary powers of judges is often
misused, by giving “benefit of doubt” even
in proven criminal cases.
4. Increasing retirement ages of High
Court judges from 62 to 65 will amount
to rewarding incompetence. In fact the
constitution should be amended so that all
judges retire at 60 as in any Government
servant.
5. Government should fill up all vacancies
of judges in all courts urgently. If
necessary the number of courts and judges
can be increased to deliver fast justice.
Shri R.R.
Shenoy,
(Memo No.
20)
—
Various measures are being taken to clear
the backlog of pending cases. However,
the Bill deals with transparency in higher
judiciary only.
—
It is not relevant to the Bill.
This is not relevant to the Bill.

144
12 3
6. Amend the constitution to cover
following minimum points in the interest
of citizen:–
- The entire judiciary including SC
and HC be brought under the
control of the President, so as to
make it accountable. The President
shall not bound by advice any
Ministry on any case. But he shall
have an advisory body consisting
of attorney general and eminent
private lawyers to help him in his
work.
- All the courts including the SC
shall be brought under the RTI
Act, so that litigants can know
reasons for delay in cases filed by
them.
- Set time limit to decide cases to
maximum 1 year for civil cases
and 3 years for criminal cases.
- Courts shall hear on case at a
time, with no adjournments given.
- Judgments shall be brief and given
within a week of closure of
arguments.
- A mechanism to evaluate judges
and suitably punish inefficient,
should be in place, under the
President.
- Contempt of court Act should be
repealed. Citizens must have
freedom to criticized delayed/
wrong verdicts (including “benefit
of doubt”).
- No immunity should be given to
lawyers for delaying court
proceedings submitting false
evidence/affidavit in courts.
Bring radical changes in the present judicial
enforcement system so that :–
(a) All court cases are decided in less
than 3 years.
(b) Cases filed by senior citizen are
given priority in all courts.
The Judiciary is an independent arm of
the State. The scope of the Bill is to lay
down Judicial Standards and provide for
accountability of Judges, and establish
credible and expedient mechanism for
investigating into individual complaints for
misbehaviour or incapacity of a judge
and to regulated the procedure for such
investigation. The Bill does not seek to
amend the Constitution.
Not directly relevant to the Bill.

145
12 3
(c)The number of appeals be
drastically reduced- just one in civil
cases and two in criminal cases.
(d) All courts shall hear cases on day
to day basis, and no adjournment
shall be granted.
(e) Special courts shall be set up to
hear property cases, which are
the maximum in number.
(f) Basically all judges should be
accountable to the citizen for their
delays and not shelter under
“contempt of Court Act” and
should be abolished.
1. Like all India services, direct selection
from the efficient candidates, after various
examinations and interview, shall be
conducted for Judicial Officer.
2. All High Court judges shall be
transferred compulsorily in 3 years. There
is such transfer procedure now existing
upto district judges level.
3. Efficiency bar to be implemented as a
must for promotions.
4. Before the selection as judge, the mental
health of the person should be examined
to see whether he is a maniac or lunatic.
The family details are also to be examined
in connection with it.
5. Now it is a practice that the judiciary
itself appoint a commission for
recommendations of their pay etc. 1
st and
2nd NJPC has recommended and the
government have implemented a huge hike
in pay and perks of the judicial officers.
This shall be stopped and All India Pay
Commission shall recommend the pay and
perks of judicial officers as well.
6. To avoid corruption long duration in
service in the case of High Court Judges
shall be avoided. Minimum age bar of 50
or 55 years shall be implemented.
The procedure for appointment and
transfer of Judges in higher judiciary is
based on the Judgement of the Supreme
Court. It was felt necessary to separately
draft comprehensive amendments to the
Constitution to amend the procedure for
appointment and not combine it with JSA
Bill which is a statutory exercise and not
a constitutional amendment.
Selection is not the subject matter of the
Bill.
Not relevant to the Bill.
Not relevant.
Shri P.V .
Harilal (Memo
No. 21)

146
12 3
7. Age of superannuation shall not be
increased further.
8. If found inefficient in any manner, he/
she should be removed from service, steps
for such removal may be simplified as in
the case of other government employees.
9. If it is not possible, impeachment steps
before Parliament shall be simplified and
should see that the corrupt officer is
removed from service without any further
delay.
10. Examine thoroughly whether L.L.B. is
a must for appointment as judicial officer.
11. The procedure of appointing the
Judges by the High Court itself shall be
stopped instead, the Government should
select and appoint the judges, in order to
keep an upper hand to Executive than
judiciary as at present.
The age criteria is not considered in the
Bill.
The procedure for removal of Judges is
defined in the Bill.
Not relevant.
The criteria for appointment of Judges in
the Supreme Court and High Courts is
prescribed in Articles 124, 217, 224 of
the Constitution.
The procedure for appointment of Judges
in higher judiciary is based on the
Judgement of the Supreme Court. At
present there is no specific proposal to
change the procedure.

147
ANNEXURE-C
147
QUESTIONNAIRE
ON
THE JUDICIAL STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2010
1. The present Bill provides for judicial standards
to be followed by the judges so that the
accountability and transparency could be
ensured. The Committee, however, would like
to know the reasons for which the issue of
appointment of judges has been left out in the
present Bill, despite repeated recommendations
of this Committee in its various Reports and
persistent demands from the public for
reviewing the existing procedure for
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court
and High Courts.
The scope of the Bill is to lay down Judicial
Standards and provide for accountability of
Judges, and, establish credible and expedient
mechanism for investigating into individual
complaints for misbehaviour or incapacity of
a judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court and to regulate the procedure for such
investigation; and for the presentation of an
address by Parliament to the President in
relation to the proceeding for removal of a
Judge and matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
The appointment of Judges is governed by the
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Supreme Court Advocates – on – Record
Association Vs Union of India (AIR 1994 SC
268) and their Advisory Opinion. Any
amendment in the procedure would require
amendment in the Constitution and/or judicial
review. Therefore, the amendment would need
detailed consultation at various levels. At present
several options of amending the procedure are
being discussed. No final view has, so far,
been taken.
The importance of amending the procedure
for appointment of Judges has not been lost
sight of. However, it was felt necessary to
separately draft comprehensive amendments to
the Constitution and not to combine the two
since the JSA Bill is a statutory exercise and
not a constitutional amendment.
Q. Questions Comments/clarifications
No.
12 3

148
12 3
Whether the Ministry, while drafting this Bill,
considered the mechanisms that are being
successfully followed in other countries to
examine complaints against the judicial officers.
Details of such a comparative study, if made,
may be provided.
In the existing Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha or the Chairman of
Rajya Sabha has the power to constitute a
Committee to make an investigation into the
grounds on which the removal of a Judge is
sought. In contrast, in the present Bill, the
power to appoint an investigation committee is
vested in the Oversight Committee having no
representation from the legislature. What is
the changed role of Parliament in matter dealt
with in the Bill in hand and the objective
sought to be achieved through this change.
What is the rationale behind not specifying the
composition of the Investigation Committee in
the Bill?
What would be the procedure for selection of
the members of the Investigation Committee?
The Committee would like the Ministry to
clarify the outcome of the possible situation
wherein the Investigation Committee’s report
contains a finding that the Judge is not guilty,
but the Parliament is of the opinion that the
Judge is guilty and vice-versa.
The Bill broadly is based, inter alia , on the
‘Restatement of Values of Judicial Life’ adopted
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the provisions
of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 and the
scheme of the Constitution for removal of
Judges. No comparison with other countries
has been made.
There is no change with regard to the power
or position of Parliament. Ultimately, it is only
the Parliament which can decide on removal
of a Judge. The JSA Bill only makes it possible
for formalizing the procedure for investigation
into complaints against Judges, which is
presently being done through an In House
procedure which has been criticized as being
unsatisfactory.
To provide flexibility to the Oversight
Committee to constitute different investigation
committees depending upon the nature of the
complaint and availability of competent persons.
The Oversight Committee would decide the
composition and tenure of the investigation
committee under sub-clause (2) of clause 22
of the Bill depending upon the nature of the
complaint and availability of competent persons.
The Bill is to regulate the procedure for the
removal of a Judge.
If report of the Investigation Committee
contains a finding that the Judge is not guilty,
Parliament will not be troubled and will not
come into the picture at all.
If the report of the Investigation  Committee
contains a finding that the Judge is guilty of
any misbehaviour or suffers from any
incapacity then the motion for removal together
with the report will be taken up for
consideration by the Parliament. Parliament’ s
decision will prevail.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

149
12 3
The Oversight Committee as provided in the
Bill does not have representation from
Parliament, thus  restricting the power of
Parliament as provided in the Judges Inquiry
Act, 1968. Please explain the reasons therefore.
The Committee would like to know whether
the Ministry has explored the feasibility of
Judicial Oversight Committee taking suo motu
action for misbehaviour or incapacity in respect
of a Judge before this Bill was formulated. If
yes, what is the position in this regard?
Clause 33 of the Bill provides that the Oversight
Committee may recommend stoppage of
assigning judicial work to the accused Judge
concerned if the Committee finds it necessary
in the interest of fair and impartial scrutiny of
complaints. The Committee feels that stoppage
of assigning judicial work may diminish the
public image of the judge even before the
charges made against him/her are proved. What
are the comments of the Ministry in this
regard?
Sub-clause 1 (b) of clause 34 of the Bill
provides that if all or any of the charges
against a Judge have been proved in the report
of Investigation Committee, but the Oversight
Committee opines that the charges proved do
not warrant removal of Judges. It may by
order, issue advisories or warning to the
concerned Judge. The Committee wants to
know if guidelines will be laid down in the
Rules under this Act, for Oversight Committee
to decide whether the charges proved warrant
removal of judges and with what
7.
8.
9.
10.
Section 3(2) of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968
contains similar provisions empowering the
Speaker or as the case may be, the Chairman
to constitute a committee consisting of three
members of whom (a) one shall be chosen
from among the Chief Justice and other Judges
of the Supreme Court; (b) one shall be chosen
from among the Chief Justices of the High
Court’s; and (c) one shall be a person who is,
in the opinion of the Speaker or the Chairman,
as the case may be, a distinguished jurist.
It was felt that it will be more appropriate not
to have representation from the Parliament in
the Oversight Committee since ultimately
Parliament is the deciding authority.
No, it was not considered feasible to authorize
Judicial Oversight Committee to take up
complaints on suo moto  basis.
To have free, fair and impartial investigation,
this clause is necessary. Whenever necessary
in the interest of fair and impartial scrutiny of
complaints, Oversight Committee may
recommend stoppage of assigning judicial work
to the accused Judge concerned. It may not
be required in all the cases. This may be
resorted to only in the event there is adverse
finding by the Investigation Committee against
a Judge.
It may not be possible to envisage in advance
various circumstances under which removal is
necessary. It is left to the wisdom of the
Oversight Committee to take appropriate action
depending upon the nature of charges proved
against a judge under clause 34 of the Bill.
Yes, the guidelines will be laid down n the
Rules under the Act.

150
12 3
11.
12.
13.
14.
circumstances, issuing advisories or waning
to the concerned Judge would be sufficient?
Sub-clause 2 of clause 34 provides that the
Oversight Committee may recommend to the
Central Government for prosecution of the
Judge, if on receipt of the report from the
Investigation Committee, it is satisfied that there
has been a prima facie commission of any
offence under existing laws. The Committee
wishes to know that since the term ‘may’
used in the clause, grants wide discretion to
the Oversight Committee, whether criteria will
be specifically laid down, for the Oversight
Committee to follow, while making or not
making such a recommendation?
What is the rationale behind prescribing such
a severe punishment i.e. rigorous imprisonment
for five years and fine of five lakh rupees, if
the complaint made by an applicant is found
frivolous or vexatious? The Committee
apprehends that such a severe punishment
would work as a deterrent and discourage the
people from taking initiative against the corrupt
judicial officials. How would the Ministry like
to justify this provision in the Bill.
The proposed Bill (Clause 11) provides for a
‘complaint scrutiny panel’ to scrutinize the
complaints made by individuals against Judges.
What is the rationale behind making the majority
membership reserved only for the members of
judiciary? Instead, the composition of this
Scrutiny Panel could have been made more
representative by incorporating the Members
of the Bar, senior Bureaucrats and Members
of Parliament etc. What are the views of
Ministry on this points?
The Committee would like to know that in
case, if the Scrutiny panel finds that a
complaint is frivolous/vexatious and submits
its report to the Oversight Committee to this
effect, then whether the Oversight Committee
is bound by the  advice of scrutiny panel, or
it can decide otherwise.
Though the word used is ‘may’, Oversight
Committee would recommend prosecution of
the Judge if there is a clear commission of an
offence under existing laws and no criteria
need to be laid down in this behalf.
The object of the Bill is to discourage or
minimize filing of frivolous and vexatious
complaints against Judges.
It is a provision to protect Judges from such
complaints/allegations filed by disgruntled
elements.
The Judges would be in a better position to
understand the allegation from Judge’s
perspective. To preserve the independence of
judiciary a Scrutiny Panel has members from
the judiciary.
The existing procedure of In House
consideration of complaints has only Judges
looking into such complaints. It is not felt
necessary to have members of the Bar or
senior bureaucrats or Members of Parliament
as part of the Scrutiny Panel.
The procedure for dealing with frivolous or
vexatious complaints has been provided under
clause 12(1) (b). There is no specific provision
on the point as to whether the Oversight
Committee is bound by the advice of scrutiny
panel or not.

151
12 3
The Oversight Committee does not sit in appeal
over the advice of Scrutiny Panel and cannot
re-examine the report judicially or quasi-
judicially
Section 3(2) of Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968
contains similar provisions.
The present composition of the OC has been
worked out so that the independence of the
judiciary should not be compromised. The
judiciary should not feel threatened by the
JSA Bill. It is an important step towards judicial
integrity whilst not undermining the
independence of the judiciary.
15. The composition of the Oversight Committee
is also predominately from Members of the
judiciary. Would it not be more appropriate if
the composition of this Committee is more
broad based.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.