PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 50
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
FIFTIETH REPORT
ON
THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN 
PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2011
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 MARCH, 2012)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
FIFTIETH REPORT
ON
THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN
PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1933 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-99

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—12
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ........................................................... 13—15
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 17—31
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 33—70
A. The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public
International Organisations Bill, 2011 ....................................................................... 35—49
B. Comments of the  Department of Personnel and Training on the views/suggestions
Contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on the
provisions of the Bill .................................................................................................. 50—70

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2011)
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
@8. Shri O.T. Lepcha
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani
10. Shri Amar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
13. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar
16. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
17. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
18. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
19. Shri Pinaki Misra
20. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Lalu Prasad
23. Adv. A. Sampath
24. Shri S. Semmalai
25. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
26. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
#27. Shri Manish Tewari
28. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
29. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
30. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
*31. V acant
@ Retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 23 rd February, 2012.
# Ceased to be Member of the Committee due to change in nomination to be Member of the Standing Committee on Defence
w.e.f. 2nd March, 2012.
* Existing since the constitution of the Committee on 31 st August, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Fiftieth Report on The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of
Public International Organisations Bill, 2011. The Bill seeks to prevent corruption relating to bribery
of foreign public officials and officials of public international organisations and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the
25th March, 2011 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 1 st April, 2011 for examination and
report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communique
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, a press communique was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies, in response
to which memoranda containing suggestions were received, from various organizations/ individuals/
experts, by the Committee.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held
on 15
th June, 2011. The representatives of DoPT made one more presentation before the Committee
on the 12 th March, 2012 to clarify certain provisions of the Bill. The Committee also heard the views
of stakeholders/NGOs in its meetings held on 10 th and 24 th January, 2012.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it :–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Personnel and Training,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Personnel and Training thereon;
(iii) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the stakeholders
such as office bearers of CII, PHD Chamber of Commerce, FICCI and ASSOCHAM; and
Central Vigilance Commissioner, Director, CBI; Director of Enforcement; and other non-
official witnesses viz. Shri Ravinder Kumar and Shri Radhey Shyam Agarwal in its
meetings held on the 10
th and 24 th January, 2012; and
(iv) Other research material/documents related to the Bill.
♣ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.48398) dated the 1 st April, 2011.

(iv)
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 26 th March, 2012.
7. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
26th March , 2012 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011 was introduced* in the Lok Sabha on the 25 th March, 2011. It was referred ♣
by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 1
st April, 2011 for examination and report.
2. The Bill (Annexure-A) seeks to prevent corruption relating to bribery of foreign public officials
and officials of public international organisations and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
3. The Statement of Objects and Reasons, appended to the Bill reads as under:–
“Bribery of public officials to obtain advantages in international business raises serious moral
and political concerns, undermines good governance and sustainable economic development,
and distorts competition. Corruption in awarding business contracts has social, political,
environmental and economic costs which no country can afford. Serious consequences result
when public officials take bribes in awarding contracts to foreign businesses for public services
such as roads, water, electricity etc. resulting in inappropriate decisions and undermining plans
for development.
2. The United Nations Convention against Corruption  annexed to the Resolution 58/4  of
31st October, 2003 was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations and opened
it for signature at the High-level Political Signing  Conference held in Merida, Mexico, from
9th to 11th December, 2003. India has signed the Convention on 9
th December, 2005. The
ratification of Convention would require criminalising the act of foreign bribery and it would
strengthen India’ s existing anti-corruption laws that demonstrate India’ s commitment to good
governance and  give more credibility in its fight against bribery and corruption.
3. India already has in place a framework for combating  corruption under certain laws,
namely, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and the Prevention of Money  laundering Act,
2002 which covers a number of areas that need international standards for the criminalisation
of bribery. Article 16  of the Convention requires that each State Party shall adopt such
legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as a criminal offence, the
giving or taking of undue advantage to or by a foreign public official or an official of a
public international  organisation, directly or indirectly, for the official himself or herself or
another person or entity when committed  intentionally. However, the bribery of foreign public
officials in international business transactions is not covered under the above said Acts.
Therefore, a need has been felt to bring a legislation to give effect to the aforesaid Convention.
4. The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011 seeks to prevent corruption relating to bribery of foreign public
officials and officials of public international organisations and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto. The proposed legislation, inter alia,—
(a) prohibits accepting gratification by foreign public official or official of public international
organization and making such act punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than six months but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable
to fine;
* Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated 25 th March, 2011.
♣  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.48398) dated 1 st April, 2011.

2
(b) prohibits giving gratification to foreign public official or official of public international
organisation and making such act punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than six months but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable
to fine;
(c) makes abetment and attempts of the acts specified at (a) and (b) above also punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine;
(d) confers power upon the Central Government to enter into agreements with foreign
countries enforcing the provisions of proposed legislation,
(e) makes provision declaring the offences under the proposed legislation as extraditable
offences;
(f) makes provision for rendering assistance to a contracting State in certain cases to give
effect to provisions of the proposed legislation;
(g) makes provision for reciprocal arrangements for processes and assistance for transfer of
accused persons;
(h) makes provision for attachment, seizure and confiscation, etc., of property in a contracting
State or India.
5. It is also proposed that proceedings under the  proposed legislation shall be taken in
consultation with the contracting State against foreign public official to whom  privileges and
immunities under any law or Convention or treaty are accorded
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.”
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Personnel and
Training of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the Bill on the 15
th June,
2011.
5. In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/suggestions
from desirous individuals/organisations on the Bill. Accordingly, a press release was issued inviting
views/suggestions which was published in major English and Hindi dailies and newspapers all over
India on the 12
th April, 2011.
5.1 The Committee considered eight memoranda from out of the ones received from the individuals/
organisations to the Department of Personnel and Training for their comments thereon. A list of such
memoranda is placed at Annexure-B.
5.2 The major points raised in these memoranda are summarized as follows:
(i) The word ‘agent’ as mentioned in clause 2(1) (c) has not been defined. A New clause
defining “agent” may be introduced in clause 2 (1) of the Bill defining “agent” to mean
any authorized representative who acts on behalf of his or her principal and includes a
Director, Officer, employee or other person authorized to act on behalf of his or her
principal, and the term “agency” to mean correspondingly.
(ii) In Clause 2(1)(c) of the Bill, the term “public function” is not defined clearly. It needs
to be clearly stated that according to which law, whether Indian law or the law of his
Nationality or the law of the Country/State for which he is discharging functions, his
function will be classified as a “public function”.
(iii) The term “foreign public official” should be defined as follows: “Foreign public official”
means and includes:–

3
(a) Any person holding a legislative, administrative or judicial office of a foreign
country;
(b) Any person performing public function for a foreign state or country, including
any person employed by a Board, Commission, Corporation or other body or
authority that performs a function of a foreign state; or
(c) An official or agent of a public international organization;
(iv) The term “foreign country” may be defined as follows and added: ‘Foreign Country’
means any country other than India and includes:
(a) Any foreign territory;
(b) All levels of sub-divisions of Government of any such country or territory; or
(c) Any agency of any such country or territory or of a political sub-division of any
such country or territory;
(v) There is lack of clarity in the definition of the term “undue advantage” given in
clause 2(1) (h). The substance of this clause appears to be addressing and elaborating
upon the passive foreign bribery offence under clause 3. The reference to “undue
advantage” does not seem to correlate with the rest. The definition be revised on the
following points:
(a) The definition under paragraph (h) states that “bribery means an act of a foreign
public official”. This leaves out the notion of an “omission” as required by Article
16(1) of the UNCAC and Article 1 of the GECD Anti-Bribery Convention.
(b) Undue advantage should not be restricted to pecuniary advantages only it should
also include non-pecuniary favor as well. The items in subparagraphs (i), (ii) and
(iii), require that the foreign public official “obtain” the “valuable thing or pecuniary
advantage”. This might appear to exclude cases where the bribe has not been
obtained or received by the foreign public officials.
(vi) In clause 10(3) of the Bill, it is not clear on what aspects and matters, the Special Judge
or Court or Central Government may impose conditions regarding transfer of persons.
(vii) In clause 18 of the Bill, after the word “shall”, the following words may be inserted
“within a prescribed time limit”. This would obligate the Central Government to make
consultation within a time frame.
5.3 The major highlights of the comments furnished by the Department of Personnel and Training
are given below :–
(i) The definition of the words “foreign public official” and “official of public international
organisation” in its existing form is very wide in the sense that foreign public official
includes” any person exercising a public function for a foreign country” and the
definition of the word “official of a public international organisation” includes ‘any
person who is authorized by such an organisation to act on behalf of that organisation”.
(ii) The phrase “person performing a public function for a foreign state or country including
a public agency or public enterprise” presently used in the definition of “foreign public
official” as such has a wider connotation and will also cover the person employed by
“ Board, Commission or Corporation”.

4
(iii) In terms of the interpretative notes to Article 2 in the Tavaux of Preparatories on the
UNCAC, the term “foreign country” includes all levels and subdivisions of Government,
from national to local and this should cover the category mentioned in sub clause (iii)
of the proposed definition (Refer para 5.2 (iv) ibid). The existing definition of foreign
country is on the above lines.
(iv) The definition of the term ‘undue advantage’ in clause 2(1)(h) has been taken from
Section 13 of Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 and can, therefore, be considered
adequate to meet the requirements stated in the legislative guide.
(v) The substantive provisions under clause 3 covers both the act or forbearing to act, and
the definition of ‘undue advantage’ under 2(h) has to be read harmoniously with the
substantive provision of clause 3.
(vi) There appears to be a gap in the existing formulation of clause 4 and Government is
open to suggestion of a formulation for amendment.
(vii) In regard to the quantum of punishment the formulation in the bill is on the lines of
punishment prescribed for various offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act
1988. Section 13(2) of the PCA provides for a maximum punishment of 7 years and
fine (amount not specified) for criminal misconduct. The punishment proposed in the
proposed bill of 7 years and fine, is in line with the punishment provided under that act
and therefore may not be disturbed.
(viii) Investigation/prosecution of offences under this bill to a substantially large extent would
be dependent on effectiveness of international co-operation secured in the area of Mutual
Legal Assistance Agreements (MLAA). Moreover, the cases involving foreign bribery can
be very complicated requiring extensive investigation and analysis of data. Therefore,
prescription of time limits can create difficulties at the ground level. However, the MLAA
can be drafted to commit the parties to the agreement to a time schedule.”
5.4 The Committee also heard the views of office bearers of CII, PHD Chamber of Commerce,
FICCI and ASSOCHAM; and Central Vigilance Commissioner, Director, CBI; Director of Enforcement;
and other non-official witnesses viz. Shri Ravinder Kumar and Shri Radhey Shyam Agarwal in its
meetings held on the 10
th and 24 th January, 2012.
5.4A On the explicit request of Secretary, DoPT, the Ministry was given an opportunity to provide
further clarifications on the provisions of the Bill at its meeting held on the 12 th March, 2012.
5.5 The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 26 th March, 2012.
MAJOR ISSUES EXAMINED BY THE COMMITTEE
Undue advantage
5.6 Sub clause-(h) of the Clause 2 of the Bill provides an elaborate definition of the term “undue
advantage.” However, the intangible and non-pecuniary advantages are apparently left out while
defining the expression ‘undue advantage.’ The Members of the Committee and witnesses that
appeared before the Committee raised serious concerns vis-a-vis the definition assigned to the
expression ‘undue advantage’ in the Bill and asserted that the intangible and non-pecuniary advantages
be included under the said expression.
5.7 A Member of the Committee expressed her views as:–
,d vkSj ckr tks cgqr bEiksVsZUV gS] og ;g gS fd lSD”ku  2(1)(h) esa budh tks
vuM~;w ,MokaVst gS] “undue advantage” that is to say bribery means an act of a foreign

5
public official or official of public international organisation”, blesa bUgksaus isD;qujh ,MokaVst
dks fy[kk gS] ysfdu ukWu isD;qujh ds ckjs esa ugha fy[kk gS bUgksaus dgha ij Hkh ;g ugha dgk
gS budks Vsaftcy vkSj ukWu Vsaftcy] nksuksa phtksa dks doj djuk pkfg,A eq>s yxrk gS fd
budks bu nksuksa phtksa ij iqufoZpkj djuk pkfg,A
5.8 Organization like the CBI, Organisation for Economic-Cooperation Development (OECD) and
some other witnesses also stated in their comments furnished to the Committee that the definition
given to the term “undue advantage” need to be modified to cover the bribes of both pecuniary as
well as non-pecuniary nature. For instance, the CBI in its note furnished to the Committee suggested
that the words “valuable thing or pecuniary advantage” in clauses 2(h)(i), 2(h)(ii) and 2(h) (iii) need
to be replaced by the words “valuable thing or advantage.” Likewise, the CBI stated in its note that
an explanation regarding valuable thing or advantage need to be added below Clause 2(h) (iv) to ensure
that the words “valuable thing or advantage” are not restricted to pecuniary things or advantages, or
such things or advantage estimable in terms of money only.
5.9 OECD in its comments furnished to the Committee also highlighted that there is some lack of
clarity concerning the definition afforded to the term “undue advantage” under Clause 2. According
to their comments the provision, in substance, appears to be addressing and elaborating upon the
passive foreign bribery offence under Clause 3. However, the reference to “undue advantage” does not
appear to correlate with the rest of the text.
5.10 The Ministry in the their in written comments submitted as follows:
“…The term ‘undue advantage’ used in the main body of clause 3 criminalising the act of
bribery on the demand side has been defined under clause 2(J)(h) as an act of obtaining any
valuable thing or pecuniary advantage. The connective “or” used in the definition has to be
construed as including advantage which may be pecuniary or any valuable thing. Sub-clause
(iv) of clause 2(J)(h) has a very wide coverage and undue advantage, whether pecuniary or
not, would stand covered. The definition of the term, ‘undue advantage’ in clause 2(J)(h) has
been taken from Section 13 of Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 and can therefore be
considered adequate to meet the requirements stated in the legislative guide…”
5.11 The Committee takes note of various suggestions by CBI & OECD and opines that
exclusion of intangible and non-pecuniary advantages from the scope of expression “undue
advantage” would unnecessarily and unjustifiably narrow down the scope & coverage of the
proposed law. The Committee opines that clause 2(1) (h) does not comprehensively define the
term “undue advantage” and further opines that it ought to have covered both pecuniary and
non pecuniary advantages. The Ministry’s reference to Section 13 of PC Act is not tenable. An
enormous range of non pecuniary advantages would be unnecessarily excluded by use of the
narrow definition and yet they would clearly involve bribery.
5.12 The Committee is of the considered view that if the Bill is to effectively check the
offences relating to bribery of foreign officials in the international business transactions, the
expression ‘undue advantage,’ which explains what an act of bribery may also comprise, needs
to be comprehensively defined, embracing both intangible and non-pecuniary advantages within
its ambit so as to avoid any narrow or limited interpretation. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the Government may review the definition of the term ‘undue advantage’
in the light of the aforesaid conclusions.
Exemption to Certain Business Activities
5.13 Some witnesses suggested that the bill should provide for the provisions to exempt some
obvious business courtesy gifts and services such as offering limited and reasonable refreshments,
entertainment, gifts etc.

6
5.14 The Committee notes the suggestions of the witnesses on this count. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the Government should consider incorporating in the Bill a clear
de minimis clause or exemption to exclude certain defined business or courtesy gifts and
services including, but not limited to, offering limited and reasonable refreshments, dinners/
lunches, entertainment, token gifts and the like. Such exemptions may be carefully calibrated
either in terms of monetary value or subject matter or both.
Foreien Public Officials and Officials of Public International Oreanisation
5.15 While deliberating upon a Bill that seeks to criminalize the bribery of public officials in
international business transactions, the Committee considered it imperative to delineate the scope of the
term public officials. The present Bill provides for two categories of such officials namely ‘foreign
public officials’ and ‘officials of public international organizations’. In view of the importance attached
to the said expressions, the Committee deeply deliberated upon what should encompass the expression
‘Foreign public officials’ and officials of public international organizations.’
5.16 Clause 2 (1)(c) of the Bill defines the ‘foreign public officials’ as any person holding a
legislative, executive, administrative or judicial office of a foreign country, whether appointed or
elected; any person exercising a public function for a foreign country, including for a public agency
or public enterprise and any official or agent of a public international organisation. It was pointed out
by some members of the Committee that in this definition, the terminologies like ‘public functions’ and
‘agents’ need further elaboration. Likewise, some witnesses emphasized the need to explicitly clarify
the expression ‘officials of public international organizations.’
5.17 A Member of the Committee put her views as:–
...
ifCyd QaD”ku dks Bhd <ax ls fMQkbu ugha fd;k x;k] blfy, blls ;g le> esa ugha
vkrk fd fdl ykW ds vuqlkj og ifCyd QaD”ku gS]  whether Indian law or the law of his
nationality or the law of the country or State for which he is discharging that function.
...iwjs fcy esa igyh ckj “,tsaV” “kCn dk bLrseky rks fd;k gS] ysfdu mldks dgha ij Hkh
ifjHkkf’kr ugha fd;k x;k] ;g Hkh ,d ckr gS] nwljh ckr ;g gS fd eSa buls fuosnu djuk
pkgwaxh fd os ,tsaV dks ifjHkkf’kr dj gh nsa rks vPNk gS] D;ksafd fMIyksesfVd 
filed esa T;knkrj
dke ,tsaV ds ek/;e ls Hkh gksrs gSa] mldks blds ijO;w esa ysa vkSj mldks ifjHkkf’kr djsa rks
vPNk gksxk] D;ksafd fMIyksesV rks oSls gh cgqr lkjh bE;qfuVh esa gksrs gSa] og muds ek/;e ls
“kk;n gh gksxkA
...
5.18 In  its written comments the DoPT submitted that:–
“…The definition of the words ‘foreign public official” and “official of public international
organisation” in its existing form is very wide in the sense that foreign public official
includes” any person exercising a public function for a foreign country” and the definition of
the word “official of a public international organisation’ includes ‘any person who is authorized
by such an organisation to act on behalf of that organization’ .
The Bill seeks to criminalise bribery of foreign public officials and is a standalone
legislation. The term ‘foreign public official” as defined would point to the fact that the
“public function” is to be seen and interpreted with reference to functions performed with
reference to that foreign country or state. The term ‘public function’ had many variations of
definition discussed during negotiations of the Convention with reference to both Article 15
which deals with criminalization of domestic bribery and Article 16 which deals with foreign
bribery and ultimately this term was not defined in Article 2 of UNCAC.

7
5.19 W ith regard to expression ‘Public International Organisations’ there was a suggestion through
written memoranda that ‘Public International Organisation’ may be defined as—
(a) an organization—
(i) of which two or more countries are members; or
(ii) that is constituted by persons representing two or more countries;
(b) an organisation established by, or a group of organisations constituted by—
(i) organisations of which two or more countries are members; or
(ii) organizations that are constituted by the representatives of two or more countries;
or
(c) an organisation that is—
(i) an organ of, or office within, an organization described in paragraph (a) or (b);
(ii) a commission, council or other body established by an organisation or organ
referred to in subparagraph (i); or
(iii) a committee or a subcommittee of a committee of an organisation referred to in
paragraph (a) or (b) or of an organ, councilor body referred to in subparagraph
(i) or (ii).
5.20 CBI in its note submitted to the Committee also suggested that the term Public International
Organisations is not properly defined. It was suggested in their note that the term may be defined as
an organization having business transactions involving two or more countries or  organizations engaged
in trade, commerce, industries, business or other  commercial activities of any kind carried on for gain
or profit.
5.21 The Ministry in its written comments submitted to the Committee appeared to be quite
agreeable. It stated as under.
“…The word “public international organisation’ has been used with reference to crimilaising
act of giving and taking undue advantage to/by an official of ‘public international organisation’,
The term ‘Public International Organisation’ can be considered to be defined as in the
proposed formulation. The Department is open to suggestions...”
5.22 The Committee had taken up these definitions with Secretary, Department of Personnel and
Training during her presentation before the Committee. The Secretary, at that time, had assured the
Committee that the Department was open to consider the suggestions given by the Committee and
would take up the matter with the Law Ministry, who have done the drafting, to see whether any
additions were required to be made.
5.22A The Committee finds two crucial phrases in clause 2(1)(c) and 2(1)(d) referring in turn
to phrases like ‘public functions’, ‘public agency’, ‘public enterprise’ and ‘agent’. These
phrases are the vital definitional variables in these provisions. However, the Committee finds
that these phrases have not been separately defined in clause 2 of the proposed Bill. Absence
of such definitional clarity would lead to some confusion in interpretation and application.
Consequently, the Committee opines and recommends that these 4 phrases and/or other
important concepts/phrases be defined in the definition clauses 2 of the Bill.
JURISDICTION OVER NON-CITIZENS OF INDIA
5.23 Sub clause (d) of clause 1 ( 2) applies to the to a person, who—

8
(i) is not a citizen of India;
(ii) operates an aircraft or ship; and
(iii) has his principal place of business or permanent residence in India.
5.24 Some Members of the Committee and witnesses were of the view that the above-mentioned
clause which is seemingly intended to define jurisdictional reach of the Bill over non-citizens of India
appears to be confusing to an extent, thereby leading to a somewhat narrow interpretation. According
to the existing provision only a specific category of non-citizens in India fall within the jurisdictional
extent of the Bill whereas as remaining non-citizens in India who have their principal place of business
or permanent residence in India, but do not operate an aircraft or ship, remain entirely excluded.
5.25 CBI and OECD in their notes submitted to the Committee shared similar apprehensions. CBI
stated in its note that as per the existing clause, other non-citizens who are actively doing other
business etc. in India or having dealing with Indian companies including Government/Semi government
or non-governmental organizations may not be covered by the Bill. CBI was of the view that clause
1(2) (d) may be re-formulated as under:–
to a person, who is not a citizen of India and
(i) Operates an aircraft or a ship; or
(ii) has his, or his employer’s, place of business or residence in India.
5.26 Representative of PHD Chambers of Commerce while deposing before the Committee also
highlighted this aspect as under:
“...1f you come to the definition of ‘’persons’’, clause 1, extends to citizens and non citizens.
You see clause 1 (d), it says “to a person who “, then you say, “(i) is not a citizen of India,’
(ii) operates an aircraft or ship,’ and” but in the last clause which is “(hi) has his principal
place of business or permanent residence in India”. A diplomat or a person from IMF etc.,
may not have his permanent residence in India. But then he will be able to escape from the
mischief Suppose, somebody comes on a tourist visa or somebody from Nepal comes, would
you like to reconsider this word ‘’permanent’’? The very fact that he is in India or has a
reasonable nexus with India need not be good enough? ...”
5.27 In its written comments submitted to Committee, the DoPT appears to have agreed for
bringing greater clarity by suitably amending the sub clause 1(2)( d). Representatives of DoPT, while
deposing before the Committee, were of the view that sub-clause (ii) may be removed from the
existing provision so as to avoid ambiguous interpretations.
5.28 The Committee is in agreement over the concerns raised with respect to Clause 1(2)
(d). The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should suitably modify
clause 1(2) (d) regarding jurisdiction vis a vis non-citizens in India, so as to prevent creation
of an escape route for offenders. It is recommended that clause 1(2) (d) may be re-formulated
as under:–
“to a person,
(i) who is not a citizen of India; and
(ii) has his principal place of business or permanent residence in India”.
TIME FRAME FOR INVESTIGATIONS
5.29 Whether the Bill should provide for a time-frame for investigation or not was another important

9
issue which drew the attention of the Committee during the deliberations on the Bill. Some Members
of the Committee and witnesses that appeared before the Committee were of the view that a
reasonable and meaningful timeframe should be prescribed in the Bill to ensure the timely completion
of investigations. The Members raised this issue with the Secretary, DoPT during her presentation on
the Bill before the Committee.
5.30 A Member put forward his views in following words :–
There is no difficulty in fixing the timeframe because I have seen the legislation where a
timeframe is fixed. There, it is always made open that in case of necessity, on a reasonable
cause, the time can be extended. By fixing the time limit, you will expedite the investigation,
but an option can be given to the court or the competent authority that on some reasonable
cause, this time can be extended .
5.31 The Secretary explained the situation in his reply to the Committee as under :–
“...there are two things. One is ‘absolutely desirable’ and one is ‘possible’, If we look at the
status of investigation of offences within the country, very often, there are cases which are
complicated and which take a long time for completion of investigation. CBI officials are
sitting here and they could confirm the problems that come during investigation even domestically.
When investigations are undertaken abroad, it would be much more difficult getting information
and getting clearances ...”
5.32 The representative of CBI offered his views on the issue as:–
“…the completion of investigation depends on so many things, for example, the nature of the
case, the voluminous nature of the case, the legal complications involved, the number of
witnesses to be examined, the number of documents to be scrutinised and the number of expert
opinions that are supposed to be taken. Then, there is the process of letter rogatory. It takes
years. So, it would not be possible to fix a time limit, and it varies from case to case …”
5.33 The Committee acknowledges the explanation offered by the Secretary and the
representative of CBI. The Committee, however, impresses upon the Government to appreciate
the need for completion of investigation in a definite time frame. Investigations cannot be
indefinite, thereby defeating the very purpose of expeditious closure. The Committee, accordingly,
calls for a specific time limit to be prescribed for the initial decision and also to provide for
an extension, if necessary, for reasons to be recorded in writing and with a further in-built
time limit for the extension. The Government should also evolve a mechanism to ensure the
timely completion of investigations so as to have the desired deterrent effect over wrong doers
and provide an efficacious system of punishment. This is equally important for Indian citizens
as for foreign public officials. The Committee is of the view that the Bill itself should prescribe
a time-frame to complete the investigation so as to fix the accountability of investigative
agencies. Such an arrangement may however, have inbuilt flexibility, keeping in view the
complexities of the transnational process of investigation. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends that provisions may be made for granting reasonable extension of time by a
separate designated Competent Authority in deserving situations.
Necessity of the Legislation
5.34 There was a complete unanimity in the Committee that the Bill proposes an effective legislative
architecture to criminalize the bribery of public officials in international business transactions.
5.35 The Committee feels that undoubtedly amendments in domestic laws are also needed
to effectively deal with the offences of bribery of foreign public officials in international
business, thereby ensuring India’s compliance with the UNCAC in both letter and spirit.

10
5.36 The Committee agrees with the objectives of the Bill. The Committee is of the opinion
that the legislative proposal contained in the Bill is reflective of India’s commitment towards
the charter of UNCAC. The Committee feels that legislative measures proposed in the Bill will
further expand the reach of India’s anti-corruption regime by embracing hitherto untouched
areas of bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public international organisations.
5.37 The Committee also notes that the Bill provides equal treatment to both the bribe giver
and the bribe taker. This two- pronged strategy, in the considered view of the Committee,
would prove to be a strong blow against corruption in the area of international business.
Further, the Bill is also meritorious in addressing a wide spectrum of associated issues like
mutual legal assistance, international cooperation in investigations, extradition of offenders
and confiscation of properties/assets of the offenders.
Need for Standalone Legislation
5.38 Deliberations of the Committee have brought forth two divergent view points with regard to
the modus operandi to give effect to the mandatory provisions of the UNCAC in India. Some
witnesses who appeared before the Committee were of the view that an entirely new law for this
purpose is likely raise unexpected and unnecessary ambiguities leading to the legal complexities and
contradictory interpretations. Those holding this viewpoint preferred amendments in the respective
domestic laws dealing with the corruption, mainly, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (POCA) to
ensure India’s compliance with the UNCAC. The contrary views point, however, was that a Standalone
Bill approach should be followed, given the legal complexities involved in the process of amendments
of the POCA and the fact that the jurisdiction of POCA is mainly confined to offences involving
bribery in domestic sphere and not foreign bribery offences. Moreover, it was strongly urged that to
amend POCA would not only be time consuming and cumbersome but would also be a complex
patchwork amendment exercise given the large expanse of POCA and its focus on several other issues.
5.39 The representation of CBI while deposing before the Committee expressed his concern in these
words :–
“...rather than going in for the formulation of an altogether new piece of legislation, the
desired purpose will perhaps be served in a better manner if suitable amendments are carried
out in the existing anti-corruption law, that is, the Prevention of Corruption Act. There are
several reasons to justify this approach. The first and the foremost is that the Prevention of
Corruption Act has withstood the test of time in courts. There is a plethora of judgements and
case laws expounding the substantive and procedural provisions of the Act. It is very likely
that the provisions of the proposed Bill may run into an unintended conflict with the provisions
of the Prevention of Corruption Act…”
5.40 The Central vigilance Commissioner in his comments furnished before the Committee drew the
attention of the Committee towards a likely overlapping of the present Bill with the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988.
“...In compliance with Art 16 (1)  of UNCAC, the Bill explicitly recognizes the offering or
giving of “undue advantage” as an offence. However, the PC Act 1988  does not explicitly
recognize offering of “undue advantage” as an offence. The offence of offering of or giving
gratification is supposed to be addressed indirectly as “abetment” to the primary offence of
accepting of gratification under Section 12  of the PC Act. This legal ambiguity which remains
unaddressed is prone to create problems in tackling domestic corruption. Section 4  and 5  of
the proposed Bill make a clear distinction between giving of gratification and abetment and
therefore, both the terms have different implications. The absence of explicit provisions to
recognise the offering of gratification as an offence has been a lacuna in the PC Act which

11
has been highlighted frequently. Further, while the Bill proposes a maximum punishment of
seven years, the PC Act 1988  prescribes a maximum punishment of only five years. Therefore,
due to the differences between the provisions of the Bill and the PC Act, Indian persons or
entity would be treated differently for bribing a foreign public official and for bribing a
domestic public official…”
5.41 However, while replying to the queries of Members, CVC welcomed the present Bill and opined
that he would prefer standalone legislation for the purpose. He, however, was not against the
alternative view supporting a comprehensive Prevention of Corruption Act having incorporated therein
the provisions to deal with the offences of foreign bribery. He expressed his views as
“...If the Prevention of Corruption Act has to be amended, then not only this issue, but the
entire range of issues will need to be discussed. What we feel is that this is a necessary step.
If you can mange to get the Prevention of Corruption Act amended, well and good. Otherwise,
do not delay the process, because this is a necessary thing that we require to fight corruption.
What we are interested in is that this debate should not get delayed. That is the only
argument…”
5.42 Representative of the DoPT, while replying to the queries of Members on the issue, clarified
his Department’s perspective as under:
“...But the Prevention of Corruption Act is a comprehensive legislation. There are already
several pending issues which need to be amended There have been attempts in the past to
amend those. In 2008, this Bill was introduced and passed in the Lok Sabha, but in the Rajya
Sabha it met with some obstacle. There are several issues which are pending. The Government
is trying to sort these out. That was the view taken by the Government while going in for a
stand-alone legislation rather than again going back to the earlier position…”
5.43 Representatives of the DoPT, while providing further clarifications to the Committee on the 12
th
March, 2012 on the need for a standalone Bill to criminalize the offences of the foreign bribery,
supported for the standalone approach over the amendments in POCA. The main reasons highlighted
by them were:–-
• Tackling foreign bribery offence requires heavy reliance on international co-operation in
areas of mutual legal assistance, tracing of proceeds of crime, seizure, freezing and
confiscation of assets, extradition, etc.
• Conceptually, the scope of bribery offence under UNCAC covers promising, offering or
giving an undue advantage (on the supply side). PC Act does not have express provisions
on the supply side of bribery (except through the abetment offence).
• The scope of the offence under UNCAC is wider. The amendment route would create a
dichotomous situation where offering bribe to a foreign public official would be an offence
but the offering of the same to an Indian public official would not be.
• In case the PC Act Amendment route is adopted, it would necessitate changes in the PC
Act for enhancing the focus and scope of the entire Act, thus throwing the present PC
Act wide open. That may necessitate a comprehensive unified legislation as has been
recently done by United Kingdom. Such an exercise can, more appropriately, be taken up
only after the culmination of review process under UNCAC and also other Anti-Corruption
legislative initiatives.
• Previous efforts to bring amendments in PC Act have not been successful and evoked
controversies, apart from being extremely time consuming.

12
5.44 The Committee notes that the objective of the present Bill, viz, to seek fulfilment
India’s commitments under the UNCAC is  undoubtedly of great importance. In this context,
the Committee  takes note of the two divergent approaches, which have emerged in  the course
of its deliberations, as summarised above. Having  examined the two views, the Committee is
of the considered opinion  that for a proper implementation of the provisions of the Bill, it
would be more prudent to opt for a standalone Bill approach rather  than amending the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (POCA).
5.45 The Committee accordingly endorses the Bill and recommends that the Government
should expeditiously pass the Bill in its existing format of a standalone legislation.
5.46 While endorsing the Bill, the Committee also takes note of the fact that there is a
variation in the quantum of punishment in the POCA and the Bill in hand. While the POCA
prescribes an imprisonment of minimum 6 months and maximum upto 5 years, the Bill in
hand prescribes for a punishment of minimum 6 months imprisonment extending upto a
maximum of 7 years. The Committee does not find any justification in this significant
variation in the quantum of punishment in the two legislations. The Committee opines that
the Government may review this differentiation in the quantum of punishment. Such a review
is all the more desirable keeping in view the provisions of clause 14 of the Bill which provides
that POCA shall apply in relation to offences under the said Bill.

13
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
Definition of Undue advantage
1. The Committee takes note of various suggestions by CBI & OECD and opines that
exclusion of intangible and non-pecuniary advantages from the scope of expression “undue
advantage” would unnecessarily and unjustifiably narrow down the scope & coverage of the
proposed law. The Committee opines that clause 2(1) (h) does not comprehensively define the
term “undue advantage” and further opines that it ought to have covered both pecuniary and
non pecuniary advantages. The Ministry’s reference to Section 13 of PC Act is not tenable. An
enormous range of non pecuniary advantages would be unnecessarily excluded by use of the
narrow definition and yet they would clearly involve bribery. [Para 5.11]
2. The Committee is of the considered view that if the Bill is to effectively check the
offences relating to bribery of foreign officials in the international business transactions, the
expression ‘undue advantage,’ which explains what an act of bribery may also comprise, needs
to be comprehensively defined, embracing both intangible and non-pecuniary advantages within
its ambit so as to avoid any narrow or limited interpretation. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the Government may review the definition of the term ‘undue advantage’
in the light of the aforesaid conclusions. [Para 5.12]
Exemption regarding Certain Activities
3. The Committee notes the suggestions of the witnesses on this count. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the Government should consider incorporating in the Bill a clear
de minimis clause or exemption to exclude certain defined business or courtesy gifts and
services including, but not limited to, offering limited and reasonable refreshments, dinners/
lunches, entertainment, token gifts and the like. Such exemptions may be carefully calibrated
either in terms of monetary value or subject matter or both. [Para 5.14]
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International Organisation
3.A The Committee finds two crucial phrases in clause 2(1)(c) and 2(1)(d) referring in turn
to phrases like ‘public functions’, ‘public agency’, ‘public enterprise’ and’ agent’. These
phrases are the vital definitional variables in these provisions. However, the Committee finds
that these phrases have not been separately defined in clause 2 of the proposed Bill. Absence
of such definitional clarity would lead to some confusion in interpretation and application.
Consequently, the Committee opines and recommends that these 4 phrases and/or other
important concepts/phrases be defined in the definition clauses 2 of the Bill. [Para 5.22A]
JURISDICTION OVER NON-CITIZENS OF INDIA
4. The Committee is in agreement over the concerns raised with respect to Clause 1(2)
(d). The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should suitably modify
clause 1(2) (d) regarding jurisdiction vis a vis non-citizens in India, so as to prevent creation
of an escape route for offenders. It is recommended that clause 1(2) (d) may be re-formulated
as under:-
13

14
“to a person,
(ii) who is not a citizen of India; and
(ii) has his principal place of business or permanent residence in India”. [Para 5.28]
TIME-FRAME FOR INVESTIGATIONS
5. The Committee acknowledges the explanation offered by the Secretary and the
representative of CBI. The Committee, however, impresses upon the Government to appreciate
the need for completion of investigation in a definite time-frame. Investigations cannot be
indefinite, thereby defeating the very purpose of expeditious closure. The Committee, accordingly,
calls for a specific time limit to be prescribed for the initial decision and also to provide for
an extension, if necessary, for reasons to be recorded in writing and with a further in-built
time limit for the extension. The Government should also evolve a mechanism to ensure the
timely completion of investigations so as to have the desired deterrent effect over wrong doers
and provide an efficacious system of punishment. This is equally important for Indian citizens
as for foreign public officials. The Committee is of the view that the Bill itself should prescribe
a time-frame to complete the investigation so as to fix the accountability of investigative
agencies. Such an arrangement may however, have inbuilt flexibility, keeping in view the
complexities of the transnational process of investigation. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends that provisions may be made for granting reasonable extension of time by a
separate designated Competent Authority in deserving situations. [Para 5.33]
Necessity of the Legislation
6. The Committee feels that undoubtedly amendments in domestic laws are also needed
to effectively deal with the offences of bribery of foreign public officials in international
business, thereby ensuring India’s compliance with the UNCAC in both letter and spirit.
[Para 5.35]
7. The Committee agrees with the objectives of the Bill. The Committee is of the opinion
that the legislative proposal contained in the Bill is reflective of India’s commitment towards
the charter of UNCAC. The Committee feels that legislative measures proposed in the Bill will
further expand the reach of India’s anti-corruption regime by embracing hitherto untouched
areas of bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public international organisations.
[Para 5.36]
8. The Committee also notes that the Bill provides equal treatment to both the bribe giver
and the bribe taker. This two- pronged strategy, in the considered view of the Committee,
would prove to be a strong blow against corruption in the area of international business.
Further, the Bill is also meritorious in addressing a wide spectrum of associated issues like
mutual legal assistance, international cooperation in investigations, extradition of offenders
and confiscation of properties/assets of the offenders. [Para 5.37]
Need for Standalone Legislation
9. The Committee notes that the objective of the present Bill, viz, to seek fulfilment
India’s commitments under the UNCAC is undoubtedly of great importance. In this context,
the Committee takes note of the two divergent approaches, which have emerged in the course
of its deliberations, as summarised above. Having examined the two views, the Committee is
of the considered opinion that for a proper implementation of the provisions of the Bill, it
would be more prudent to opt for a standalone Bill approach rather than amending the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (POCA). [Para 5.44]

15
10. The Committee accordingly endorses the Bill and recommends that the Government
should expeditiously pass the Bill in its existing format of a standalone legislation. [Para 5. 45]
11. While endorsing the Bill, the Committee also takes note of the fact that there is a
variation in the quantum of punishment in the POCA and the Bill in hand. While the POCA
prescribes an imprisonment of minimum 6 months and maximum upto 5 years, the Bill in
hand prescribes for a punishment of minimum 6 months imprisonment extending upto a
maximum of 7 years. The Committee does not find any justification in this significant
variation in the quantum of punishment in the two legislations. The Committee opines that
the Government may review this differentiation in the quantum of punishment. Such a review
is all the more desirable keeping in view the provisions of clause 14 of the Bill which provides
that POCA shall apply in relation to offences under the said Bill. [Para 5.46]

MINUTES

19
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 15 th June, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Dr. Monazir Hassan
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
8. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
9. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
10. Shri Devji M. Patel
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
13. Shri Manish Tewari
14. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
15. Adv. P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
(Department of Personnel and Training)
1. Shrimati Alka Sirohi, Secretary;

20
2. Shri K.D. Tripathi, Secretary (CVC);
3. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Additional Secretary;
4. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary;
5. Shri Prabodh Kumar, Joint Director (CBI);
6. Shri Alok Kumar Pateria, Joint Director (CBI);
7. Shri Saurabh Tripathi, DIG (CBI); and
8. Shri Gautam Chakraborty; DLA (CBI).
II. MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
1. Dr. G . Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
2. Shri M.K. Sharma, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor;
3. Shri R.S. Shukla, Additional Legal Advisor; and
4. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson requested the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training to
make a presentation on The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public
International Organisations Bill, 2011. The Secretary, while making a powerpoint presentation on the
Bill, apprised the Committee that at present, domestic laws do not provide for criminalization of the
bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public international organisations and that this Bill
inter-alia, seeks to achieve this objective, which is a condition precedent to the ratification of the
treaty. There were queries from Members of the Committee regarding certain definitions in the Bill,
the justification for going in for a stand alone legislation rather than amendment in the Prevention of
Corruption Act, the ratification of the treaty in anticipation of the passing of the Bill in Parliament,
presenting a time limit for investigation in the Bill (which could be extendable), comprehensiveness of
the legislation to cover offences committed under various situations, etc. The Secretary responded to
the queries raised by the Members. As regards prescribing a time limit on investigation the Secretary
said that they were open to Committee’s suggestions.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The Committee adjourned at 11.55 
A.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

21
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Tuesday, the 10 th January, 2012 in Room No. ‘53’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
10. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
11. Shri Pinaki Misra
12. Shri Lalu Prasad
13. Adv. A. Sampath
14. Shri S. Semmalai
15. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
16. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
17. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal,  Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
A. ** *
21
*** Relates to some other matter.

22
B. NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. ASSOCHAM
1. Shri R.K. Handoo, Managing Committee Member; and
2. Shri O.P. Srivastava, Senior Advisor.
II. FICCI
1. Dr. K.K. Upadhaya; Additional Director, Team Leader; and
2. Shri Rajan Kohli, Advisor.
III. CII
1. Shri Sushanta Sen, Principal Adviser; and
2. Shri Shreeram Lakshman, Deputy Director.
IV. PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry
1. Shri Suman Jyoti Khaitan, Sr. Vice President;
2. Shri K. Swarup, Co-chairman, Law and Justice Committee;
3. Ms. Kanchan Zutshi, Secretary, Law and Justice Committee; and
4. Ms. Ishita Sharma, Personnel Secretary to SG.
C. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL AND PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
• Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
• CVC
Shri K.D. Tripathi, Secretary CVC.
• CBI
1. Shri A.K. Pateria, Joint Director, CBI; and
2. Shri Prabodh Kumar, Joint Director, CBI.
• Department of Legal Affairs
Shri M.K. Sharma, Joint Secretary & Legislaitve Counsel.
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Chairman apprised the Members of the next item on the agenda of the
Committee, viz, the oral evidence of the representatives of the corporate bodies on the Prevention of
Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International Organizations Bill, 2011. The
Chairman welcomed the representatives of corporate bodies and invited Shri R.K. Handoo, Managing
Committee Member of ASSOCHAM to apprise the Committee of the views of his organization on the
said Bill.
4. Lauding the introduction of the said Bill as a big step forward, Shri Handoo of ASSOCHAM
emphasized that the said Bill would certainly expand the reach of current anti-corruption legislative
*** Relates to some other matter.

23
regime. He, however, was a bit apprehensive over the likely overlapping of the said Bill with some
provisions of prevailing legislations, aiming to curb corruption namely the PC Act, 1988 and the FCRA
Act.
5. Thereafter, Shri Sushanta Sen of CII apprise the Committee of the views of his organization
on the Bill. He acknowledged that most of the provisions of the Bill were effective enough to generate
significant deterrence against indulgence in corruption with the foreign public officials. He, however,
sought some more additions which, in his opinion, were necessary, if the efficacy of present Bill is
to be enhanced. For the purpose, he suggested some amendments in the Bill like inclusion of
quantification of fine, an in-built definition of the abetment in the Bill and more elaborate provisions
in clause 18 which refer to diplomatic immunities to foreign officials.
6. Shri Rajan Kohli of FICCI, while making his presentation, was very emphatic on his support
to the rationale and objectives of the Bill. The main focus of his brief remarks was the need to make
the people aware of the provisions and implications of Bill after its enactment.
7. Shri Suman Jyoti Khaitan of PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry made a detailed
presentation on the Bill in the light of similar legislations prevailing in the UK and USA. He was of
the opinion that the experience of the UK and USA may be taken into account while legislating upon
similar subject in India. Though he fervently admired the objectives of the Bill, he also contended that
there remain certain issues which need to be reconsidered, if the Bill is to be an effective legislation.
According to him, the Bill lacks a provision for deciding the jurisdiction to take cognizance of an
offence as to where it has been committed. The Bill also does not effectively deal with the likely
overlapping among the sovereign laws of various countries and definition of ‘persons’ as mentioned
in the Bill.
8. Members sought clarifications on some issues which were responded to by the witness.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

24
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 24 th January, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kirti Azad
6. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
7. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
8. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Pinaki Misra
11. Adv. A. Sampath
12. Shri S. Semmalai
13. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
15. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
A. CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar, Central Vigilance Commissioner;
24

25
2. Shri K.D. Tripathi, Secretary; and
3. Shri K. Subramaniam, Director.
B. CBI
1. Shri Amar Pratap Singh, Director; and
2. Shri Abdul Aziz, Director.
C. DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
1. Shri Arun Mathur, Director;
2. Shri S.K. Sawhney, Special Director; and
3. Shri Balesh Kumar, Special Director.
D. NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Shri Ravinder Kumar; and
2. Shri Radhey Shyam Agarwal;
E. MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL AND PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
(Department of Personnel and Training)
Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
F. MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel.
(Since there was information about the Chairman of the Committee, joining the meeting little later,
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik was voted to the Chair)
2. The Chairman greeted the Members of the Committee and welcomed the Central Vigilance
Commissioner, Director, CBI and Director, Enforcement Directorate who were invited for tendering
oral evidence before the Committee on The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International Organizations Bill, 2011. The Chairman, thereafter, requested the
Central Vigilance Commissioner to apprise the Committee of their views on the Bill.
3. While deposing before the Committee, the Central Vigilance Commissioner endorsed the need
of a legislation to check the offences of bribery relating to the foreign public officials and officials
of public international organizations in international business organizations. He also acknowledged that
the scheme of the proposed Bill on foreign bribery is in broad consonance with the requirements of
the United Nations Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC), of which India is one of the signatory
country. He, however, highlighted the legal ambiguities that may arise out of the overlapping of Clauses
4 & 5 of the proposed Bill with Section 12 of the PC Act. He was of the view that the PC Act may
be amended appropriately, so as to make Indian persons or entity liable to equal punishment for bribing
a foreign public official and for bribing a domestic public official.
4. Thereafter, Director, CBI made a power point presentation. He lauded the Bill for providing
equal treatment to both the bribe giver and the bribe taker, thereby checking both demand and supply
of bribery. He also very resolutely pointed out that the CBI is not in favour of a stand alone legislation
to deal with the offences of foreign bribery because such an initiative may lead to conflict/overlapping
of the provisions of the Bill with the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act. Instead, he opined
that a suitable amendment of the existing anti-corruption laws and particularly, the Prevention of
Corruption Act would be a better option.

26
5. The Director of ED while presenting his views before the Committee supported the Bill. He,
however underscored the fact that amendments would be required in the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act to give effect to the clauses 3, 4 and 5 of the proposed Bill. Likewise, he also
highlighted that while implementing clauses 12 and 13 of the Bill, which deals with attachment and
confiscation of property, a harmonious interpretation of the corresponding provisions of the PMLA
with the proposed Bill would be required.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. Thereafter, Shri Ravinder Kumar, a non-official witness apprised the Committee of his views
on the Bill. In his presentation, he inter alia  emphasized that in order to avoid likely confusions and
ambiguities, there is a need to explicitly define some of the expressions used in the Bill like ‘agent’
foreign public officials’ etc.
7. Shri Radheyshyam Aggarwal, another non-official witness while presenting his views stated
that bribery was an anti-national activity, and urged the Committee to consider for incorporating within
the Bill strong provisions for a time bound and accountable system of investigations.
8. Members sought clarifications on some issues which were responded to by the witnesses.
9. Thereafter, the Members deliberated on the proposed legislation. They were convinced on the
merits of not having a stand alone legislation for the purpose. The Committee directed that a draft
report on the Bill may be prepared for its consideration.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
(Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi arrived and assumed the Chair in the meeting)
10. * * *
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee adjourned at 4.27 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

27
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 17 th February, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Balchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri O.T. Lepcha
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Kumari Meenakshi Nataranjan
11. Shri Adv. A. Sampath
12. Shri S. Semmalai
13. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
A. ** *
B. ** *
27
*** Relates to some other matter.

28
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. ** *
II. ** *
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
A. Representatives of the Ministry of Personnel & Training
1. Shri P.K. Mishra, Secretary:; and
2. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
B. Representatives of the Legislative Department
1. Shri S.D. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel; and
2. Shri K.V. Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
C. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri M.K. Sharma, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser; and
2. Dr. R.J.R. Kasibatla, Deputy Legal Adviser.
(Since there was information about the Chairman of the Committee joining the meeting later,
during the course of the meeting, Dr Bhalchandra Mungekar was voted to the Chair)
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee next welcomed the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training who had
desired to give clarifications on certain issues related to the Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public
Officials and Officials of Public International Organisations Bill, 2011  like the difficulties that may entail
in case it is decided to follow the route of amending the Prevention of Corruption Act instead of going
for a stand alone legislation and the scope of applicability of the Bill with reference to its clause (1)
(2) (d). The Committee briefly heard the representatives but decided to have detailed clarifications in
the matter in one of its later sitting as the strength of the Committee at that point of time was quite
less for deliberating on such important issues.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 6.32 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

29
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, the 12 th March, 2012 in Committee Room, ‘E’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ram Vilas Pawan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
7. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
11. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
12. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. ***
II. ***
III. ***
IV. ***
V. ***
29
*** Relates to some other matter.

30
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
***
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES AND PENSIONS
• Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri P.K. Mishra, Secretary (P);
2. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Additional Secretary; and
3. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. In their presentation, the Representatives of DoPT apprised the Committee the merits
of standalone legislation approach compared to the proposal to incorporate the provision in the
existing Prevention of Corruption Act dealing with corruption, in order to fulfil India’s Commitment
vis a vis  the Article 16 of the UNCAC. The Committee heard the presentation of the representatives
of the DoPT and decided to look into this aspect while finalizing its Report on the said Bill.
10. The Members of the Committee sought clarifications on some issues, which were
responded to in detail by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

31
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.30 P.M. on Monday, the 26 th March, 2012 in Committee Room, ‘B’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Ram Vilas Pawan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
9. Shri S. Semmalai
10. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
11. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft 50
th Report on the Prevention of Bribery
of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International Organizations bill, 2011. The
Members shared their views on the draft Report and adopted the same with some specific
modifications.
2.1 The Committee nominated Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shri Shantaram
Laxman Naik to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar and in his absence
Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh to lay the same on the table of the Lok Sabha on 29
th March, 2012.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
4. The Committee adjourned at 4.55 P.M.
31

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-A
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
25 March, 2011
Bill No. 26 of 201 1.
THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC
OFFICIALS AND OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL
ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to prevent corruption relating to bribery of foreign public officials
and officials of public international organisations and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the United Nations Convention against Corruption
annexed to the Resolution 58/4 of 31 st October, 2003 was adopted
by the General Assembly of the United Nations and opened it for
signature at the High-level Political Signing Conference held in
Merida, Mexico, from 9
th to 11 th December, 2003:
AND  WHEREAS  aforesaid Resolution urges all States and
competent regional economic integration organisations to sign and
ratify the United Nations Convention against Corruption as soon as
possible in order to ensure its rapid entry into force;
A
ND WHEREAS aforesaid Resolution requests the Conference of
the State Parties to the Convention to address the criminalisation of
bribery of officials of public international organisations, including the
United Nations, and related issues, taking into account questions of
privileges and immunities, as well as of jurisdiction and the role of
international organisations by inter alia , making recommendations
regarding appropriate action in that regard;
35

36
AND WHEREAS the aforesaid Convention expresses concern about
the seriousness of problems and threats posed by corruption to the
stability and security of societies, undermining the institutions and
values of democracy, ethical values and justice and jeopardising
sustainable development and the rule of law; and about cases of
corruption that involve vast quantities of assets, which may constitute
a substantial proportion of the resources of States, and that threaten
the political stability and sustainable development of those States;
A
ND WHEREAS India has signed the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption on the 9 th December, 2005;
AND WHEREAS on ratification of the Convention by India it shall
be necessary to implement the aforesaid Convention as a State Party;
AND WHEREAS in terms of Article 16 of the aforesaid Convention,
each State Party is required to adopt such legislative and other measures,
as may be necessary to establish the bribery of foreign public officials
and officials of public international organisations, as a criminal offence.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International
Organisations Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India and applies also—
(a) to citizens of India wherever they may be;
(b) to the persons on, an aircraft or ship registered in
India wherever they may be;
(c) to the persons on, an aircraft or ship registered
outside India but for the time being in or over India; and
(d) to a person, who—
(i) is not a citizen of India;
(ii) operates an aircraft or ship; and
(iii) has his principal place of business or permanent
residence in India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint; and different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any
such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

37
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Convention” means the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption adopted by the Resolution 58/4 of 31st October,
2003 of the General Assembly of the United Nations;
(b) “contracting State” means any country or place outside
India in respect of which arrangements have been made by the
Central Government with the Government of such country
through a Convention, treaty or otherwise;
(c) “foreign public official” means any person holding a
legislative, executive, administrative or judicial office of a foreign
country, whether appointed or elected; any person exercising a
public function for a foreign country, including for a public
agency or public enterprise and any official or agent of a public
international organisation;
(d) “official of a public international organisation” means
an international civil servant or any person who is authorised by
such an organisation to act on behalf of that organisation;
(e) “foreign country” includes all levels and sub-divisions
of Government, from national to local;
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette;
(g) “Special Judge” means the Special Judge appointed
under section 3 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988;
(h) “undue advantage” that is to say bribery means an act
of a foreign public official or official of public international
organisation, who—
(i) by corrupt or illegal means, obtains for himself
or for any other person, any valuable thing or pecuniary
advantage; or
(ii) by abusing his position as such public official
obtains for himself or for any other person, any valuable
thing or pecuniary advantage; or
(iii) while holding office as such public official
obtains for himself or for any other person any valuable
thing or pecuniary advantage without any public interest;
or
(iv) habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept
or attempts to obtain for himself or for any other person,
any valuable thing without consideration or for a
consideration which he knows to be inadequate from any
person whom he knows to have been, or to be, or to be
likely to be concerned in any proceeding or business
transacted or about to be transacted by him, or having
any connection with the official functions of himself or
Definitions.
49 of 1988.

38
of any foreign public official to whom he is subordinate,
or from any person whom he knows to be interested in
or related to the person so concerned.
(2) The words and expressions used under this Act but not
defined and defined under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them under that Act.
CHAPTER II
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND
OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
3. Whoever, being a foreign public official or official of public
international organisation,  accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or
attempts to obtain from any person, for himself or for any other
person or entity, any undue advantage other than legal remuneration,
as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act
or for showing or forbearing to show, in the exercise of his official
functions, favour or disfavour to any person or entity for or rendering
or attempting to render any service or disservice to any person or
entity, shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less
than six months but which may extend to seven years and shall also
be liable to fine.
4. Whoever, in relation to the conduct of international business
in order to obtain or retain business, intentionally, offers or promises
to offer, gives or promises to give, directly or indirectly, any undue
advantage, to any foreign public official or official of public international
organisation, for himself or herself or for another person or entity, in
order that such official, act or refrain from acting in the exercise of
his or her official duties, shall be or punishable with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
5. Whoever, abets the commission of an offence punishable
under this Act or attempts to commit any such offence and in such
attempt does any act towards the commission of such offence, shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than six months but which may extend to seven years and shall also
be liable to fine.
6. ( 1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement
with the Government of any country outside India for—
(a) enforcing the provisions of this Act;
(b) exchange of information for the prevention of any
offence under this Act or under the corresponding law in force
in that country or investigation of cases relating to any offence
under this Act, and may, by notification, make such provisions
as may be necessary for implementing the agreement (including
mutual assistance).
49 of 1988.
Prohibition
for accepting
gratification
by foreign
public official
or official of
public
international
organisation.
Prohibition
for giving
gratification
to foreign
public official
or official of
public
international
organisation.
Abetment and
attempts.
Agreements
with foreign
countries.

39
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the
application of this Act in relation to a contracting State with which
reciprocal arrangements have been made, shall be subject to such
conditions, exceptions or qualifications as are specified in the said
notification.
7. The offences under this Act shall be deemed to have been
included as extraditable offences and provided for in all the extradition
treaties made by India with convention countries and which extend to,
and are binding on, India on the date of commencement of this Act.
8. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, if, in the course of an investigation
into an offence or other proceedings under this Act, an application is
made to a Special Judge by the Investigating Officer or any officer
superior in rank to the Investigating Officer that any evidence is
required in connection with investigation into an offence or proceedings
under this Act and he is of the opinion that such evidence may be
available in any place in a contracting State, and the Special Judge, on
being satisfied that such evidence is required in connection with the
investigation into an offence or proceedings under this Act, may issue
a letter of request to a court or an authority in the contracting State
competent to deal with such request to—
(i) examine facts and circumstances of the case,
(ii) take such steps as the Special Judge may specify in
such letter of request, and
(iii) forward all the evidence so taken or collected to the
Special Judge issuing such letter of request.
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as
the Central Government may specify in this behalf.
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received
under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the evidence collected
during the course of investigation.
9. Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government
from a court or an authority in a contracting State requesting for
investigation into an offence or proceedings under this Act and
forwarding to such court or authority any evidence connected therewith,
the Central Government may forward such letter of request to the
Special Judge or to any authority under the Act, as it thinks fit, for
execution of such request in accordance with the provisions of this
Act or, as the case may be, any other law for the time being in force.
10. ( 1) Where a Special Judge, in relation to an offence
punishable under section 3 or section 4, desires—
(a) a summons to an accused person; or
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or
Provisions as
to extradition.
Letter of
request to a
contracting
State in
certain cases.
2 of 1974.
Assistance to
a contracting
State in
certain cases.
Reciprocal
arrangements
for processes
and assistance
for transfer
of accused
persons.

40
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and
produce a document or other thing or to produce it; or
(d) a search warrant.
issued by it shall be served or executed at any place in any contracting
State, it shall send such summons or warrant in duplicate in such
form, to such Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authorities, as
the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf and
that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the
same to be executed.
(2) Where a Special Judge, in relation to an offence punishable
under section 4 has received for service or execution—
(a) a summons to an accused person; or
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and
produce a document or other thing, or to produce it; or
(d) a search warrant,
issued by a court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State, it shall,
cause the same to be served or executed as if it were a summons or
warrant received by it from another court in the said territories for
service or execution within its local jurisdiction; and where—
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person
arrested shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedure
specified under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(ii) a search warrant has been executed, the things found
in this search shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in accordance
with the procedure specified under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973:
Provided that in a case where a summon or search warrant
received from a contracting State has been executed, the documents
or other things produced or things found in the search shall be
forwarded to the court issuing the summond or search warrant through
such authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify
in this behalf.
(3) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant
to sub-section ( 2) is a prisoner in India, the Special Judge or the
Central Government may impose such conditions as that court or
Government deems fit.
(4) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub-
section ( 1) is a prisoner in a contracting State, the Special Judge in
India shall ensure that the conditions subject to which the prisoner is
transferred to India are complied with and such prisoner shall be kept
in such custody subject to such conditions as the Central Government
may direct in writing.
2 of 1974.

41
11. Every letter of request, summons or warrant, received by
the Central Government from, and every letter of request, summons
or warrant, to be transmitted to a contracting State under this
Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as the case
may be, sent to the concerned court in India in such form and in
such manner as the Central Government may, by notification, specify
in this behalf.
12. (1) Where the property is suspected to be in a contracting
State, the Special Judge, on an application by an officer authorised by
the Central Government, may issue a letter of request to a court or
an authority in the contracting State for execution of attachment or
confiscation of the property in the contracting State.
(2) Where a letter of request is received by the Central
Government from a court or an authority in a contracting State
requesting attachment or confiscation of the property in India, derived
or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from the commission
of an offence under section 3 or section 4 committed in that contracting
State, the Central Government may forward such letter of request to
the Special Judge for execution in accordance with the provisions of
this Act.
(3) The Special Judge shall, on receipt of a letter of request
under sub-section ( 2), direct any authority to take all steps necessary
for tracing and identifying such property.
(4) The steps referred to in sub-section ( 3) may include any
inquiry, investigation or survey in respect of any person, place, property,
assets, documents, books of account in any bank or public financial
institutions or any other relevant matters.
(5) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub-
section ( 4) shall be carried out by an authority mentioned in sub-
section ( 3) in accordance with such directions issued in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
13. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, or the
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 the provisions of the
Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance 1944, as amended by section
29 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, shall, as far as may
be, apply to the attachment, administration of attached property and
execution of order of attachment or confiscation of the property
under this Act.
14. The provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
and the rules made thereunder, (including those relating to appointment
of Special Judges under Chapter II and investigation into the cases and
inspection of bankers books under Chapter IV of that Act), shall, so
far as may be, apply in relation to the offence under this Act as they
apply in relation to the offence under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
Procedure in
respect of
letter of
request.
Attachment,
seizure and
confiscation,
etc., of
property in a
contracting
State or India.
Provisions of
Criminal Law
Amendment
Ordinance,
1944 to apply
to attachment
under this
Act.
Certain
provisions of
Act 49 of
1988 to
apply.
15 of 2003.
49 of 1988.

42
15. (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercisable
by, or the procedure applicable to, any court or other authority under
the Army Act, 1950, the Air Force Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957, the
Border Security Force Act, 1968, the Coast Guard Act, 1978 and the
National Security Guard Act, 1986.
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the
purposes of any such law as is referred to in sub-section ( 1), the
court of a Special Judge shall be deemed to be a court of ordinary
criminal justice.
16. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the High Court may
exercise, so far as they may be applicable, all the powers of appeal
and revision conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on
a High Court as if the court of the Special Judge were a Court of
Session trying cases within the local limits of the High Court.
17. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force, and
nothing contained herein shall exempt any foreign public official or
official of public international organisation from any proceeding which
might, apart from this Act, be instituted against him.
18. In case any foreign public official or official of public
international organisation is alleged to have committed an offence
under this Act to whom certain privileges and immunities applies under
the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 or the
International Finance Corporation (Status, Immunities and Privileges)
Act, 1958, or the International Development Association (Status,
Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1960, or the Diplomatic Relations
(Vienna Convention) Act, 1972, or under any other law for the time
being in force or under any Convention or treaty, the Central Government
shall, in consultation with the contracting State or public international
organisation, as the case may be, take adequate measures for proceeding
under this Act against such public official.
19. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as amended by section 22 of
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall have effect in their
application in relation to any proceeding in relation to an offence
punishable under this Act.
20. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of the period of four years from the date of commencement
of this Act.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
47 of 1968.
30 of 1978.
47 of 1986.
Military,
Naval and Air
Force or
other laws not
to be
affected.
Appeal and
revision.
Act to be in
addition to
any other law.
Proceedings
under this Act
to be taken in
consultation
with
contracting
State against
foreign public
official to
whom
privileges and
immunities
under any law
or Convention
or treaty
apply.
Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973 to apply
subject to
certain
modifications.
2 of 1974.
46 of 1947.
42 of  1958.
32 of 1960.
43 of 1972.
2 of 1974.
49 of 1988
Power to
remove
difficulties.

43
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
21. The enactments specified in the Schedule to this Act shall be
amended in the manner specified therein and such amendments shall
take effect on the date of commencement of this Act.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.

44
44
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 21)
AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART I
THE P REVENTION OF C ORRUPTION A CT, 1988
(49 OF 1988)
In section 3, in sub-section ( 1), in clause (a), for the words
“any offence punishable under this Act”, the words and figures “any
offence punishable under this Act or the Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International
Organisations Act, 2011 ” shall be substituted.
PART II
T
HE P REVENTION OF M ONEY-LAUNDERING A CT, 2002
(15 OF 2003)
In the Schedule, in Part B, after paragraph 5, the following
paragraph shall be inserted, namely:-
“PARAGRAPH 5 A
The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials
of Public International Organisations Act, 2011.
Section Description of offence
3 Prohibition for accepting gratification by foreign
Public Officials or official of public international
organisation.
4 Prohibition for giving gratification to foreign public
official or official of public international organisation.
5 Abetment and attempts.”.
Amendment
of section 3
Amendment
of Schedule

45
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Bribery of public officials to obtain advantages in international
business raises serious moral and political concerns, undermines good
governance and sustainable economic development, and distorts
competition. Corruption in awarding business contracts has social,
political, environmental and economic costs which no country can
afford. Serious consequences result when public officials take bribes
in awarding contracts to foreign businesses for public services such
as roads, water, electricity etc. resulting in inappropriate decisions and
undermining plans for development.
2. The United Nations Convention against Corruption annexed to
the Resolution 58/4 of 31st October, 2003 was adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations and opened it for signature at the
High-level Political Signing Conference held in Merida, Mexico, from
9th to 11th December, 2003. India has signed the Convention on 9th
December, 2005. The ratification of Convention would require
criminalising the act of foreign bribery and it would strengthen India’s
existing anti-corruption laws that demonstrate India’s commitment to
good governance and give more credibility in its fight against bribery
and corruption.
3. India already has in place a framework for combating
corruption under certain laws, namely, the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 and the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 which
covers a number of areas that need international standards for the
criminalisation of bribery. Article 16 of the Convention requires that
each State Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as
may be necessary to establish as a criminal offence, the giving or
taking of undue advantage to or by a foreign public official or an
official of a public international organisation, directly or indirectly, for
the official himself or herself or another person or entity when
committed intentionally. However, the bribery of foreign public officials
in international business transactions is not covered under the above
said Acts. Therefore, a need has been felt to bring a legislation to give
effect to the aforesaid Convention.
4. The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International Organisations Bill, 2011 seek to prevent
corruption relating to bribery of foreign public officials and officials of
public international organisations and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto. The proposed legislation, inter alia,-
(a) prohibits accepting gratification by foreign public official
or official of public international organisation and making such
act punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to seven years and
shall also be liable to fine;
45

46
(b) prohibits giving gratification to foreign public official
or official of public international organisation and making such
act punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to seven years and
shall also be liable to fine;
(c) makes abetment and attempts of the acts specified at
(a) and (b) above also punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine;
(d) confers power upon the Central Government to enter
into agreements with foreign countries enforcing the provisions
of proposed legislation;
(e) makes provision declaring the offences under the
proposed legislation as extraditable offences;
(f) makes provision for rendering assistance to a
contracting State in certain cases to give effect to provisions of
the proposed legislation;
(g) makes provision for reciprocal arrangements for
processes and assistance for transfer of accused persons;
(h) makes provision for attachment, seizure and
confiscation, etc., of property in a contracting State or India.
5. It is also proposed that proceedings under the proposed
legislation shall be taken in consultation with the contracting State
against foreign public official to whom privileges and immunities under
any law or Convention or treaty are accorded.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
V . NARAYANASAMY .
N
EW D ELHI;
The 22nd March, 2011.

47
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Item ( b) of sub-clause ( 1) of clause 6 of the Bill provides that
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions as may be necessary for implementing the
agreement (including mutual legal assistance) in connection with the
agreement entered into with the Government of any country outside
India for exchange of information for the prevention of any offence
under this Act or under the corresponding law in force in that country
or investigation of cases relating to any offence under this Act. Sub-
clause ( 2) of clause 6 enables the Central Government to specify
conditions, exceptions or qualifications subject to which reciprocal
arrangements shall be given effect.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 10 empowers the Central Government
to specify, by notification, the form of summon or warrant and the
authority through which such summons or warrant shall be sent to
any contracting State for its service or execution.
3. Clause 11 empowers the Central Government to specify, by
notification, the form and manner in which every letter of request,
summons or warrant, received by the Central Government from, and
every letter of request, summons or warrant to be transmitted to, a
Contracting State shall be sent to the concerned court in India.
4. The matters in respect of which notifications may be issued
in accordance with the provisions of the Bill are matters of procedure
and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of
a normal character.
47

48
48
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE P REVENTION  OF C ORRUPTION  A CT, 1988
(No. 49 OF 1988)
** * * *
3. ( 1) The Central Government or the State Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as many special
Judges as may be necessary for such area or areas or for such case
or gruoup of cases as may be specified in the notification to try the
following offences, namely:—
(a) any offence punishable under this Act; and
** * * *
Power to
appoint
special Judges.

49
49
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to prevent corruption relating to bribery of foreign public officials and
officials of public international organisations and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions)

50
ANNEXURE-B
COMMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING ON THE
VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS CONTAINED IN MEMORANDUM SUBMITTED BY
INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS/EXPERTS ON THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL
Total comments Received : 8
I. PART-1 COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
Sl. No. Name of the individual/ Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
Organisation
12 3 4
CLAUSE NO : PREAMBLE TO THE BILL
1 Vijay Choudhary & Ravinder
Kumar, Advocate, G-20A,
Naraina Vihar, New Delhi-
28. [Memo No. 2]
Amend the introductory portion of the bill as under
A Bill
(1) To prevent corruption relating to  bribery of foreign
public officials and officials of public international
organisations and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto;
(2) Whereas corruption is a transnational phenomenon
that crosses national borders and affects all societies
and economies and is equally destructive and
reprehensible within both public and private spheres
of life, so that national, regional and international co-
operation is essential to prevent, combat and control
corruption and related corrupt activities;
(3) AND WHEREAS the prevention and combating
corruption and related corrupt activities is a
responsibility of States requiring mutual co-operation,
with the support and involvement of individuals and
groups of civil society, trans-border states and public
international organisations;
The basic purpose of this standalone bill is
to have an enabling legislation to comply
with the requirements of Article 16 of United
Nations Convention Against Corruption and
this objective has been clearly spelt out in
the ‘Preamble to the bill” in its existing
form. Therefore the proposed amendment in
the “Preamble or introduction to the bill”
may not be required.

51
(4) AND WHEREAS the United Nations has adopted
various resolutions condemning all corrupt practices,
and urged member states to take effective and
concrete steps and action to combat all forms of
corruption and related corrupt practices relating to
bribery of foreign public officials and officials of
public international organisations including United
Nations;
(5) AND WHERAS the Republic of India desires to be
in compliance with and to become a party to the
United Nations Convention against Corruption adopted
by the General Assembly of the United Nations on
31st October 2003;
(6) AND WHEREAS the Republic of India signed the
United Nations Convention against Corruption on 9th
December 2005;
(7) AND WHEREAS in terms of Article 16 of the
aforesaid Convention, each Party State is required to
adopt such legislative and other measures, as may
be necessary to establish the bribery of foreign
public officials and officials of public international
organisations, as a criminal offence;
(8) Be it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-second
Year of Republic of India as follows:
CLAUSE 1(2) – SHORT TITLE AND COMMENCEMENT - sub clause (d)(ii)
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and
Development (OECD)
Directorate for Financial
and Enterprise Affairs,
Anti Corruption Division,
2, rue Andre Pascal,
1 Possible typo in the provisions establishing jurisdiction
under Chapter I,  section 1, para 2  (d)(ii)
There is a possible typographical error in this section that
the committee may wish to review under
subparagraph (ii): “operates an aircraft or ship; and”.
In order to bring greater clarity either sub clause
1(2)(d)(ii) may be omitted by retaining sub
clause (i) and (iii) or add a connective ‘and’
after existing sub clause in 1(2) (d)(i).

52
75775 Paris Cedex l6,
France. [Memo No. 1]
This sub-paragraph may not have been intended to have
been included in this specific section. If this paragraph
were intended to be included in this section, this basis of
establishing jurisdiction over persons who are not Indian
citizens but operate their principal place of business or
permanent residence in India, would be very narrow and
unworkable.
CLAUSE 2(1) : DEFINITIONS - [New terms proposed to be added] –“agent” used in 2(1)(c)
Vijay Choudhary &
Ravinder Kumar, Advocate,
G-20A, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-28. [Memo
No. 2]
Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai -
600104 [Memo No. 3]
1
2
The following changes have been suggested in clause 2
(1) containing definitions
1. New clause defining "agent" to be introduced
“agent” means any authorized representative who
acts on behalf of his or her principal and includes
a Director, Officer, employee or other person
authorized to act on behalf of his or her principal,
and “agency” has a corresponding meaning
In section 2(1)(c) of the bill the word “agent” [page 3;
line 4] is not clearly defined. As there are various kinds
of agents or agency contracts it is better to clearly and
illustratively define what constitutes agency and when on
is said to be acting as agent for another.
The definition of the words “foreign public
official” and “official of public international
organisation” in its existing form is very
wide in the sense that foreign public official
includes “any person exercising a public
function for a foreign country” and the
definition of the word “official of a public
international organisation’ includes ‘any
person who is authorized by such an
organisation to act on behalf of that
organisation”.
Same as above.
12 3 4

53
CLAUSE 2(1) : DEFINITIONS - [New terms proposed to be added] –“Public function” used in clause 2(1)(c)
Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl. Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai -
600104 [Memo No. 3 ]
1 The Bill seeks to criminalise bribery of
foreign public officials and is a stand alone
legislation. The term of the “foreign public
official” as defined would point to the fact
that the “public function” is to be seen and
interpreted with reference to functions
performed with reference to that foreign
country or State. The term ‘public function’
had many variations of definitions discussed
during negotiations of the Convention with
reference to both Article 15 which deals
with criminalization of domestic bribery and
Article 16 which deals with foreign bribery
and ultimately this term was not defined in
Article 2 of UNCAC.
In Section 2(1)(c) of the bill the word “public function”
[paged 3, line 3] is not defined clearly. It needs to be
clearly stated that as according to which law whether,
Indian Law or the Law of his Nationality or the Law of
the Country/State for which he is discharging functions,
his function will be classified as a public function.
CLAUSE 2(1) : DEFINITIONS - [New terms proposed to be added] –“Public function” used in clause 2(1)(c)
Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl. Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai -
600104 [Memo No. 3 ]
1 This definition is contained in Article 2 of
UNCAC. UNCAC covers both bribery of
both domestic public officials (Article 15)
and foreign public officials (Article 16). The
proposed bill is a stand alone bill to cover
bribery of foreign public officials and officials
of international organisations. The corruption
related offences in respect of domestic public
officials are covered by the Prevention of
Corruption Act 1988. Therefore, the definition
of ‘public officials’ is not required. The
term ‘foreign public official’ is defined in
the bill.
(a) “Public official” shall mean any person holding a
legislative, executive, administrative or judicial office of a
State Party, whether appointed or elected, whether
permanent or temporary, whether paid or unpaid,
irrespective of that person’s seniority; any other person
who performs a public function, including for a public
agency or public enterprise, or provides a public service,
as defined according to the laws of India and as applied
in the pertinent area of laws of India any other person
defined as a “public official” in the domestic law of a
State Party.

54
CLAUSE 2(1) : DEFINITIONS - [New terms proposed to be added] –“International business” used in clause (4)
Vijay Choudhary &
Ravinder Kumar, Advocate,
G-20A, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-28. [Memo
No. 2]
1 This term has not been defined as it is
viewed that the term would be interpreted in
its general connotation and in the context of
the object of the clause i.e., where it is
used.
“International business” included all business transactions
that involve two or more countries or public international
organisations engaged in trade, commerce, business,
occupation, industry, or undertaking of any kind, or any
other activity carried on for gain or profit;
CLAUSE 2(1) : DEFINITIONS - [New terms proposed to be added] –“Public International Organisation” used in clause (4)
Vijay Choudhary &
Ravinder Kumar, Advocate,
G-20A, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-28. [Memo
No. 2]
1 The word “public international organisation”
has been used with reference to crimilaising
act of giving and taking undue advantage to/
by an official of ‘public international
organisation’. The term ‘public international
organisation’ can be considered to be defined
as in the proposed formulation. The
Department is open to suggestions.
“Public international organisation” means—
(a) an organisation—
(i) of which two or more countries are members; or
(ii) that is constituted by persons representing two or
more countries;
(b) an organisation established by, or a group of
organisation constituted by—
(i) organisations of which two or more countries are
members; or
(ii) organisations that are constituted by the representatives
of two or more countries; or
(c) an organisation that is—
(i) an organ of, or office within, an organisation described
in paragraph ( a) or ( b);
(ii) a commission, council or other body established by
an organisation or organ referred to in subparagraph (i);
or
(iii) a committee or a subcommittee of a committee of an
organisation referred to in paragraph ( a) or ( b) or of an
organ, council or body referred to in subparagraph (i) or
(ii);
12 3 4

55
CLAUSE 2(1) : DEFINITIONS - sub clause 2(1)(e)–“Foreign Public Official” [Earlier before Errata (c)]
Vijay Choudhary &
Ravinder Kumar, Advocate,
G-20A, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-28  [Memo No.
2]
1 The phrase “person performing a public
function for a foreign state or country
including a public agency or public enterprise”
presently used in the definition of “foreign
public official” as such has a wider
connotation and will also cover the person
employed by “Board, Commission or
Corporation”.
Has proposed a revised definition of the word “foreign
public official”
“Foreign public official” means and includes:–
(i) Any person holding a legislative, administrative or
judicial office of a foreign country;
(ii) Any person performing public function for a foreign
state or country, including any person employed
by a Board, Commission, Corporation or other
body or authority that performs a function of a
foreign state; or
(iii) An offic ial or agent of a public international
organization;
CLAUSE 2(1) : DEFINITIONS - sub clause (e) [After Errata sub clause (c)]-foreign country’
Vijay Choudhary &
Ravinder Kumar, Advocate,
G-20A, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-28. [Memo
No. 2]
1 In terms of the interpretative notes to Article
2 in the Tavaux of Preparatories on the
UNCAC, the term “foreign country” includes
all levels and subdivisions of Government,
from national to local and this should cover
the category mentioned in sub clause (iii) of
the proposed definition. The existing definition
of foreign country is on the above lines.
Revised definition of the word “foreign country”
‘Foreign State’ means any country other than India and
includes”
(i) Any foreign territory;
(ii) All levels of sub-divisions of Government of any
such country or territory; or
(iii) Any agency of any such country or territory or
of a political sub-divisions of any such country
or territory;

56
12 3 4
CLAUSE 2(1) : DEFINITIONS - sub-clause 2(1)(h) & clause 3 [Under advantage & Acceptance of gratification]
Organisation for Economic
Co-Operation and
Development (OECD)
Diroctorate for Financial
and Enterprise Affairs,
Anti Corruption Division,
2, rue Andre Pascal,
75775 Paris Cedex 16,
France [Memo No. 1]
1 The term ‘undue advantage’ used in the
main body of clause 3 criminalising the act
of bribery on the demand side has been
defined under clause 2(1)(h) as an act of
obtaining any valuable thing or pecuniary
advantage. The connective “or” used in the
definition has to be construed as including
advantage which may be pecuniary or nay
valuable thing. Sub clause (iv) of clause
2(1)(h) has a very wide coverage and undue
advantage, whether pecuniary or not, would
stand covered. The definition of the term
‘undue advantage’ in clause 2(1)(h) has been
taken from Section 13 of Prevention of
Corruption Act 1988 and can therefore be
considered adequate to meet the requirements
stated in the legislative guide.
The definition of “undue advantage” with regard to the
bribe obtained by the foreign public official
The draft Bill does not expressly define in the text of the
offence or in the Preliminary provisions under Chapter 1
the undue advantage as covering both pecuniary and non-
pecuniary advantages. The Legislative Guide of the UNCAC
(at para. 196) stipulates that the bribery offences must
cover instances where no gift or other tangible item is
offered, and therefore, an undue advantage may be
something tangible or intangible, whether pecuniary or
non-pecuniary. (The OECD Anti-Bribery Convention
requires the same).
It is to be noted that Chapter I, Section 2 of the draft Bill
provides that where words or expressions used under the
Act are not defined but are defined under the Prevention
of Corruption Act (1988), the meanings assigned to them
under the PCA shall apply. However, while the PCA
applies such terms as “gratification” and “valuable thing”
with reference to the bribe, it does not apply nor define
the term “undue advantage”.
In this regard, and also in view of some of the
recommendations that were made to India under the
ADB/OECD Anti-Corruption Initiative’s Thematic Review
on the Criminalisation of Bribery, consideration may wish
to be given to expressly define “undue advantage” as
covering bribes of a both pecuniary and non-pecuniary
nature.

57
Lack of clarity concerning definition of "undue
advantage" under Chapter I, section 2, para. (h)
There is lack of clarity concerning the definition afforded
to the term “undue advantage” under this section. The
substance of this section appears to be addressing and
elaborating upon the passive foreign bribery offence under
Section 3. The reference to “undue advantage” does not
seem to correlate with the rest of the text and may
benefit from review and clarification. Confusing aspects
of this definition also include the following:
❑ The definition under paragraph (h) states that
“bribery means an act of a foreign public official”.
This leaves out the notion of an “omission” as
required by Article 16(l) of the UNCAC and Article
1 of the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention.
❑ The items in subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii),
require that the foreign public official “obtain” the
“valuable thing or pecuniary advantage”. This might
appear to exclude cases where the bribe has not
been obtained or received by the foreign public official.
(a) In section 2(1)(h) of the bill defining ‘undue
advantage’ [page 3, line 13] non monetary or
pecuniary benefits such as sexual favors or any
undue privileges may be included.
(b) In section 2(1)(h)(ii) of the bill dealing with
“abuse of position” [page 3, line 17) an
exhaustive and illustrative list of what constitutes
abuse of position may be given; since the word
‘abuse’ is an ambiguous word and its
interpretation is always subjective.
The substantive provisions under clause 3
covers both the act or forbearing to act,
and the definition of 'undue advantage' under
2(h) has to be read harmoniously with the
substantive provision of clause 3. The words
“act of foreign public official” has to be
interpreted with reference to the ‘actions’
covered in the substantive clause 3.
Clause 5 of the Bill ‘Abetment and attempt’
inter alia  states that whoever attempts to
commit any offence and in such attempt
does any act towards the commission of an
such offence shall be punishable. Therefore,
the views of OECD that cases where bribe
is not obtained or received, can get excluded,
may not be correct.
(a) The comments indicated against memo
no 1 is valid here also.
(b) to d). The word "undue advantage" has
been defined in clause 2(l)(h) using the
prescription of what constitutes criminal
misconduct in Section 13(1)(d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 and
the usage of terms mentioned under (b)
to (d) does not appear to have caused
any serious problem requiring the need
Dr. R Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264,
New Addl. Law
Chambers, Madras High
Court Buildings, Chennai -
600104
[Memo No. 3]

58
(c) In section 2(1)(h)(iii) of the bill the word ‘public
interest’ [page 3; line 20] is not explained. It
may be explained suitably as to mean what is
meant by public interest
(d) In Section 2(1)(h)(iv) of the bill [page 3; line
24] the adequacy of the consideration is left to
the judgement of the alleged accused himself.
The wordings are “which he knows to be
inadequate”. Hence the words may be suitably
replaced with “which is inadequate”
for clarity. The interpretation that the
phrase “which he considers inadequate”
has to be read in totality and in
harmonious construction in letter and
spirit of the sub clause. Sub clause (iv)
does not convey that its invocation
depends on the perception of the accused
officer as regards adequacy or
inadequacy of consideration.
12 3 4
CLAUSE 3 : [Acceptance of gratification by foreign public official]
Organisation for Economic
Co-Operation and
Development (OECD)
Directorate for Financial
and Enterprise Affairs,
Anti Corruption Division,
2, rue Andre Pascal,
75775 Paris Cedex 16,
France [Memo No. 1]
Vijay Choudhary &
Ravinder Kumar, Advocate,
G-20A, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-28. [Memo
No. 2)
1
2
See response against Clause 2(1)(h)
There are two areas proposed for
amendment. One is for covering persons
acting behalf and for foreign public official
or official of public international organisation
by including the word ‘agent’ and the second
area is enhancement of the period of
punishment.
The definition of the words “foreign public
official” and “official of public international
organisation” in its existing form is very
wide in the sense that foreign public official
See their comments against clause 2(1)(h)
Section 3 may be modified by inserting and adding the
bold words in original section 3 of the Bill
“Whoever, being a foreign public official or official
of public international organization or its agent, accepts or
obtains from any person, for himself or for any person
or entity, any undue advantage or gratification, other than
legal remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or
forbearing do any official act or for showing or forbearing
to show, in the exercise of is official functions, favour or
disfavor to any person or entity for rendering or attempting
to render any service or disservice

59
to any person or entity, shall be punishable with
imprisonment which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to
fine.”
It has been argued in support that most of the foreign
public official or official of public international organisation
are protected by the Privileges and Immunities under the
various convention of the UN. The other will have
diplomatic immunities. Therefore a suggestion has been
made for a healthy discussion and the bill without the
word agent will lack teeth.
Imprisonment
Minimum Be increased from 6 months to 2 years
Fine
Minimum Rs. 25 lacs
Minimum of 3 years of sentence and drastic measures
such as amputation for life should be taken
includes “any person exercising a public
function for a foreign country” and the
definition of the word “official of a public
international organisation includes any person
who is authorized by such an organisation
to act on behalf of that organisation”. The
definition of “agent” would only serve to
restrict the wider coverage of the term.
In regard to the quantum of punishment the
formulation in the bill is on the lines of
punishment prescribed for various offences
under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988.
Section 13(2) provides for a maximum
punishment of 7 years and fine (amount not
specified) for criminal misconduct. The
punishment proposed in the proposed bill of
7 years and fine, is in line with the
punishment provided under that act and
therefore may not be disturbed.
Same as above.
Same as above.
Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai-600104
[Memo No. 3)
N. Lalchandani, A Wing,
104/05 Shiv Shakti Apts,
Ahimsa Marg, Off
Chincholi Bunder Road,
Malad (W), Mumbai-
400064 [Memo No. 4]
3
4

60
12 3 4
CLAUSE 4 : [Prohibition for giving gratification to foreign public official or official of public international organisation]
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and
Development (OECD)
Diroctorate for Financial
and Enterprise Affairs,
Anti Corruption Division,
2, rue Andre Pascal,
75775 Paris Cedex 16,
France [Memo No. 1]
1 It goes without saying that the act or
refraining to act is with reference to and in
relation to performance of official duties.
Impartial behavior on the part of public
servant is a very basic requirement in
official’s conduct. Clause 5 of the Bill covers
abetment of offence committed under the
act and should cover the situation brought
out by OECD where the persons who
otherwise don’t have competence to perform
the specified official duty but influence the
other public official who are assigned to
carry out that official duty.
Therefore there appears to be no need for
any change.
There appears to be a gap in the existing
formulation of clause 4 and Government is
open to suggestion of a formulation for
amendment.
Section 4 of the draft Bill exactly replicates the language
of- Article 16(1) of the UNCAC in respect of  the act or
omission sought by the briber – i.e. “... act or refrain
from acting in the exercise of his or her official duties”.
However, we would just like to  bring to your attention that
the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention is slightly broader in this
respect, in that it requires that States Parties cover cases
where the purpose of the bribe is for the foreign public
official to “... act or refrain from acting in relation to the
performance of officials duties”. The inclusion of the
terminology “in relation to” in the OECD Convention ensures
that the case is covered where the purpose of the bribe is
to obtain a breach of the foreign public official’s duty  by,
for instance, not exercising judgment or discretion impartially
in a public procurement tender, when it is his/her duty to do
so. It also covers the case when the purpose of the bribe
is for  the foreign public official to act outside his/her
authorized competence, by, for instance, trying to influence
another official to award a contract to the briber.
Mens rea for the offence of bribing a foreign public
official: Omission of the “other undue advantage”
element
Article 16 of the UNCAC covers the offering, promising
or giving of bribe... “in order to obtain or retain business
or other undue advantage in relation to the conduct of
international business”. (Article 1 of the OECD Anti-
Bribery Convention similarly covers this element of the
offence, applying the terminology of “…or other improper
advantage”).

61
Under the current formulation of the draft Bill, Section 4
only prohibits bribes to foreign public officials “in
order to obtain or retain business” and does not
cover the purpose of obtaining or retaining an “other
undue advantage”.  The formulation in the draft Bill
would therefore appear to restrict the application of the
offence to cases where a company bribes a foreign
public official to obtain a business contract with the
foreign government. It would not appear to cover cases
where the purpose of the bribe is to purchase property
from a foreign government, obtain rights to explore for
oil, gas or minerals, or obtain an interest in a foreign
state-controlled company that is being privatized. It seems
even less likely that this formulation would cover cases
where the purpose of the bribe is to obtain an advantage
that would enable the briber to conduct business in the
foreign country, such as an operating license or permit,
or make conducting business in the country in question
more profitable, such as a reduction in customs duties or
a preferential or reduced tax assessment. The
Commentaries to the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention
further define “improper advantage” as “something to
which the company concerned was not clearly entitled,
for example, an operating permit for a factory which fails
to meet the statutory requirements.”
It is important that this element of the offence is covered
to ensure that bribes to foreign public officials cover
such purposes encompassed by the terminology “or other
undue advantage”. Otherwise, there may be a risk that
the provision could be interpreted to produce an offence
narrower in scope than that envisaged by international
standards, including the UNCAC.
The OECD has suggested a formulation by including
the words “or undue advantage” after the words “to
retain or obtain business”

62
12 3 4
2 Vijay Choudhary &
Ravinder Kumar, Advocate,
G-20A, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-28. [Memo
No. 2 ]
Whoever, in relation to the conduct of international business
in order to obtain or retain business, intentionally, offers
or promises to offer, gives or promises to give, directly
or indirectly, any undue advantage or gratification, to
any foreign public official or its agent or official of
public international organisation or its agent , for himself
or herself or for another person or entity, in order that
such official, act or refrain from acting in the exercise of
his or her official duties, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
Five years but which may extend to ten years and shall
also be liable to fine.
It should be specifically be added that no parole shall be
given to the convict for the first years of conviction on
any ground whatsoever.
There are two areas proposed for
amendment. One is for covering persons
acting behalf and for foreign public official
or official of public international organisation
by including the word ‘agent’ and the second
area is enhancement of the period of
punishment.
The definitiion of the words “foreign public
official” and “official of public international
organisation” in its existing form is very
wide in the sense that foreign public official
includes “any person exercising a public
function for a foreign country” and the
definition of the word “official of a public
international organisation’ include ‘any person
who is authorized by such an organisation
to act on behalf of that organisation”. The
definition of “agent” would only serve to
restrict the wider coverage of the term.
In regard to the quantum of punishment the
formulation in the bill is on the lines of
punishment prescribed for various offences
under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1998.
Section 13(2) provides for a maximum
punishment of 7 years and fine (amount not
specified) for criminal misconduct. The
punishment proposed in the proposed bill of
7 years and fine, is in line with the
punishment provided under that act and
therefore may not be disturbed.

63
3 Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai-600104
[Memo No. 3]
Imprisonment
Minimum Be increased from 6 months to 1 year
Fine
Minimum Rs. 10 lacs
Same as above.
CLAUSE 5 : [Abetment and Attempts]
1
2
Vijay Choudhary &
Ravinder Kumar, Advocate,
G-20A, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-28. [Memo
No. 2 ]
Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai-600104
[Memo No. 3]
The sentence in clause 5 of the Bill be enhanced from
minimum three month to five years and maximum sentence
be enhanced from seven years to 10 years.
Imprisonment
Minimum Be increased from 6 months to 1 year
Fine
Minimum Rs. 10 lacs
In regard to the quantum of punishment the
formulation in the bill is on the lines of
punishment prescribed for various offences
under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988.
Section 13(2) provides for a maximum
punishment of 7 years and fine (amount not
specified) for criminal misconduct. The
punishment proposed in the proposed bill of
7 years and fine, is in line with the
punishment provided under that act and
therefore may not be disturbed.
Same as above.
CLAUSE 6(2) – [Agreement with foreign countries]
1 Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl Law Chambers,
Madars High Court
Buildings, Chennai-600104
[Memo No. 3]
In Section 6(2) if the bill the words “be notification” is
printed [page 4; Line 12]. It should be “by notification”.
The typographical error would require to be
corrected.

64
12 3 4
1 Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai-600104
[Memo No. 3]
In Clause 8(1) of the bill the words “being satisfied”
[page 4; line 26] shifts the onus of investigation to the
special judge himself; Hence the word “being satisfied”
may be replaced with the following words “an application
being made by the investigating officer”.
For the word “may” [page 4; line 27] the word “shall”
may be substituted so as to minimize discretion of special
judges in collecting evidence.
The structure of this provision is on similar
lines as available in section 57 of the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002.
CLAUSE 10(3) – [Reciprocal arrangements for processes and assistance for transfer of an accused person]
1 Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai-600104
[Memo No. 3]
In Section 10(3) of the Bill [page 5 lines 26-28] it is not
clear on what aspects and matters the special judge or
court or Central Govt. may imposed conditions regarding
transfer of persons.
It is also unclear whether the conditions imposed are
justiciable or appealable. It is unclear as to what remedies
are available to the transferred person if the transferee
State does not abide by the conditions imposed by the
transferor State.[India]
It is further unclear as to which forum the transferred
persons has remedies against ill treatment or non fulfillment
of conditions of transfer, whether in Transferor [Indian]
State Courts or Transferee State Courts.
This provision on similar lines as that of
Section 59 of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act 2002.
CLAUSE 8(1) – [Letter of Request to Contracting States in certain cases]

65
CLAUSE 12(1) to (2)   – [Attachment, confiscation, seizure etc. of property in Contracting State or India]
1 Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl. Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai-600104
[Memo No. 3]
In Section 12(1) of the bill [page 5 lines 39] the words
“by an officer authorized by the Central Government”
may be deleted and it may be replaced by with the words
“the investigating officer”.
In Section 12(1) of the bill [page 5; line 39] the word
“may” may be displaced with “shall”
In Section 12(2) of the bill [page 5 line 46] the word
“may” be deleted and replaced with “shall”
All the above three suggestions [in respect of Section 12]
are made with a view to minimize Government Control
and discretion over investigation and consequent actions.
The scheme of construction of this clause
esentially follows the pattern adopted in
Section 60 of Prevention of Money
Laundering Act and the general law on
criminal offence with mutatis and mutandis
changes.
CLAUSE 14–[Certain provisions of Prevention of Corruption Act to apply]
1 Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and
Development (OECD),
Diroctorate for Financial
and Enterprise Affairs,
Anti Corruption Division,
2, rue Andre Pascal,
75775 Paris Cedex 16,
France [Memo No. 1]
C. INTERRELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DRAFT BILL
AND PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988
1. Effect of offences in PCA 1988 on offences in draft
Bill.
We note that section 14 of the Draft Bill preserves the
provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, and
states further that the provision  “...shall, so far as may
be, apply in relation to the offence under this Act  as
they apply in relation to the offence under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988”. We, therefore, think it is possible
that section 12 of the PCA, 1988, on “punishment for
abetment of offences” would continue to apply, and by
virtue of section 14 of the Draft Bill, would also apply in
relation to the foreign bribery offence under section 4 of
the Draft Bill. We think this might cause confusion
regarding which provision applies to the offer, promising
The argument that the punishment prescribed
under the PC Act [section 12 of that Act]
may apply to the ‘offence of abetting’ under
the foreign bribery act in view clause 14 in
the present foreign bribery bill. This may
not be correct. Clause 3 (passive bribery),
clause 4 (active bribery) and more
importantly and specifically, Clause 5 (abetting
of substantive offence of the act) prescribes
specifie and uniform punishment. For this
reason the apprehension expressed by OECD
may not be correct because the phrase used
in clause 14 of the bill is “shall so far as
may be, apply in relation to the offence
under this act”.
If it is intended to bring in clarity, clause 14
may be considered to be amended as follows:

66
12 3 4
or giving of a bribe to a foreign public official, and since
abetment under section 12 of the PCA, 1988, is liable to
a lower penalty ( i.e. up to five years imprisonment as
opposed to up to seven years under section 5 of the draft
Bill), we wonder whether Indian courts might be inclined
to reconcile the confusion in favour of accused persons
and imposed the penalty under section 12 of the PCA,
1988.
“14. Save as otherwise provided under this
Act, the provisions of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 and the rules made
thereunder, (including those relating to
appointment of Special Judges under Chapter
II and Act 49 of 1988 to investigation into
the cases and inspection of bankers books
under Chapter IV of that Act), shall, so far
as may be, apply in relation to the offence
under this Act as they apply in relation to
the offence under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988.”
Clause 18–[Consultation with Contracting State in respect of proceedings in case of persons who enjoy diplomatic
immunities under the relevant laws]
1 Dr. R. Kathikeyan,
Advocate, No. 264, New
Addl. Law Chambers,
Madras High Court
Buildings, Chennai –
600104 [Memo No. 3]
In section 18 of the bill [page 6; line 40] after the word
“shall”, the following words may be inserted “within a
prescribed time limit”.
This would obligate the Central Government to make
consultation within a time-frame.
The suggestion is in the interests of
committed investigation and follow up. But
this also need to be kept in mind that
Investigation/prosecution of offences under
this bill to a substantially large extent would
be dependent on effectiveness of international
co-operation secured in the area of Mutual
Legal Assistance Agreements. More over the
cases involving foreign bribery can be very
complicated requiring extensive investigation
and analysis of data. Therefore prescription
of time limits can create difficulties at the
ground level. However, the MLA can be
drafted to commit the parties to the
agreement to a time schedule.

67
II. PART-2 COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL-OTHER ISSUS NOT COVERED BY THE BILL
Dr. R. Karthikeyan, Advocate, No. 264, New Addl. Law Chambers, Madras High Court Buildings, Chennai-600104 [Memo no. 3]
Sl. No. Comments/Suggestions Response of the Government
12 3
1
2
Apart from the clause specific suggestions there appears to be
other lacunae in the Bill. They are :
(i) The Bill is silent regarding the role of the State Government.
(ii) When the State anti-corruption police during investigation of
a case, comes upon the involvement of foreign public officials
in that case, then what will be procedure, can they further
investigate or has to transfer the investigation to central
agency?
(iii) Whe ther State Police are competent to register the complaint
against Foreign Public Officials?
(iv) What is the demarcating line between the State Police and
Central Authorities?
(v) The duties of the State Government with regard to
implementation of provisions of this Act is not mentioned.
(vi) The role of the Central Vigilance Commission is also not
mentioned in the Act. Likewise the role of the State Vigilance
Commission.
These lacunae may be addressed suitably.
(1) Tribunal or Commission may be formed. The composition,
modalities of its functioning and  jurisdiction to be decided
accordingly.
(2) Its rules and byelaws should be framed after taking into
consideration already existing acts but finally none of the
existing acts should overrule it.
Para 14 of the draft Bill states that
“The provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
and the rules made thereunder, (including those relating to
appointment of Special Judges under Chapter II and to
investigation into the cases and inspection of bankers books
under Chapter IV of that Act), apply, shall, so far as may be,
apply in relation to the offence under this Act as they apply
in relation to the offence under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.”
Chapter IV of the Prevention of Corruption Act (Section 17) lays
down as to who is authorised to investigate etc. Section 19 of the
Bill states that the provisions of CrPC subject to certain conditions
and save as otherwise provided under the Bill, shall have effect in
their application to any proceedings under the foreign bribery Act.
In terms of clause 14 of the Bill “The provisions of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 and the rules made thereunder, (including
those relating to appointment of Special Judges under Chapter II
and to investigation into the cases and inspection of bankers books
under Chapter IV of that Act), apply, shall, so far as may be,
apply in relation to the offence under this Act as they apply in
Shri M.M. Mittal, B2/4, Model Town, Delhi 110009 [Memo no. 5]

68
(3) The appeal could be made only in Hon’ble Supreme Court.
(4) The commission/tribunal would be obliged to publish its
report annually.
(5) The Commission would review its functioning from time to
time and recommend necessary amendments in the existing
provisions and government would be obliged to enact the
same within three months period.
(6) The Commission would also invite public suggestions every
two yearly and would consider the same. The commission
would inform back the public about its reactions to the
suggestions.
(a) Any bribery accepted/given to any foreign public officials and
officials of public international organization. Case should be
registered under the act of anti national activity and all the
provisions of existing act to be implemented.
(b) Special designated court with the power of high court to be
set up for prosecution. Appeal can be made to the Supreme
Court only within 30 days.
(c) Special designated court has to give the judgement with six
months from the date of registration of case it should be
time bound. And appeal to be decided within three months.
(d) The concerned government officials should be dismissed and
private individuals and government official’s property and
assets should be seized. If the concerned individuals are free
from the Supreme Court the seized property and assets to be
returned with an addition of 5% compensation.
(e) To confer power upon the government to enter into mutual
agreement with foreign country and international and private
organization for extradition of concerned people.
(f) Attempt to give and take bribe be made and offence with
minimum punishment with life imprisonment because it is
anti national activity.
relation to the offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988”. The existing adjudication mechanism in the case of domestic
bribery is considered sufficient and no separate mechanism in the
form of special Tribunals or Commission is required.
The existing adjudication mechanism applicable in the case of
domestic bribery is considered sufficient and no separate mechanism
in the form of special designated courts is required. The punishment
for the offences under the act have been prescribed on the lines
prescribed for domestic bribery under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 and are considered sufficiently deterrent. The Bill has
provision which says that the offence committed under the act is
extraditable.
Shri Radhey Shyam Agarwal, 1141, Napier Town, near Bhandari Hospital, Jabalpur (M.P.) [Memo no. 6]3
12 3

69
N. Lalchandani, A wing 104/05, Shiv Shakti Apts, Ahimsa Marg, of Chincholi Bunder Road, Malad (W), Mumbai-
400064. [Memo no. 4]
Shri N. Lal Chandani has made the following points in his comments
(i) Punishment for defaulters is too too light.
(ii) Defaulters should be prosecuted in special fast courts.
(iii) Enforcement authorities should complete the preliminary
formalities within fifteen days on discovering a single case of
the offender without waiting for multiple cases. Judgement
should be given in a period of maximum of 45 days.
(iv) In the meantime all assets movable/immovable be frozen and
accused lodged in jail and once proved a sentence of 3 years
should be imposed.
(v) Assets recovered should be converted into cash and deposited
in a newly created fund called “Nations Reconstruction Fund”
for immediate utilisation in education, agriculture, health care,
and infrastructure building and projects.
(vi) The accused family should be allowed to retain only one
place of residence and a fixed allowance (income tax free) to
the accused family for a specified period.
(vii) The bill should cover people in position from municipalities
onwards who make promises while taking oath and failed to
fulfil the promises.
The Bill is so elaborative. It should be precise and to the point.
There is no protection given to the informers. There is no counter
check and cross check in giving and taking bribery. The Authority
to investigate should be specifically given. Suppose a person got
bribery in a particular Department should not be investigated by
the person belonging to the same Department. There is no time
frame for investigation, it leaves lot of scope for the culprit to
escape. It should be made as non-bailable.
In regard to the quantum of punishment the formulation in the Bill
is on the lines of punishment prescribed for various offences
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Section 13(2)
provides for a maximum punishment of 7 years and fine (amount
not specified) for criminal misconduct. The punishment proposed
in the proposed bill of 7 years and fine, is in line with the
punishment provided under that act and therefore may not be
disturbed.
The bill vide schedule declares that the offence under the Act is
a predicate offence under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act
2002 and the provisions of confiscation, seizure will apply as
provided under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.
In terms of clause 14 of the bill “the provisions of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 and the rules made thereunder, (including those
relating to appointment of Special Judges under Chapter II and to
investigation into the cases and inspection of bankers books under
Chapter IV of that Act), apply shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the offence under this Act as they apply in relation to the
offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988”. The existing
mechanism including for adjudication as applicable in the case of
domestic bribery is considered sufficient and no separate mechanism
in the form of special Tribunals or Commission is required.
4
5
A. Sowrirajan, Jayasuryapuram, Vayalur, Ramapuram PO, Thanjavur-613003 [Memo no. 7]

70
A. Rajani, [rajanijain1960@gmail.com]
12 3
Before finalizing this bill, views to be circulated to those who have
submitted their views to this Bill and ascertain their feedbacks. In
fact, they may be called for a seminar on this Bill and a kind of
discussions to be held on the seminar. Public opinion accepted on
the seminar to be made final.
Finalization should not be done in closed air-conditioned rooms by
a few individuals. In fact, common people to be as Members of
the Committee.
My suggestion is that foreign banks should disclose account
details of all Indian account holders and non resident indians
Income Tax department is to check if the account details have
been disclosed in returns and to verify if the account was opened
before becoming NRI.
The issue of protection of informer on the lines provided in
Section 24 of the Act though not specifically mentioned in the Bill
should extend to the offences under this act as well.
The comments are not with specific reference to any of the
clauses of the Bill. Once the UNCAC is ratified Article 40 relating
to Bank Secrecy will apply and even at present the Banks are
obliged to disclose information required by investigating agencies.
Further Article 46(8) relating to mutual legal Assistance provides
that the ground of Bank Secrecy cannot be a ground for refusing
mutual legal assistance.
6

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.