PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 11
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
ELEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL BILL, 2004
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2005)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2005)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2005)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005/SRAVANA, 1927 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2005/SRAVANA, 1927 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
ELEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL BILL, 2004
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 TH AUGUST, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4 TH AUGUST, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005/SRAV ANA, 1927 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-21

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—6
4. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 7—21
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 23—47
THE N ATIONAL T AX T RIBUNAL B ILL, 2004

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2004-05)
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P. C. Alexander
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Raashid Alvi
9. Vacant
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
12. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
13. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar
14. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar
16. Shri Dahyabhai V . Patel
17. Shri Brajesh Pathak
18. Shri Harin Pathak
19. Shri V . Radhakrishnan
20. Shri Vishwendra Singh
21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
22. Prof. Vijaya Kumar Malhotra
23. Kumari Mamata Banerjee
24. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
25. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
26. Shri A.K. Moorthy
27. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having
been authorised by the Committee, present its Eleventh Report on the National Tax Tribunal Bill,
2004. The Bill seeks to establish a National Tax Tribunal to hear cases on substantial questions of
law arising from the decisions of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and the Customs, Excise and
Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, with a view to speed up taxation matters pending before the High
Courts.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred* the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the
22nd December, 2003 and pending therein, to the Committee, on the 14th December, 2004, for
examination and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue Press
Communique to solicit views/suggestions from interested individuals/organisations/
institutions on various provisions of the Bill. Accordingly, a press communique was issued on
3lst December, 2004 in response to which 28 memoranda containing suggestions were received by
the Committee.
4. The Committee considered the Bill and heard a presentation by the Secretary, Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice on the 17th January, 2005.
5. The Committee heard oral evidence of 10 individuals/organisations/institutions/experts.
6. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it: —
(i) Background note on the Bill; and
(ii) The comments of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice on the
views/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill.
7. The Committee held 5 meetings to examine the Bill.
8. The Committee held clause-by-clause consideration on the Bill on the 28th July, 2005.
9. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on 2nd August, 2005.
10. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 2, 2005 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, (No. 41840) dated the 14th December, 2004.

1
REPORT
APPELLATE PROVISIONS UNDER THE DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAX ENACTMENTS
1.0. Presently, under the direct and indirect tax enactments, appeals on substantial questions of
law from the decisions of tribunals such as the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and the Customs,
Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal lies to the High Court.
THE INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
2.0. U nder Section 252 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 an appellate tribunal known as Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal has been set up which consists of both Judicial members as well as Accountant
members. This tribunal hears appeals against orders passed by the Deputy Commissioner of Appeals
or the Commissioner of Appeals, as specified in Section 253 of the Act on questions of law as
well as questions of fact. Under the direct tax regime, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is the final
authority as regards determination of questions of fact. Under Section 260 A of the same Act, an
appeal lies to the High Court from every order passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, if
the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law. However, there is
also a provision for filing further appeals to the Supreme Court from any judgment of the High
Court as specified under Section 261, only if the High Court certifies that the case is fit for appeal
to the Supreme Court. In cases where High Court refuses to give such certificate, the aggrieved
party has an option to invoke extraordinary jurisdiction of Supreme Court through special leave
petition under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
2.1. Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, High Courts and the Supreme Court have been given similar
powers of hearing appeals in respect of disputes concerning wealth tax under the Wealth Tax
Act, 1957.
THE CUSTOMS, EXCISE AND SERVICE TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
3.0. Under Section 129 of the Customs Act, 1962 the Customs, Excise and Service Tax
Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT) has been constituted which consists of Judicial as well as Technical
Members. The Tribunal hears appeals against orders passed by the authorities mentioned in Section
129 A of the Customs Act. It also hears appeals against orders passed by the excise authorities
as specified in Section 35 B of the Central Excise Act, 1944. Earlier, instead of appeal a reference
used to lie regarding questions of law. An appeal lies to the High Court on a substantial question
of law against an order passed by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, under
Section 130 of the Customs Act, as substituted by the Finance Bill, 2003. Similar provision has
been incorporated in respect of appeals to High Courts under the Central Excise Act, 1944. The
tribunal also has appellate jurisdiction in anti-dumping matters and the Special Bench headed by the
President of the tribunal hears appeals against orders passed by the designated authority in the
Ministry of Commerce. The appeals under the Service Tax are also heard by the tribunal. This
tribunal is the appellate authority on matters relating to classification and valuation, with the appeals
lying to the Supreme Court in these matters.
NEED FOR NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL
4.0. The following reasons have been advanced in favour of creating this tribunal:
4.1. When the appeals or references from the orders of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and
the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal lie with the High Courts, these Courts get

2
flooded with such cases which needs considerable time to dispose them. Due to the heavy
workload of the High Courts, there is a huge backlog of tax related cases as a result of which
huge revenue is blocked in such litigations. This is adversely affecting the national economy.
Hence, urgent measures are required to be taken to speed up taxation matters pending before the
High Courts.
4.2. It may also be noted that there are at present 21 High Courts. Many a time, decisions of
the High Courts vary from each other which create uncertainty, delays and problems in the
administration of tax matters. Conflict of decisions amongst various High Courts on the same point
of law have the effect of distorting uniformity and give rise to unnecessary appeals to the Supreme
Court which results in further delay.
4.3. National Tax Tribunal will help in clearing the backlog and mitigating the burden that lie at
the doors of High Courts. The constitution of the National Tax Tribunal would (i) relieve the
taxpayers from the burden of pursuing the tax disputes for a long period and (ii) substantially
reduce the workload of different High Courts which could not concentrate and devote as much
focus which the complex tax laws presently demand.
BACKGROUND NOTE ON THE NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL BILL, 2004
5.0. Having realised the necessity for uniformity and certainty in the administration of tax laws
(both direct and indirect tax laws), the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Revenue
suggested in 2003 that a National Tax Tribunal be set up under the administrative control of the
Ministry of Law and Justice and the Department of Legal Affairs so that instead of the High
Courts, the Tribunal may decide appeals against the orders passed by the Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal and the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal. Since urgent measures were
needed to improve the national economy, the National Tax Tribunal Ordinance, 2003 was
promulgated on October 16, 2003, which lapsed on 12th January, 2004 at the expiration of six
weeks from the re-assembly of the winter session of Parliament in 2003.
5.1. A Bill to replace the Ordinance was introduced in Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2003. When
the Bill was taken up for consideration, some members demanded that the Bill be referred to the
Standing Committee and consequently the consideration was postponed. Subsequently, the National
Tax Tribunal Bill introduced on 8th December, 2003 replacing the Ordinance for setting up the
National Tax Tribunal was withdrawn and a new Bill on the same lines without reference to the
Ordinance was introduced in Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2003. The said Bill was referred to
the Department Related Standing Committee on Home Affairs. However, consequent upon the
dissolution of the 13th Lok Sabha on 6th February 2004, the said National Tax Tribunal (No.2)
Bill, 2003 lapsed.
5.2. As against this background, this present Bill, namely, the National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004
has been introduced.
OBJECTIVE OF THE NATIONAL  TAX TRIBUNAL BILL, 2004
6.0. The National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004 aims to establish a national level tribunal known as the
National Tax Tribunal which will have all India jurisdiction to decide disputes with respect to both
direct and indirect taxes. This tribunal will deal with all matters and proceedings including appeals
and references arising from direct tax and indirect tax legislation for which the jurisdiction lie with
the High Courts at present.
6.1. This Tribunal is being set up under Article 323 B of the Constitution and will act through
its Benches. Article 323 B of the Constitution enables Parliament to make law for the adjudication

3
by tribunals of any dispute, inter-alia, in respect of levy, assessment, collection and enforcement
of any tax. The Bill seeks to establish National Tax Tribunal under this Article.
6.2. The main objective behind the setting up of this Tribunal is to speed up disposal of cases
relating to direct and indirect tax matters. Apart from achieving the purpose of speedy disposal of
tax matters, the setting up of this tribunal will introduce an all India perspective in the matter of
interpretation of tax laws since it will have a nation wide jurisdiction. A special body dealing with
tax litigation around the year will acquire both speed and consistency in its views.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE BILL
7.0. The Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice received comments and
suggestions on the Bill from prominent individuals and organizations. It also heard eminent lawyers
and representatives of various organizations, specialising in tax matters.
7.1. The Committee appreciates the earnestness of the Government to clear the backlog
of tax related cases which adversely affects the nation’s exchequer. But, the Committee,
during its deliberations, expressed doubts as to whether setting up of the National Tax
Tribunal alone will reduce the pendency of tax related cases.
7.2. The majority of the witnesses who deposed before the Committee were almost unanimous
in their view that there is delay at the stage of execution of the orders of the High Courts. This
is the main reason for delay in recovering money from the assessees. In their view, this is caused
due to lack of proper maintenance of records of the cases. The Committee took note of this and
feels that action has to be taken in this regard even when the National Tax Tribunal is set up.
7.3. The Committee is of the opinion that the Government which is a party to tax
litigations, has to be better geared up in terms of modern techniques and infrastructure to
speed up the execution proceedings. This will help reduce the backlog of cases to a great
extent.
7.4. The Committee notes that there was grave opposition from many witnesses who deposed
before the Committee, to the establishment of National Tax Tribunal.
7.5. The Committee feels that establishing National Tax Tribunal would entail huge
expenditure in terms of salary, infrastructure etc. Also, since the writ jurisdiction of the
High Courts will not be taken away, the party who is aggrieved by an order of the National
Tax Tribunal can invoke this jurisdiction. This would result in delay in final disposal of cases
which would defeat the very purpose of the Bill.
7.6. The Committee also feels that Judges who have specialized knowledge in tax related
matters will be better equipped to decide tax cases. Therefore, the Committee feels that
providing for additional Benches in High Courts which would be manned by Judges
specializing in tax matters would rectify the current problem of divergent decisions given
by High Courts on identical questions of law. Such Benches may deal exclusively with tax
cases. The Committee also feels that the existing vacancies of High Court Judges is another
reason for pendency of tax cases. Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that filling
up of these vacancies will ensure quicker disposal of tax cases.
7.7. Responding to the strong opposition raised by the witnesses who deposed before the
Committee and the Members of the Committee, the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs stated
that National Tax Tribunal is the need of the hour to tackle the pendency of tax cases as was
recommended by the Law Commission of India in its 115th Report of 1986, the Choksi Committee,
the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Revenue. He was of the view that there are very

4
few Judges in the High Courts who are experts in tax matters. Therefore, National Tax Tribunal
will ensure that the substantial questions of law are decided by persons who are better equipped
to appreciate and decide tax cases. Further, National Tax Tribunal will ensure uniformity in
decisions taken in tax disputes, which is not the situation at present. He also opined that the setting
up of National Tax Tribunal will not be against the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India, since this Bill does not interfere with the writ jurisdiction of
the High Courts.
7.8. The Committee is not convinced by this explanation. The Committee wishes to place on
record reservations regarding the setting up of National Tax Tribunal.If the Government goes ahead
with the setting up of National Tax Tribunal,the Committee is of the opinion that initially, four
benches of National Tax Tribunal may be set up on experimental basis, one each in the Northern,
Southern, Western and Eastern Zones. Later, if the need arises, more benches may be set up.
7.9. H aving said so, in the event of the Government being very keen to go ahead with this Bill,
it should take into consideration the observations/ recommendations of the Committee on the
clauses of the Bill, as in the following paras:
Observations/Recommendations in respect of different Clauses
CLAUSE 6
8.1. Clause 6(2)(b) provides that in order to be appointed as member of the
National Tax Tribunal, a person should have been a Member of the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal or of the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, for
at least 7 years.
8.2. The Committee notes that the effect of this clause along with clause 6(2) (a),
is that the National Tax Tribunal shall consist of only judicial or quasi-judicial persons.
In the memoranda submitted to and during the course of oral evidence before the
Committee, a suggestion was made that technical members may also be appointed in
National Tax Tribunal. But the Ministry opined that it is better to have judicial or
quasi-judicial Members, since the cases which would come before the National Tax
Tribunal, shall involve substantial questions of law. Only the judicial or quasi-judicial
persons will be able to appreciate and decide substantial questions of law. If a
technical person wants to be a Member of the National Tax Tribunal, he should serve
as a Member of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal or the Customs, Excise and
Service Tax Appellate Tribunal for 7 years. Then as per Clause 6(2) (b), he shall be
entitled to be a member of National Tax Tribunal.
8.3. The Committee notes that the Chief Commissioners of the Income Tax
Department, who pass appellate orders while adjudicating upon the assessment
orders, decide upon questions of fact as well as that of law. They take a lot of
risk while conducting search and seize operations against the tax evaders.
Therefore, the Committee feels that they should be given encouragement
towards the fag end of their career by giving them an opportunity to become
Members of the National Tax Tribunal.
Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 8
9.1. Clause 8 lays down the term of office of the Chairperson and Members
as 5 years.

5
9.2. The Committee feels that the provisos (a) and (b) to Clause 8 deny the
Chairperson or Members a term of 5 years if any of them happen to be a retired
Judge. This is so because only a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice
of a High Court can be appointed as Chairperson of the National Tax Tribunal. A
Supreme Court Judge or the Chief Justice of a High Court retires at the age of 65.
So, if he is appointed Chairperson of National Tax Tribunal, he can serve for 3 years
only, since the age limit fixed in proviso (a) is 68 years. Also, a Member of the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal retires at the age of 65 and a Member of the Customs,
Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal retires at the age of 62. So, if such a
retired person wants to become a member of National Tax Tribunal, a member of the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal will be denied the opportunity and a member of the
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal can serve only for 3 years. The
Ministry opined that an age limit has to be fixed because otherwise, the Chairperson
or Members may wish reappointment, which is permitted by Clause 8.
9.3. In this context, the Committee is of the view that the provision for
reappointment may be deleted from Clause 8. Similarly, the provisos (a) and (b)
to Clause 8 may also be deleted.
9.4. Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 13
10.1. The Committee feels that the provision in clause 13 (1), authorizing any person
duly authorized to appear before the National Tax Tribunal has to be modified;
otherwise such a provision will encourage persons who are not well versed with law
and the procedural aspects to appear before the Tribunal, whereas knowledge of law
is mandatory, as the Tribunal decides on substantial questions of law.
10.2. The Committee, therefore, opines that only professionally qualified
persons such as Advocates, Company Secretaries, Chartered Accountants, Cost
and Works Accountants may be authorised to appear before the National Tax
Tribunal.
10.3. Subject to the above, the Clause is adopted.
CLAUSE 15 (1)
11.1. The Committee notes that as per Clause 15(1), an appeal from the Customs,
Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, involving a substantial question of law,
shall lie to the National Tax Tribunal. One of the witnesses who deposed before the
Committee expressed the view that Clause 15 goes beyond the preamble of the Bill and
makes orders passed by Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal
appealable to National Tax Tribunal, including orders in anti-dumping matters and
subsidy and countervailing measures. Moreover, the WorId Trade Organisation
agreements on customs valuation, anti-dumping, etc., to which we are signatory,
require only one level of prompt judicial review of administrative actions. Anti-dumping
measures, which are required to protect domestic industries, must be decided quickly.
If we provide for such matters to be decided by National Tax Tribunal, it will add
one more tier of appeal which will delay the prompt review required under these
agreements.
11.2. The Committee agrees with this view and suggests that this aspect
should be taken into consideration.

6
11.3. The Clause is adopted without any changes.
CLAUSE 15
12.1. As per clause 15(4), the assessee or aggrieved person has to deposit at least
25% of the tax or duty, payable on the basis of the order appealed against. Some
witnesses submitted before the Committee that this provision may be deleted.
12.2. The Committee observes that this provision will help in restricting the
number of appeals preferred before the National Tax Tribunal and, therefore,
has to be retained.
12.3. The Clause is adopted without any changes.
13. Clauses 2 to 7, 9 to 12, 14, 16 to 30 are adopted without any changes.
14. Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title are adopted with some changes
which are of consequential or drafting nature, namely, the figure ‘‘2004’’ and
words ‘‘Fifty-fifth’’ to be substituted by the figure ‘‘2005’’ and the words ‘‘Fifty-
sixth’’, respectively.

7
7
RELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20th December, 2004, in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
6. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
9. Shri Dahyabhai V . Patel
10. Shri Brajesh Pathak
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri A.K. Moorthy
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman informed the Members about the reference of the Contempt of Courts
(Amendment) Bill, 2004 and the National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004 to the Committee for examination
and Report.
3. The Committee held preliminary discussion on the said Bills. It deliberated on its future
course of action for the examination of these Bills.
4. The Committee decided to issue press releases inviting memoranda on the Bills from various
individuals/organizations interested in the subject matter of the Bills, advising them to send the same

8
to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat, also indicating whether they would be interested in giving oral
evidence on the Bill.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.40 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

9
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 7th January, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. P. C. Alexander
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
6. Justice (Retd.) N.Y . Hanumanthappa
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Railway Board, Ministry of Railways
1. Shri S.P.S. Jain, Member Engineering and Ex-officio Secretary
2. Shri R.N. Poddar, Legal Adviser
II. Representatives of Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL)
1. Dr. U.D. Chowby, Director
2. Shri A.K. Rudra, General Manager
III. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri R.L. Meena, Law Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
9

10
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of
Law and Justice and requested him to give a presentation on the National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004.
The Secretary, stated that the main objective behind the setting up of the Tribunal was to speed
up disposal of tax matters and to achieve consistency in decisions and that the Tribunal would hear
appeals from orders passed by Income Tax Appellate Tribunal; and Customs, Excise and Service
Tax Appellate Tribunal on substantial questions of law . He explained in detail the constitution of the
Tribunal, qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members, tenure of office, grounds of
removal from office, contempt powers, appellate provisions etc. With regard to appearance before
the Tribunal, the Bill provided that a party may appear either in person or authorize a Chartered
Accountant or a legal practitioner or any person to present his case. He clarified that the Bill did
not envisage ousting the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and High Courts. He replied to the
queries put forward by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

11
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 2nd February, 2005, in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
8. Justice (Retd.) N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
10. Shri Harin Pathak
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
13. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
14. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
15. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Indian Revenue Service (IRS) Association
1. Shrimati Saroj Bala
2. Shri P.K. Gupta
3. Shri Divjot Kohli
4. Shri Siddharth Pradhan
5. Shri Amitabh Kumar
11

12
6. Shri Suresh Kumar
7. Shri D.N. Kar
8. Shri Y .K. Singh
9. Shri Rattan Singh
10. Shri Vishesh Prakash
11. Shri Amal Tamaug
II. Representatives of Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)
1. Shri Kamlesh Viram, Secretary
2. Shri H.N. Motiwala, Council Member and Chairman, Fiscal Laws Committee
3. Shri Ved Jain, Council Member and Vice-Chairman, Fiscal Laws Committee
4. Shri R. Devarajan, Additional Director
III. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the witnesses on the National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004.
3. The witnesses were of the considered view that the Bill was a step in the right direction of
reducing the pendency of tax litigations.
4. The representatives of the Indian Revenue Service (IRS) Association submitted that the Chief
Commissioners of the Income Tax Department and Chartered Accountants may also be given
opportunity to become Member of the Tribunal and appear before the Tribunal, respectively.
5. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 1.04 
P.M.

13
XXXVIII
THIRTY EIGHTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. to 12.10 P.M. and again at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the
8th June, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Dr. P. C. Alexander
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
9. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
10. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Dahyabhai V . Patel
13. Shri Harin Pathak
14. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
15. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.P. Aggarwal, Joint Secretary
III. Representatives of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India
1. Shri R. Ravi, President
13
*** Relates to some other matter.

14
2. Shri Nesar Ahmad, Council Member
3. Shri P.K. Mittal, Council Member
4. Shri V .K. Aggarwal, Principal Director
IV. Representatives of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, New Delhi
Shri Rakesh Singh, President
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India to the meeting and requested them to express their views/suggestion on the
various provisions of the National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004. The representative apprised the
Committee that in the year 1982, before the Customs, Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal
came into existence, against the order of the Commissioner, appeals under the Central Excise Act,
were filed by a writ petition either before the High Court or the Supreme Court.
4. The witnesses drew the attention of the Committee to the fact that High Courts used to
take a longer period to dispose off matters but the cases referred to the Tribunals would be
disposed off within 6 months. The representatives apprised the Committee that their Institute had
representation in National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), State Administrative Tribunal (SAT),
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Appellate Tribunal etc. and as such on the similar
lines their representation should be allowed in the National Tax Tribunal.
5. Some Members of the Committee wanted to know the necessity of inclusion of technical
member in the NTT, whether it would be helpful in the interpretation of law. Members further
wanted to know how Chartered Accountants and Work Accountants had been at par with legal
practitioners.
6. The representative clarified that there was a necessity of inclusion of technical member in
the NTT on the plea that in the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and the Central Excise Appellate
Tribunals, one member was from technical side and the second member was from the judicial side,
this combination had resulted in speedy disposal of cases.
7. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India to the meeting. The representative apprised the Committee that Section 13 of
the Bill should be suitably amended to specifically mention ‘Cost Accountant‘ in place of 'any other
person' in the Bill. Witnesses informed the Committee that they did the same job in tax valuation
as being done by the lawyers.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4.31 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

15
XXXIX
THIRTY-NINTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd June, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Dr. P.C. Alexander
4. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar
7. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
10. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
13. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary
III. Representatives of All India Federation of Tax Practitioners, Mumbai
Shri K. Shivaram, National President
2. * * *
3. * * *
15
*** Relate to some other matters.

16
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of The All India Federation of Tax
Practitioners to give evidence on the National Tax Tribunal Bill. The representatives thanked the
Committee for inviting them on this important Bill. The representatives briefed the Committee that
the idea for creation of National Tax Tribunal would result in many disadvantageous situation for
the taxpayers. The litigation would become costlier for ordinary taxpayers. The Witness apprised
the Committee that rise in pending cases in different High Courts was due to the lack of proper
administrative care.
7. The witnesses answered the queries raised by the Hon’ble Members.
(The witnesses then withdrew )
8. The Committee adjourned at 1.17 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

17
XLI
FORTY-FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 14th July, 2005 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
6. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
11. Shri A.K. Moorthy
12. Shri Ramchandra Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
I. WITNESSES
1. Justice G.N. Ray, Chairman, Press Council of India, New Delhi;
2. Justice R.K. Mahajan, Retd. Judge, Allahabad High Court, Shimla;
3. Shri Shanti Bhushan, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi;
4. Shri Prashant Bhushan, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi;
5. Shri Hardev Singh, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi;
6. Shri Arvind P. Datar, Senior Advocate, Madras High Court and President, Revenue Bar
Association, Tamil Nadu;
17

18
7. Shri Chittaranjan Satapathy, Member, Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Mumbai;
8. Shri V .S. Jayakumar, Advocate, Chennai;
9. Shri K.H. Kazi, President, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Bar Association, Mumbai.
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary;
2. Shri A.P. Aggarwal, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser.
V. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up for further consideration the National Tax Tribunal
Bill, 2004 and heard the views of the witnesses on its various provisions. Members sought
clarifications on certain issues pertaining to the Bill.
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee, adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
28 July, 2005.
*** Relate to some other matters.

19
XLII
FORTY SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 28th July, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri Raashid Alvi
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq
10. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
11. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
15. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. ** *
II. ** *
19
*** Relate to some other matters.

20
III. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary; and
2. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. Then the National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004 was taken up for clause-by-clause consideration.
The Committee, after some discussion on the various provisions of the Bill, adopted clauses 2 to
30. Clause 1 Enacting formula and the Title of the Bill were also adopted.
5. * * *
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.35 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

21
XLIII
FOURTY-THIRD MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 2nd August, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran
7. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
11. Shri Vijay Kumar Malhotra
SECRETARIAT
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered its draft Tenth Report on the High Court and Supreme Court
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 2005, draft Eleventh Report on the
National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004 and draft Twelfth Report on the Contempt of Courts (Amendment)
Bill, 2004. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports.
3. The Committee adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.
21

ANNEXURE

AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 94 of 2004
THE NATIONAL T AX TRIBUNAL BILL, 2004
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT  OF THE N ATINOAL T AX T RIBUNAL
3. Establishment of National Tax Tribunal.
4. Composition of National Tax Tribunal.
5. Constitution and jurisdiction of Benches.
6. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other Members.
7. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members.
8. Terms of office of Chairperson and other Members.
9. Resignation of Chairperson and other Members.
10. Salary and allowances.
11. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Members.
12. Officers and employees of National Tax Tribunal.
13. Appearance before National Tax Tribunal.
14. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circum-
stances.
CHAPTER III
J
URISDICATION , POWERS  AND FUNCTIONS  OF N ATIONAL T AX T RIBUNAL
15. Appeal to National Tax Tribunal.
16. Procedure and powers of National Tax Tribunal.
17. Finality of orders of National Tax Tribunal.
25

26
18. Decision by majority.
19. Special Bench.
20. Interim order.
21. Power to punish for contempt.
22. Order of National Tax Tribunal.
23. Transfer of pending cases from High Court.
24. Appeal to Supreme Court.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. Members, etc., to be public servants.
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.
27. Power to remove difficulties.
28. Power to make rules.
29. Laying of rules before Parliament.
30. Consequential amendments.
THE SCHEDULE.

27
AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 94 of 2004
THE NATIONAL TAX TRIBUNAL BILL, 2004
A
BILL
to provide for the adjudication by the National Tax Tribunal of
disputes with respect to levy, assessment, collection and
enforcement of direct taxes and also to provide for the
adjudication by that Tribunal of disputes with respect to the
determination of the rates of duties of customs and central
excise on goods and the valuation of goods for the purposes of
assessment of such duties as well as in matters relating to levy
of tax on service, in pursuance of article 323B  of the
Constitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Tax Tribunal Act,
2004.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision.
27
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

28
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Bench” means a Bench of the National Tax Tribunal;
(b) “Board of Direct Taxes” means the Central Board of
Direct Taxes constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act,
1963;
(c) “Board of Excise and Customs” means the Central
Board of Excise and  Customs constituted under the Central Boards
of Revenue Act, 1963;
(d) “Central Excise Act” means the Central Excise Act, 1944;
(e) “Central Excise Tariff Act” means the Central Excise Tariff
Act, 1985;
(f) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the National Tax
Tribunal;
(g) “Companies (Profits) Surtax Act” means the Companies
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964;
(h) “Customs Act” means the Customs Act, 1962;
(i) “Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal”
means the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal
constituted under section 129 of the Customs Act, 1962;
(j) “Customs Tariff Act” means the Customs Tariff Act, 1975;
(k) ‘‘Expenditure tax Act” means the Expenditure-tax Act,
1987;
(l) “Gift-tax Act” means the Gift-tax Act, 1958;
(m) ‘‘Income tax Act’’ means the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(n) ‘‘Income-tax Appellate Tribunal’’ means the lncome-tax
Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 252 of the Income-tax
Act 1961.
(o) ‘‘Interest-tax Act” means the Interest-tax Act, 1974;
(p) “law officer” means the Attorney-General for India, the
Solicitor General of India or the Additional Solicitor, General of
India;
(q) ‘‘Member” means a Member of the National Tax Tribunal
and includes  the Chairperson;
(r) “National Tax Tribunal” means the National Tax Tribunal
established under section 3;
(s) ‘‘notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette;
(t) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;
Definitions.
54 of 1963.
54 of 1963.
1 of 1944.
5 of 1986.
7 of 1964.
52 of 1962.
52 of 1962.
51 of 1975.
35 of 1987.
18 of 1958.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
45 of 1974.

29
(u) “Supreme Court” means the Supreme Court of India;
(v) “Wealth-tax Act” means the Wealth-tax Act, 1957;
(w) words and expressions used in this Act but not
defined herein and defined in the Central Excise Act, the Central
Excise Tariff Act, the Customs Act, the Customs Tariff Act
(hereinafter referred to as-the indirect taxes) or the rules made
thereunder or in Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 shall have
the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in the said Acts or
the rules made thereunder;
(x) words and expressions used in this Act but not
defined herein and defined in the Income-tax Act, the Wealth-
tax Act, the Gift-tax Act, the Expenditure-tax Act, the Interest-
tax Act or the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act (hereinafter
referred to as the direct taxes) or the rules made thereunder
shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in the
said Acts or the rules made thereunder.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF THE N ATIONAL T AX T RIBUNAL
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish with effect from such date as may be
specified therein, a Tax Tribunal to be known as the National Tax
Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred
on such Tribunal by or under this Act.
4. The National Tax Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson
and such number of Members as the Central Government deems fit,
to be appointed by that Government, by notification in tbe Official
Gazette.
5. (1) The jurisdiction of the National Tax Tribunal may be
exercised by the Benches thereof to be constituted by the Chairperson.
(2) The Benches of the National Tax Tribunal shall ordinarily sit
at any place in the National Capital Territory of Delhi or such other places
as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson,
notify:
Provided that the Chairperson may for adequate reasons permit
a Bench to hold its temporary sitting for a period not exceeding fifteen
days at a place other than its ordinary place of seat.
(3) The Central Government shall notify the areas in relation to
which each Bench of the National Tax Tribunal may exercise its jurisdiction.
(4) The Central Government shall determine the number of
Benches and each Bench shall consist of two members.
(5) The Central Government may in consultation with the
Chairperson transfer a Member from headquarters of one Bench in one
State to the headquarters of another Bench in another State or to the
headquarters of any other Bench within a State.
27 of 1957.
32 of 1994.
Establishment
of National Tax
Tribunal.
Composition of
National Tax
Tribunal.
constitution and
jurisdiction of
Benches.

30
6. ( 1) The Chairperson of the National Tax Tribunal shall be a
person who has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice
of a High Court.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Member unless
he–
(a) is, or has been, or is eligible to be, a Judge of a High
Court; or
(b) is, or has been, a Member of the Income-tax Appellate
Tribunal or of the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal for at least seven years.
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the Chairperson
and every other Member shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Chairperson and the other Members shall be appointed by
the Central Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee
consisting of–
(a) the Chief Justice of lndia or a Judge of the Supreme Court
nominated by him;
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs);
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue).
(3) No appointment of the Chairperson or of any other Member shall
be invalidated merely by reason of any vacancy or any defect in the
constitution of the Selection Committee.
8. The Chairperson and every other Member shall hold office as
such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office but shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson of other Member shall hold office as
such after he has attained,–
(a) in the case of Chairperson, the age of sixty-eight years;
and
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-five
years.
9. The Chairperson or any other Member may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office.
10. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the salary and
allowances and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson shall
be the same as applicable to a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court,
but no vacation shall be allowed:
Qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Terms of
office of
Chairperson
and Members.
Resignation
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Salary and
allowances.

31
Provided that if a person who, immediately before the date
of assuming the office as the Chairperson was in receipt of or being
eligible so to do, had elected to draw, a pension in respect of any
previous service or office held by such person under the Government
of the Union or of a State, his salary in respect of service as
Chairperson shall be reduced by the amount of that pension.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “vacation”
shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Supreme Court Judges
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1958.
(2) A Member shall draw salary of a High Court Judge and
other allowances and the terms and conditions of his service shall be
the same as applicable to a Secretary to the Government of India:
Provided that if a person who, immediately before the date
of assuming the office as Member was in receipt of, or being eligible
so to do, had elected to draw, a pension in respect of any previous
service held by such person in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of a State, his salary in respect of service as Member shall
be reduced to the extent of that pension.
(3) The salary and allowances and other terms and conditions
of service of Chairperson or a Member of the Tribunal shall not be
varied to his disadvantage after appointment.
11. ( 1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the
Chief Justice of India, remove from office the Chairperson or any Member
who–
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting
as such Chairperson or Member of the National Tax Tribunal;
or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the Chairperson or
a Member of the National Tax Tribunal; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance
in office prejudicial to the public interest.
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed
from his office except by an order made by the Central Government on
the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by
a Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson or Member had
been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard in respect of those charges.
41 of 1958.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson and
other Members.

32
(3) The Central Government may suspend from office the Chairperson
or any other Member in respect of whom a reference of conducting an
inquiry has been made to the Judge of the Supreme Court under sub-
section ( 2) until the Central Government has passed orders on receipt of
the report of the Judge of the Supreme Court on such reference.
(4) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure
for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson or
a Member referred to in sub-section ( 2).
12. ( 1) The Central Government shall provide the National Tax
Tribunal with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service
of officers and employees of the National Tax Tribunal shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(3) The officers and employees of the National Tax Tribunal shall
discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the
Chairperson.
(4) The officers and the other employees shall be appointed on
the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted by the
Central Government.
13. ( 1) A party to an appeal other than Government may either
appear in person or authorise one or more chartered accountants or legal
practitioners or any person duly authorised by him or it to present his or
its case before the National Tax Tribunal.
(2) The Government may authorise one or more legal practitioners
or any of its officers to present its case before the National Tax Tribunal.
Explanation.,—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as
defined in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered
Accountants Act, 1949 and who has obtained a certificate of practice
under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;
(b) “legal practitioner” means an advocate, a vakil or any
attorney of any High Court, and includes a pleader in practice.
14. ( 1) In the, event of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Central Government
may designate the senior-most Member to act as the Chairperson until the
day on which a Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions
of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing
to absence, illness or any other cause, the Central Government may
authorise the senior-most Member to discharge the functions of the
Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
Officers and
employees of
National Tax
Tribunal.
Appearance
before
National Tax
Tribunal.
Member to
act as
Chairperson
or to
discharge his
functions in
certain
circumstances.

33
(3) The senior-most member designated to act under sub-
section ( 1) or to discharge functions ofthe Chairperson under sub-section
(2), of the Chairperson shall continue to draw salary and allowances of a
Member.
CHAPTER III
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF N ATIONAL T AX T RIBUNAL
15. ( 1) An appeal shall lie to the National Tax Tribunal from
every order passed in appeal by the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal and the
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, if the National Tax
Tribunal is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law.
(2) The Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner of Income-
tax or the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner of Customs and Central
Excise, as the case may be, or an assessee aggrieved by any order passed
by the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal or any person aggrieved by any
order, passed by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal
(hereinafter referred to as aggrieved person), may file an appeal to the
National Tax Tribunal and such appeal under this sub-section shall–
(a) be filed within one hundred and twenty days from the
date on which the order appealed against is received by the
assessee or the aggrieved person or the Chief Commissioner or
Commissioner, as the case may be;
(b) be in the form of a memorandum of appeal precisely
stating therein the substantial question of law involved; and
(c) be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed:
Provided that separate form of memorandum of appeal shall be
filed for matters involving direct and indirect taxes:
Provided further that the National Tax Tribunal may entertain
the appeal within sixty days after the expiry of the said period of one
hundred and twenty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented
by sufficient cause from preferring an appeal in time.
(3) Where an appeal is admitted under sub-section ( 1), the
National Tax Tribunal—
(a) shall formulate the question of law for hearing the
appeal; and
(b) may also determine any relevant issue in connection
with the question so formulated–
(i) which has not been so determined by the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal or by the Customs, Excise
and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal; or
(ii) which has been wrongly determined by the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal or by the Customs, Excise
and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal,
and  shall  decide  the  question  of  law  so  formulated,
Appeal to
National Tax
Tribunal.

34
and the other relevant issue so determined and deliver such judgment
thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and
may award such cost as it deems fit.
(4) Where in any appeal under this section, the decision of the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal or the Customs, Excise and Service Tax
Appellate Tribunal involves the payment of any tax or duties, the assessee
or the aggrieved person, as the case may be, shall not be allowed to prefer
such appeal unless he deposits at least twenty-five per cent of such tax
or duty payable on the basis of the order appealed against:
Provided that where in a particular case the National Tax Tribunal
is of the opinion that the deposit of tax or duty under this sub-section
would cause undue hardship to such person, it may dispense with such
deposit subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose so as to
safeguard the interest of revenue.
16. ( 1) The National Tax Tribunal shall not be bound by the
procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be
guided by the principles of natural justice.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Tax
Tribunal shall have powers to regulate its own procedure.
(3) The National Tax Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of
discharging its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in
a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit,
in respect of the following matters, namely:–
(a) requiring the discovery and production of books of account
and other documents;
(b) subject to the provisions of  sections 123 and 124 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or
document or a copy  of such record or document, from any office;
(c) dismissing an appeal for default or deciding it, ex parte;
(d) setting aside any order of dismissal of  any appeal for
default or  any order passed by it, ex parte;
(e) rectifying any mistake or error apparent on the face of
record; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(4) All proceedings before the National Tax Tribunal shall be deemed
to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and
for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the National
Tax Tribunal shall be deemed to  be a civil court for the purposes of
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
17. Any order passed by the National Tax Tribunal shall be final and
shall be given effect to  accordingly and no civil court shall have or be
entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, power or authority with respect to
any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the National Tax
Tribunal.
Procedure and
powers of
National Tax
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
1872.
f of 1860.
1974.
Finality of
orders of
National Tax
Tribunal.

35
18. If the Members of  a Bench consisting of  two Members
differ in opinion on any point , they shall state the point or points on which
they differ, and make a reference to the Chairperson, who shall hear the
point or points himself or nominate any other Member for such hearing
and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the
majority, who have heard the case including those who first heard it.
19. Where a judgment pronounced on a question of  law by a
Bench subsequently comes up for  hearing before any Bench, and the latter
Bench is of the opinion that the question of law requires reconsideration,
then the latter Bench shall make a reference to the Chairperson to constitute
a Special Bench consisting of five Members to  hear and decide such
question of  law.
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions
of this Act or any other law for the time being in force, no interim order
(whether by way of  injunction or  stay or otherwise) shall be made in
relation to any appeal under this Act, unless—
(a) copies of such appeal and all documents in support
of the plea for such interim order are furnished to the party
against whom the appeal is preferred; and
(b) opportunity is given to  such party to be heard in the
matter.
21. The National Tax Tribunal shall have and exercise the same
jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as the
High Court has and may exercise such power or authority, for this purpose
under the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, which shall
have effect subject to the modification that–
(a) any reference therein to a High Court shall be construed
as including a reference to  the National Tax Tribunal;
(b) any reference to  the Advocate General in section 15
of the said Act shall be construed as a reference to  such law
officer as the Central Government may specify in this behalf:
Provided that such matters shall be heard by a Special Bench
consisting of five Members constituted by the Chairperson.
22. The National Tax Tribunal may, after giving the parties to
any proceedings before it, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders
thereon as it thinks fit.
23. ( 1) On and from such date as the Central Government may,
by notification, specify, all matters and proceedings including appeals and
references under the direct taxes and indirect taxes pending before any
High Court immediately before that date shall stand transferred to  the
National Tax Tribunal.
(2) Where any matter or proceeding including appeals and
references stand transferred from the High Court to the National Tax
Tribunal under sub-section ( 1),—
1971.
Decision by
majority.
Special Bench.
Interim Order.
Power to punish
for contempt.
Order of
National Tax
Tribunal.
Transfer of
pending cases
from High
Court.

36
(a) the High Court shall, as soon as may be after such
transfer, forward the records pertaining to such matter or proceeding
to the National Tax Tribunal;
(b) the National Tax Tribunal shall, on receipt of such
records, proceed to deal with such matter or proceeding from the
stage at which it is transferred or from an earlier stage or de novo
as it may deem fit;
(e) the Chairperson shall constitute a Bench consisting of such
number of Members as he deems fit for hearing cases transferred
under this section.
24. Any person including any department of the Government aggrieved
by any  decision or order of the National Tax Tribunal may file an appeal
to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of communication
of the decision or order of the National Tax Tribunal to him:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within
the said period, allow it to be filed within such time as it may deem fit.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. The Chairperson, Members and other officers and employees of
the National Tax Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21  of the Indian Penal Code.
26. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against
the National Tax Tribunal or its Chairperson, Member, officer or other
employee in the discharge of any function for any loss or damage caused
or likely to be caused by any act which is, in good faith, done or intended
to be done in the discharge of any function under this Act.
27. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be,
after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
28. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure under sub-section ( 4) of section 11 for the
investigation of charges of misbehaviour or incapacity against the
Chairperson or other Members;
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Members,
etc., to be
public
servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860.

37
(b) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of
service of officers and other employees of the National Tax
Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 12;
(c) the amount of fees payable under clause ( c) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 15;
(d) the other matters in respect of which the National
Tax Tribunal may exercise the powers of a civil court under
clause ( f) of sub-section (3) of section 16;
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed or in
respect of which rules are required to be made by the Central
Government.
29. Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
30. On and from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify, the enactments mentioned in the Schedule shall stand
amended in the manner specified therein.
Laying of rules
before
Parliament.
Consequential
amendments.

38
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 30)
AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART I
AMENDMENTS TO THE I NCOME-TAX A CT, 1961
(43 OF 1961)
1. In section 2, after clause (29C), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(29D) “National Tax Tribunal” means the National Tax Tribunal established
under section 3 of the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2004;’.
2. In Chapter XX,—
(i) in section 254, in sub-section ( 4), for the words, figures and letter “Save
as provided in section 256 or section 260A”, the words and figures “Save as provided
in the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2004” shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-heading “ C.—Reference to High Court” and sections 256, 258 and 259
shall be omitted;
(iii) for section 260, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“260. ( 1) The Supreme Court upon hearing any reference made to it by
the Appellate Tribunal under section 257 shall decide the question of law raised
therein, and shall deliver its judgment thereon containing the grounds on which
such decision is founded, and a copy of the judgment shall be sent under the
seal of the Court and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal
which shall pass such orders as are necessary to dispose of the case conforming
to such judgment.
(2) Where the National Tax Tribunal delivers a judgment in an appeal
filed before it or in any matter transferred to it under the National Tax  Tribunal
Act, 2004, effect shall be given to the order of that Tribunal by the assessing
officer on the basis of certified copy of the judgment.
(3) The cost of any reference to the Supreme Court which shall not
include the fee for making the reference shall be at the discretion of the
Court.’’;
(iv) in section 260A, in sub-section ( 1), after the words “order passed in appeal
by the Appellate Tribunal”, the words “before the date of establishment of the National
Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted;
(v) in section 261, after the words “any judgment of the High Court delivered”,
the words “before the establishment of the National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted;
(vi) in section 263, in sub-section ( 3), after the words “the Appellate Tribunal,”,
the words “National Tax Tribunal,” shall be inserted;
38
Effect to the
decisions of
Supreme Court
and of the
National Tax
Tribunal.

39
(vii) in section 264, in sub-section ( 7), after the words “the
Appellate Tribunal,”, the words “National Tax Tribunal,” shall be inserted.
PART II
AMENDMENTS TO THE W EALTH-TAX A CT, 1957
(27 OF 1957)
1. In section 2, after clause (lc), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(ld) “National Tax Tribunal” means the National Tax Tribunal established
under section 3 of the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2004;’.
2. In section 25, in sub-section ( 4), after the words “Appellate Tribunal,” the
words “National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
3. In section 27A,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after the words and figures, “file on or after the
1st day of October, 1998”, the words “but before the date of establishment
of the National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), after the words “An appeal shall lie to the High
Court”, the words “before the date of establishment of the National Tax
Tribunal” shall be inserted.
4. In section 29, in sub-section ( 1), after the words, “any judgment of the
High Court delivered”, the words “before the date of establishment of the National Tax
Tribunal” shall be inserted.
5. In section 29A, after the words “preferred to the Supreme Court”, the
words and figures “under this Act before the commencement of the National Tax
Tribunal Act, 2004” shall be inserted.
PART III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE E XPENDITURE-TAX A CT, 1987
(35 OF 1987)
1. In section 13, in sub-section ( 4), for the words “or any order of a High
Court”, the words “or any order of the National Tax Tribunal or of a High Court”
shall be substituted.
2. In section 21, in sub-section ( 7), after the words “Appellate Tribunal,”, the
words “the National Tax Tribunal,” shall be inserted.
PART IV
A
MENDMENTS TO THE I NTEREST-TAX A CT, 1974
(45 OF 1974)
1. In section 19, in sub-section ( 3), after the words “the Appellate Tribunal”,
the words “the National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
2. In section 20, in sub-section ( 7), for the words “Appellate Tribunal, the
High Court or the Supreme Court”, the words “Appellate Tribunal, the National Tax
Tribunal, the High Court or the Supreme Court” shall be substituted.

40
PART V
AMENDMENT TO THE F INANCE (N O. 2) A CT, 1998
(21 OF 1998)
In section 76, in sub-section ( 1), the words, figures, letter and brackets
“sections 23, 23A, 24, 25, 28 and 29 of the Wealth-tax Act as amended and section
27A as inserted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1998”, the words, figures and letter
“sections 23, 23A, 24 and 25 of the Wealth-tax Act” shall be substituted.
PART VI
A
MENDMENT TO THE C USTOMS A CT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
1. In section 2, after clause ( 30), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(30A) “National Tax Tribunal” means the National Tax Tribunal established
under section 3 of the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2004;’.
2. In section 27, in sub-section (3), after the words “Appellate Tribunal”, the
words, “the National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
3. In section 27A, in the Explanation, after the words “Appellate Tribunal”, the
words, “National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
4. In section 28AA, in Explanations 1 and 2, after the words “Appellate
Tribunal”, the words, “National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
5. In section 28AB, in Explanations 1 and 2, after the words “Appellate
Tribunal”, the words, “National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
6. In section 28B, in sub-section ( 1), after the words “Appellate Tribunal”, the
words, “National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
7. Sections 130, 130A, 130B, 130C and 130D shall be omitted.
8. In section 130E, in clause (b), after the words “any order passed”, the words
“before the establishment of the National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
9. In section 131, after the words “an appeal has been preferred to the Supreme
Court”, the words and figure “under this Act before the commencement of the
National Tax Tribunal Act, 2004” shall be inserted.
10. In section 131C, clause ( b) shall be omitted.
PART VII
A
MENDMENTS TO THE C ENTRAL E XCISE A CT, 1944
(1 OF 1944)
1. In section 2, after clause ( f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ff) “National Tax Tribunal” means the National Tax Tribunal established
under section 3 of the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2004;’.
2. In section 11AA, in Explanations 1 and 2, after the words “Appellate
Tribunal”, the words, “National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.

41
3. In section 11AB, in Explanations 1 and 2, after the words “Appellate
Tribunal”, the words, “National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
4. In section 11BB, in the Explanation, after the words “Appellate Tribunal”,
the words, “National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
5. In section 35C, in sub-section ( 4), for the words, figures and letters “Save
as provided in section 35G or section 35L”, the words and figures “Save as provided
in the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2004’’ shall be substituted.
6. Sections 35G, 35H, 35I and 35J shall be omitted.
7. In section 35K,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), the words “High Court or the” shall be omitted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2),—
(a) the words “the High Court or” occurring at both the places shall be
omitted;
(b) the words “as the case may be”, shall be omitted.
8. In section 35L, in clause (b), after the words “any order passed”, the
words “before the establishment of the National Tax Tribunal” shall be inserted.
9. In section 35N, after the words “an appeal has been preferred to the
Supreme Court”, the words and figures “under this Act before the commencement of
the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2004” shall be inserted.

42
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Under the direct and indirect tax enactments. an appeal lies to the High
Court on a substantial question of law. Due to pendency of a large number of
cases in the High Courts, huge revenue is blocked in such litigations. This is
adversely affecting the national economy. Hence, urgent measures are required to
be taken to speed up taxation matters pending before the High Courts. To
achieve the aforesaid objective, it is proposed to establish a Tax Tribunal to be
known as the National Tax Tribunal to hear cases on substantial question of law
from the decisions of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal and the Customs, Excise
and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal. This Tribunal is being set up under article
323B of the Constitution and will act through its Benches. A person who has
been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court shall
be the Chairperson of the National Tax Tribunal. The number of Benches to hear
the cases under the direct tax laws and indirect tax laws shall be decided by the
Central Government from time to time. With the establishment of the National
Tax Tribunal all matters and proceedings pending in appeals and references under
the direct tax laws and indirect tax laws before the High Courts shall stand
transferred to it.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses
explain the various provisions of the Bill.
H.R. BHARDWAJ
N
EW D ELHI;
The 18th November, 2004.
42

43
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2.—This clause defines certain expressions occurring in the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause provides for the establishment of a National Tax
Tribunal.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for composition of the National Tax
Tribunal.
Clause 5.—This clause provides for constitution, jurisdiction and place of
sitting of the Benches of the National Tax Tribunal.
Clause 6.—This clause prescribes the qualifications for appointment of
Chairperson, and other Members of the National Tax Tribunal.
Clause 7.—This clause provides the manner in which the Chairperson
and other Members of the National Tax Tribunal shall be appointed by the
Central Government. It provides that the Chairperson and Members shall be
appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of a Selection
Committee consisting of the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of a Supreme
Court nominated by him, the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and the
Secretary, Department of Revenue.
Clause 8.—This clause fixes the tenure of the Chairperson and other
Members of the National Tax Tribunal subject to a maximum age limit.
Clause 9.—This clause provides for the procedure for resignation by the
Chairperson or a Member of the National Tax Tribunal.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for the salary, allowances and other
terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and other Members.
Clause 11.—This clause deals with the procedure for removal and
suspension of the Chairperson and other Members of the National Tax Tribunal.
Clause 12.—This clause provides that the Central Government shall
provide the staff for the functioning of the National Tax Tribunal. They will be
appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of a Selection
Committee and their salaries, allowances and other conditions of service shall be
prescribed by the rules.
Clause 13.—This clause authorises the persons who may appear before
the National Tax Tribunal.
Clause 14.—This clause provides for the appointment of the senior most
member to act as Chairperson or discharge the functions of the Chairperson
when there is any vacancy in the office of Chairperson by reason of his death,
resignation or otherwise, or when the Chairperson is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause.
43

44
Clause 15.—This clause specifies the procedure for preferring an appeal
to the National Tax Tribunal.
Clause 16.—This clause provides that the National Tax Tribunal shall not
be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but
be guided by the principles of natural justice and shall have the power to regulate
its own procedure. It also invests the National Tax Tribunal with powers of civil
court in respect of certain matters.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that any order passed by the National
Tax Tribunal shall be final.
Clause 18.—This clause provides that the decision of the National Tax
Tribunal shall be by majority where the members of a Bench differ in opinion
on any point.
Clause 19.—This clause deals with circumstances when a Special Bench
may be constituted where a question of law already decided by a Bench
subsequently comes up for hearing before another Bench.
Clause 20.—This clause empowers the National Tax Tribunal to make
interim order subject to certain conditions.
Clause 21.—This clause vests the National Tax Tribunal with power to
punish for contempt of itself as a High Court.
Clause 22.—This clause provides that the National Tax Tribunal may
pass such orders as it thinks fit after giving an opportunity of being heard to
the parties in any proceedings before it.
Clause 23.—This clause provides for the transfer to the National Tax
Tribunal of all matters and proceedings under the direct taxes and indirect taxes
pending before any High Court and procedure for their hearing.
Clause 24.—This clause provides for filing of an appeal to the Supreme
Court against any decision or order of the National Tax Tribunal.
Clause 25.—This clause makes it clear that Chairperson, Members and
staff of the National Tax Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for protection of the National Tax
Tribunal, its Chairperson, Member, officer or other employees in respect of
anything done in good faith in pursuance of this Bill.
Clause 27.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make
suitable provisions by order published in the Official Gazette, and not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill, for removing any difficulty in giving
effect to the provisions of this Bill within a specified period.
Clause 28.—This clause empowers. the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Bill and such rules may provide for
various matters including procedure for the investigation of the charges of
misbehaviour or incapacity against the Chairperson or other Members, salaries,
allowances and other conditions of service of its staff, etc.

45
Clause 29.—This clause provides for the procedure for laying of rules
framed under this Bill before each House of Parliament.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for consequential amendments in the
provisions relating to the jurisdiction of a High Court under Income-tax Act,
1961; the Wealth-tax Act, 1957; the Expenditure Tax Act, 1987; the Interest-tax
Act, 1974; the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1998; the Customs Act, 1962 and the
Central Excise Act, 1944.

46
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The National Tax Tribunal Bill, 2004 provides for the establishment of
the National Tax Tribunal for adjudication of disputes with respect to levy,
assessment, collection and enforcement of direct taxes and the determination of
the rates of duties of customs and Central excise on goods and the valuation of
goods for the purposes of assessment of such duties and also levy of tax on
service.
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Tax
Tribunal. According to clause 4 of the Bill, the National Tax Tribunal shall
consist of a Chairperson and such number of other Members as the Central
Government deems fit. Clause 10 provides that the salary, allowances and other
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson shall be the same as
applicable to a sitting judge of the Supreme Court and a member shall draw
salary of a High Court judge and other allowances, and the terms and conditions
of service of the member shall be the same as applicable to a Secretary to the
Government of India. Clause 12 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
shall provide the National Tax Tribunal with such officers and employees as it
may deem fit. These provisions in the Bill when enacted will have financial
implications.
2. Having regard to the number of appeals and references which will
stand transferred to the National Tax Tribunal from the High Courts, it is
considered necessary to have at least 15 Benches for the  Direct Tax matters and
10 Benches for Indirect Tax matters so that cases which may stand transferred
to the Tribunal from the High Court may be disposed of quickly. It will also be
necessary to provide for an adequate number of supporting officers and
employees for proper functioning of the Tribunal.
3. The total expenditure per Bench and its staff requirement will be
Rs.31,51,000/- per annum. Accordingly, the total expenditure for 25 Benches
would be around Rs.7.88 crores per annum. The total expenditure on
infrastructural requirements on the non-recurring expenditure (for initial setting
up) would be Rs.15,00,000/- and Rs.10 lakhs per annum is estimated as
recurring expenditure, per Bench. Accordingly, total expenditure on the
infrastructural requirements including recurring and non-recurring would be
approximately Rs.6.80 crores.
46

47
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to remove by
order any difficulty, which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the
proposed legislation. This is by way of abundant auction and for covering
difficulties, which it is not practicable to visualise. It has, however, been
provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of the Appellate Tribunal. It has also been
provided that a copy of each such order made shall be laid before each House
of Parliament.
2. Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by
notification, to make rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters with respect to which rules
may be made under this clause. These matters relate to, inter alia, the procedure
for investigation of charges of misbehaviour or incapacity against the
Chairperson or other Members under the proposed sub-clause (4) of clause 11;
the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and other
employees of the National Tax Tribunal under the proposed sub-clause (2) of
clause 12; the amount of fee payable for filing an appeal to the National Tax
Tribunal under the proposed sub-clause (2) of clause 15 and the subject matter
in respect of which the National Tax Tribunal may exercise the powers of a civil
court under the proposed item (f) of sub clause (3) of clause 16.
3. As the matters with respect to which order or rules may be made
pertain to matters of procedure or detail, the delegation of legislative powers is
of a normal character.
47

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.