 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA     44 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND 
FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (SAKA)   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in 
 

CS (P & L) - 87 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND 
FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE...................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT ....................................................................................................................... 1-8 
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE .................................................... 9-16 
5. A NNEXURE – ................................................................................................................. 17-43 
 A. The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth   
  Amendment) Bill, 2010 .......................................................................................... 19-23 
 B. Comments of the Department of Justice on the Memoranda received from 
individuals/organisations/ 
 
  stakeholders  ......................................................................................................... 24-43  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11) 
(Constituted on 31st August, 2010) 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan   ––    Chairperson  
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Shanta ram Laxman Naik 
 3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 5. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
 7. Shri Amar Singh 
 8. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
 9. Shri O. T. Lepcha 
 *10. Vacant 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
 12.  Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi 
 13.  Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
 14.  Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda 
 15.  Dr. Monazir Hassan 
 16.  Shri Arjun Munda 
 17.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 18.  Shrimati Chandresh Kumari 
 19.  Shri Bhajan Lal 
 20.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
 21.  Ms. Meenakshi Natarajan 
 22.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
 23.  Shri Harin Pathak 
 24.  Shri Lalu Prasad 
 25.  Shri S. Semmalai 
 26.  Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh 
 27.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 28.  Shri Manish Tewari 
 29.  Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 30.  Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
 31.  Vacant 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
  Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
 
 

  Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
  Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director  
  Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having 
been authorised by the Committee, present this Forty Fourth Report of the Committee relating to The 
Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
2.  In pursuance of the rules relating to the Depa rtment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee, the 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
@ the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 25th August, 2010 to 
this Committee. 
3.  The Committee decided to issue Press Release to solicit views/suggestions from interested 
individuals/organisations/ experts/institutions on the various provisions of the Bill. The Press Release appeared 
in print media on the 25th September, 2010. In respon se thereto, a number of memoranda were received. The 
memoranda containing the relevant suggestions were forwarded to the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law 
and Justice for their comments thereon. 
4.   The Committee considered the Bill and heard the pr esentation of the Secretary, Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and Justice and took oral evidence of some non-official witnesses to have better appreciation 
of the subject. 
5.  While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information placed 
before it:- 
(i)  Background note on the Bill recei ved from the Department of Justice; 
(ii)  The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010;  
(iii)  The Constitution of India; 
(iv)  The Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963; and 
(v)  Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice on the views/suggestions contained in the 
memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on various provisions of the Bill. 
6. The Committee held two meetings to discuss the Bill in detail. 
7.  For the facility of reference and convenience, the observation and recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
  JAYANTHI NATARAJAN
 
NEW DELHI; Chairperson, 
7
th
 December, 2010 Committee on Personnel 
   Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth Amen dment) Bill, 2010 (Annexure-A) introduced* in 
the Lok Sabha on 25th August, 2010 seeks to increase th e age of retirement of Judges and additional Judges or 
acting Judges of High Courts from sixty-two years to sixty-five years. 
2. To attain the objective, the Bill seeks to amend clause (1) of Article 217 of the Constitution by 
substituting the word “sixty-five years” for the words “sixty-two years”, and to amend clause (3) of Article 224 
of the Constitution by substituting the words “sixty-five years” for the words “sixty-two years”. The Bill was 
referred** by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to the 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on 
the 15th September, 2010 for examination and report. 
3.  The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill elucidate the reasons and the need for 
bringing forth the proposed amendment. It states as under: 
 “Clause (1) of article 217 of the Constitution of India allows every Judge of a High Court to hold 
office until he attains the age of sixty-two years. Clause (3) of article 224 of the Constitution provides 
that no person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court shall hold office after 
attaining the age of sixty-two years. The age of retirement of High Court Judges, which was fixed at sixty 
years in the beginning, was enhanced to sixty-two years by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 
1963. Since then, no revision has taken place in this regard.” 
4. The Statement of Objects and Reasons further states: 
 “The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice, in its 39th Report dated the 29th April, 2010, has recommended to raise the retirement 
age of the Judges of the High Courts from sixty-two to sixty-five to be at par with the retirement age of 
the Judges of the Supreme Court. Further, most of the reasons adduced by the Fifth Central Pay 
Commission in support of its recommendation for increasing the age of retirement of the Central 
Government employees, such as gl obal practices, increase in life expectancy, improved health 
standards, need for utilisation of experience and wisdom of senior employees, etc., would also apply to 
the Judges.” 
 “In view of the present state of vacancies of Judges in High Courts, it is extremely difficult to clear 
the heavy pendency of cases in the High Courts. Increasing the age of  retirement by three more years 
would restrict occurrence of new vacancies on account of superannuation for the next three years during 
which time the existing backlog in vacancies could be  cleared. This would have a clear impact on 
reduction of pendency of cases in the High Courts.” 
 “It is, therefore, proposed to increase the age of retirement of Judges and additional or acting 
Judges of High Courts from sixty-two years to sixty-five years.” 
5.  The Committee, considered the background note dated 24th September, 2010 submitted by the Ministry 
of Law and Justice (Department of Justice) which reads as follows:- 

 “The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010 has been introduced in 
the Lok Sabha further to amend the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Pursuant to the 
recommendation of the Committee in its 39th Report presented in both the Houses of Parliament on 29th 
April, 2010 that ‘Government should immediately bring forward a proposal to raise the retirement age 
of Judges of High Courts from 62 to 65 to be at par with the retirement age of Judges of the Supreme 
Court without any further delay’. The age of retirement of the Judges of Supreme Court of India has 
been determined as 65 years since the commencement of the Cons titution. However, the retirement age 
of High Court Judges, which was fixed at 60 years in the beginning, was revised to 62 years in October, 
1963. This was preceded by increase in the retirem ent age of Central Government employees from 55 to 
58 years w.e.f. 1.12.1962 on the recommendations of the Second Central Pay Commission, mainly 
relying upon increase in life expectancy in India. Soon after, the retirement age of the Judges of High 
Courts was raised from 60 to 62 years on the same basis w.e.f. 5.10.1963 by the Constitution (Fifteenth 
Amendment) Act, 1963. The Fifth Central Pay Commission in support of its recommendation for 
increasing the age of retirement of Central Government employees such as global practices, increase in 
life expectancy, improved health standards, need for utilization of experience and wisdom of senior 
employees, etc. apply to the Judges also. It may also be noted that while the life expectancy in India at 
birth was 58.8 years of age in 1970-75 it has increased to the level of 67.1 years in 2002-2006 for males 
and from 59.2 years to 70.0 years for females. General increase in the age of longevity also supports the 
issue of increase in age of retirement of High Court Judges. 
 Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in its Judgment in All India Judges Association case has directed 
that Judicial Officers, who retire at 60 years of age may be reemployed and allowed to work till the age 
of 62 years if there are vacancies in the cadre of the District Judges. Thus the District Judges will work 
upto the age of 62 years. Further, the prevailing huge pendency of cases in High Courts require more 
stable environment of working in the High Courts. The nation will continue to have the benefit of 
utilizing the knowledge and experience of High Court Judges, if their age of retirement is raised to 65 
years keeping in view the increase in longevity. It wi ll, hopefully, bring about commensurate benefits of 
greater experience and maturity in judgments.  
 As on 30.04.2010, the working Judge strength in all the High Courts was 625 Judges leaving 270 
vacancies to be filled up. Vacancies in the High Courts occur from time to time due to superannuation, 
resignations etc. The filling up the vacant posts is a long drawn process. Despite continuous follow-up 
action as per the procedure laid down in the Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges of 
the High Courts, the backlog has persisted. With the present state of vacancies, it appears extremely 
difficult to clear the heavy pendency of cases in the High Courts. Increasing the age of retirement by 3 
more years would restrict occurrence of new vacancies on account of superannuation for the next three 
years during which time the existing backlog in  vacancies could be cleared. This would have a clear 
impact on reduction of pendency of cases in the High Courts as envisaged also in the Vision document of 
the Ministry of Law and Justice”. 
6.  The Committee heard the presentation of the Secret ary, Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and 
Justice, on the Bill on Wednesday, the 29th September, 2010. 
7. In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/ suggestions from
 desirous individuals/organizations. Accordingly, a press release was issued inviting views/suggestions 

from individuals/organizations. In response to the press release published in major English and Hindi 
newspapers on 25th September, 2010, a number of memoranda were received. 
8. The Committee considered the memoranda that contained pertinent suggestions/ comments on the 
various aspects of the Bill. Some significant issues raised in such memoranda have been summarized in the 
succeeding paras. Some select memoranda were also forwarded to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Department of Justice) for their comments. The statem ent of these memoranda giving the gist of views and 
suggestions contained therein, along with the comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice is placed at 
Annexure-B. 
9. To understand the various perspectives on the Bill , the Committee also decided to hear the views of the 
stakeholders on the Bill. In this process the Committee heard the views of Shri B.V. Acharya, Senior 
Advocate, Bangalore, Shri M. Rajender Reddy, Advocate and Member, Bar Council of India, Hyderabad and 
Shri M.A. Rangaswamy, New Delhi on the provisions of the Bill. 
10. The major points that emerged in vari ous memoranda are summarized as follows:---- 
(i) There is no mechanism in our system to review the judicial work done by High Court judges. A 
perusal of the Supreme Court decisions remitting th e cases back to the High Courts directing to 
render decision after adducing reasons or after observing due procedure will signify the pathetic 
situation in various High Courts. 
(ii) Instead of increasing the age of  retirement of various judges of High Courts, and also because most 
of the judges also feel that they are overburdene d, it will be better if the Government fill-up the 
vacant posts of various High Court Judges so that the pending work gets distributed amongst a 
larger number of judges and dispensation of justice to the people will not suffer due to the shortage 
of Judges. 
(iii) The High Court judges should be made to give short dates of not longer than two to three weeks, 
so that the hearings could be conducted at short intervals and the entire case solved within a period 
of 2-3 years. The rich and powerful party should not be allowed to derive the advantage/ reliefs 
due to other party’s poor financial position. 
(iv) The age of all the judges should not be increased to 65 years. Instead the extension of time period 
should be given to only those judges whose work record is found satisfactory. Also additional 
parameters like their health and sound mind should also be taken into consideration. All the judges 
do not deserve to get extension of time or increase of work period. 
(v) Rather than increasing retirement age, Governme nt should fill up all vacancies of judges in all 
courts urgently. If necessary the number of courts and judges should be increased to deliver fast 
justice. 
(vi) All the courts including the Supreme Court should be brought under the Right to information Act, 
so that litigants can know reasons for delay in cases filed by them. 
(vii)  A mechanism to evaluate judges and suitably pu nish the inefficient should be in place. Basically 
all Judges should be accountable to the citizen for their action. 

(viii)  The number of pending cases in Supreme a nd High Courts are enormous. The weekly holiday of 
every Saturday should be converted to second and fourth Saturday of every month. This will 
enable to increase the working years of judges instead of increasing the retirement age. 
(ix) The Government should plan Indian Judiciary Services. Young talented law graduates should be 
screened by UPSC or a more tough scrutiny test which is away from political interference. This 
will increase speedy judgments as well stop favors. 
(x) Vacancies must be filled up by new selectio n because our Constitution confers equal opportunity 
to all. 
(xi) The selection procedure for becoming the judge of High Court must be changed and the selection 
may take place from all Bars and by promotions by a competitive examination organized by 
Supreme Court and BCI jointly. 
(xii)  The judges should be selected through competitive examination so that we get brilliant and 
talented Judges to solve public issues. 
(xiii)  There should be “Online System” for the current and pending issues in the Courts to enable 
obtaining soft copy of rulings by e-mail. 
(xiv)  We are running short of Judges of all categories. Constitution should be amended to extend the 
services of Judges of High Courts, subject to their medical fitness. There has to be a Medical 
Council that will format the criteria of fitness as per the prevailing medical standards of our 
country, giving consideration to the age factor. 
(xv)  The Government already avails the services of judges even after their retirement in various 
manner. For example, they are invited to serve as Chairman, President or Members of various 
judicial and quasi-judicial forms, like the Admini strative Tribunals, Cust oms Excise and Service 
Tax Appellate Tribunal, SEBI Tribunal, etc., where the age limit is 65. As such, since the 
Government itself finds them worthy for such important posts, there is no reason why they cannot 
continue to serve as a judge. 
(xvi)  It should be appreciated that in most of the develop countries, retirement age of judges is above 65 
years. For example, in United Kingdom and Cana da, the retirement age is 75 years, while for 
Japan the retirement age is 65 years. As such, in other countries, this is an established practice. 
(xvii)  Maturity makes a man perfect. One can give his best during this ripe stage of life. 
(xviii) An aged and experienced person can give his best and matured opinion/judgment in an easy 
manner. 
(xix)  In this way the sitting judges will get more time and opportunity to take initiative in the matter of 
quick disposal of long pending cases. 
(xx)  The efficacy of various Judgments depend on va rious- skill, knowledge of ramification of law like 
body of law civil/ common law, criminal law, statute law corpus juries, juries prudence ---- 
Constitution, etc. Therefore, en hancement of retirement of Judges  of High Court/ Acting Judge of 
provincial - Apex-Court/ High Court from 62 years to 65 years should be according to their skill-
knowledge, performance on the above mentioned different subjects. 

(xxi)  One catastrophic consequence of the proposal is  that there will be no regular vacancies for a post 
of High Court judges for the next 3 years and the authorities are totally deprived of the opportunity 
to recruit deserving and meritorious candidates, who are expected to help in speedy disposal of the 
cases. 
(xxii) Once this Bill is passed, there will be no limit to it and in future, there may be efforts to increase 
the age further. Besides this, other public agencies may also follow suit starting a chain reaction. 
(xxiii) There should be sincere efforts to appoint most qualified persons as High Court judges by a 
competitive exam on all India basis rather than increasing their age so that undeserving, 
unqualified persons should not be appointed as High Court judges and corruption in the higher 
judiciary can be curtailed. There should be represen tation to all sections of societies especially for 
women, SC/ST, etc. as per the provisions of Constitution of India. 
(xxiv) The Committee appointing the retired judges to posts in Tribunals, Commissions, etc. would 
have to bear in mind that such appointments cannot be made, mainly to oblige someone to 
continue his medical attention, or enjoy other perquisites on various extraneous grounds. The 
mental and physical fitness of a judge as well as his general outlook and ability to adjust to the 
changing age composition of society, and it’s expectations would have to be kept in mind. 
(xxv) With increased life span and improved health conditions, when careers of the learned Judges of the 
High Courts are being cut short at the age of 62, when they are still capable of performing judicial 
functions, the justice delivery system in our country is being deprived of their substantial 
knowledge and experience. 
11. The Secretary, Department of Justice, in her presentation before the Committee informed that the 
proposed increase in the age of retirement has also been recommended by this Committee in its earlier Reports. 
Stressing the need for the amendment, she stated: 
 “... .although the arrears are getting reduced but because of the institution of cases, there is no 
clear reduction in the pendency. Then, there are still 270 vacancies in High Courts. So, taking into 
account all this, as also the recommendations of the Standing Committee and several other decisions 
taken in the Chief Justices Conference and so on, the Government decided to move this Bill for 
increasing the retirement age from 62 to 65 years. This is also at par with the kind of thinking that has 
been going on the increase in the age of retirement of Government Servants mainly because there has 
been an increase in life expectancy and the people now are not that old when they are 60 or 62. So, 
taking into account all these things and also in the interest of the judiciary to have a certain amount of 
permanency in High courts, because sometimes they have very short tenures, and, also to reduce the 
pendency if we can take care of the vacancy position for some time, we have introduced this...” 
12.  Apart from hearing the views of Secretary, Department  of Justice, to understand the various perspectives 
on the Bill, the Committee decided to consider the views of  the stakeholders on the Bill also. For this purpose, 
the Committee invited selected individuals and orga nizations before the Committee for tendering oral 
evidence. 
13. The Committee’s deliberations with such individuals/ representatives of the organizations witnessed a 
detailed discussion on the various aspects of the propos ed amendments in the Bill and also other associated 

issues that need to be addressed. The issues that emerged out during the Committee’s interaction with the 
witnesses may be categorized under the following points: 
(i) The collegium system of appointment of Judges should be replaced by a National Judicial 
Commission and National Judicial Services so that vacancies in the High Courts could be fulfilled 
timely and in a transparent and accountable manner. 
(ii) Instead of enhancing the age of retirement of Judges, article 224 A of the Constitution should be 
utilized for the appointment of ad-hoc judges so that the problem of pendency of cases could be 
taken care of. 
(iii) Vacancies of the judges should be filled up one or two months before the retirement in order to 
deal with the existing problem of large vacancies of judges in High Courts. 
(iv) Unrestrained used of Article 224A may also be dysfunctional because it may in some cases 
encourage the corrupt practices. 
(v) The problem of existing vacancies of judges can  not be addressed only by enhancing the age of 
retirement of judges of the High C ourt in view of the fact that most of the High Courts still do not 
have the adequate infrastructural capacity such as number of courts so as to accommodate the 
actual sanctioned strength of judges. 
(vi) To reduce pendency, it would be a better option to recruit the talented and competent people 
instead of continuing the people who have outlived their utility. The proposed Bill, if enacted, may 
lead to a situation where there will be no regular vacancies for the post of High Court judges for 
the next 3 years and the authorities would totall y be deprived of the opportunity to recruit 
deserving and meritorious candidates, who are expected to help in speedy disposal of the cases. 
(vii)  Until the present collegium system of appointment of judges remain in place, the present proposal 
would only enable less meritorious judges to continue in office for 3 more years. 
(viii)  The proposed Bill may be passed, provided the amendments proposed in the Bill will only come in 
to force with prospective effect. Thus, a provision should be incorporated in the Bill that proposed 
amendment will apply only to those who are recruited hereafter. 
(ix) Also, the benefits of enhancement in retirement age should be conferred on only deserving and 
meritorious judges after a thorough scrutiny. 
Committee’s Observations/ Recommendations 
14. Taking into account the justific ations given by the Secretary, De partment of Justice, and the 
statement of objects and reasons appended to the B ill, the Committee supports the proposal for increase 
in the retirement age of the Judges of  the High Courts from sixty-two ye ars to sixty-five years and to be 
at par with the retirement age of the Judges of  the Supreme Court. The Committee also acknowledges 
that the Bill has been brought fo rth in pursuance of the recommendations made by the Committee in its 
earlier, Reports. 
15. The Committee endorses the Department’s view that the rationale of the Fifth Central Pay 
Commission’s recommendation for increasing the age of retirement of Central Government employees 
such as global practices, increase in  life expectancy, improved health standards, need for utilization of 

experience and wisdom of senior employees, etc. app lies to the judges also. A general increase in the 
expectancy of life also supports the proposal to increase the age of retirement of the High Court Judges. 
16. The Committee also takes note of the Government’s reasoning that increasing the age of retirement by 
three more years would restrict occurrence of new vacancies which would have a clear impact on reducing the 
pendency of cases in the High Courts. An analysis of the material provided by the Department reveals that a 
large number of vacancies exist at present in High Courts, i.e., 270  vacancies and only 625 judges are in 
position. The vacancies have accumulated due to the procedures involved in the appointment of judges. In this 
backdrop, when the procedures for appointment of j udges have not been succe ssful enough in timely 
filling-up of the vacancies, the Co mmittee acknowledges that the prop osed amendment would provide 
the much needed relief as enhancem ent of the age of retirement of Hi gh Court Judges would at-least 
check further increase in the number of vacanc ies. The Committee, however, does not see the 
enhancement of age of retirement as a solution to  delayed appointment of High Court Judges. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the process of filling up of the existing vacancies may be 
expedited by all means. 
17. In the course of the deliberations, the Committee was apprised that some High courts still do not have 
adequate infrastructural capacity to accommoda te the actual sanctioned strength of judges. The Committee, 
therefore, is of the view that Government should seriously explo re all the possible ways to overcome the 
infrastructural bottlenecks being faced by the High Court so that the Hi gh Courts could function as per 
their sanctioned strength and the problem of mounting pendency could be effectively dealt with. 
18. The Committee further feels that the retirement of judges of High Court and Supreme Court 
coming at par, there would be less competition among the high court judges for getting elevated to the 
Supreme Court which presently means three years’ additi onal service. This would also ensure a fairly 
reasonable tenure to the High Cour t Judges during which they could make some valuable contribution 
in the dispensation of justice. 
19. During the deliberations, some witnesses had expressed their apprehensions that the proposed Bill, if 
enacted, may lead to a situation where there will be no regular vacancies for a post of High Court judges for 
the next 3 years and the authorities would be totally deprived of the opportunity to recruit deserving and 
meritorious candidates, who ar e expected to help in speedy disposal of the cases. It was also said that the 
proposed Bill might be dysfunctional in the sense as it would extend the tenure of judges who are not 
competent enough and the judges having allegations of corruptions against them. 
20. The Committee takes a serious note of the concerns expressed by the witnesse s. Integrity, honesty 
and output of the Judges are issues  that need to be addressed by G overnment with all seriousness. The 
appointment and continuance of the judges is regulated under the Cons titution, but there is an urgent 
need on the part of the Government to review the procedure for appointment of the judges in the higher 
judiciary and also to put in place some mechanism so as to optimize the output in their performance. 
Towards this objective, Government  may consider creation of a National Judicial Commission having 
representation from the judiciary, executive, Ba r and the Parliament. Th e Committee hopes that 
Government would take urgent steps in this directio n. The concerns of the pe ople that the proposed 
action might extend benefit in term s of extended years of service in certain non deserving cases too are 
appreciated, but, in the Committee’s vi ew, the solution to this lies in putting in place a well considered 
mechanism to see that the judiciary rises above from such allegations and the public perception changes. 

21. In some memoranda received by the Committee, it was opined that the benefits of enhancement in 
retirement age should be conferred on only deserving and meritorious judges after a thorough scrutiny and the 
present Bill should only be enacted after incorporating such requisite provisions. The Committee, however, 
feels that it may not be possible to implement the proposed amendment on a selective basis, such as 
allowing the benefit of inc reased age only to the meritorious/ des erving because that is not the practice 
at present in the Government. Further, Article 224 of the Constitution already provides for appointment 
of additional judges up to two year s. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that whatever be the age 
of retirement for the Judges, Article 224 of the Consti tution can be utilized for obtaining the benefits of 
the experience and wisdom of meritorious and competent judges for up to two more years, if required. 
22. The Committee reiterates that i ssues like, replacing the present judiciary driven system of 
appointment of judges to a rational, transparen t and accountable method, dealing with the errant 
judges, etc. need to be addresse d as soon as possible in a comp rehensive manner. The Committee, 
therefore, feels that it would be much prudent to ex amine all these issues independently. Mixing of these 
issues with the proposed Bill and drawing conclusions is not desirabl e as the proposed Bill is on a 
different subject-matter and with a different objective, per se. 
23. The Committee, therefore, endorses the proposed Bill in its present form and suggests that the 
Bill should be passed without dela y because delaying it further wo uld defeat the very cause that 
necessitates its introduction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE  
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
 The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 29th September, 2010 in Committee Room No. G074, Ground 
Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan     ––      Chairperson 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Shantara m Laxman Naik  
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
 5. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
  LOK  SABHA 
 6. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
 7. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda  
 8. Dr. Monazir Hassan 
 9. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 10. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
 11. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan  
 12. Shri S. Semmalai 
 13. Shri Manish Tewari 
 14. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
I.  * * * 
II.  MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE  
  DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
 1.  Shrimati Neela Gangadharan, Secretary; 
 2.  Shri Ramesh Abhishek, Joint Secretary; and  
 3.  Shri S.C. Srivastava, Joint Secretary. 

  LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
 1.  Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;  
 2.  Shri Divakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and  
 3.  Shri K.V. Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel. 
2.  * * * 
3.  * * * 
4.  * * * 
  The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010 
5.   The Chairperson then informed the Members that The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth 
Amendment) Bill, 2010 has also been referred to th e Committee by Hon’ble Chairman on the 15th September, 
2010 for examination and report within three months. Th e Amendment seeks to increase retirement age of the 
Judges of High Courts from 62 years to 65 years. She welcomed the Secretary, Depa rtment of Justice to the 
meeting and requested her to make a presentation on (i) The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth 
Amendment) Bill, 2010; and (ii) *  *  * The Secretary, while making a presentation on the Bill, illustrated the 
background for introducing the Bill and explained how the increase in the retirement age of the Judges and 
additional or acting Judges of High Courts from 62 years to 65 years would enable reduction in pendency of 
cases in High Courts. The Chairper son and Members asked some clarifications which were given by the 
Secretary. 
6.  * * * 
7.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8.  The Committee adjourned at 12.30 
A.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 
FIFTH MEETING 
  The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 23rd November, 2010 in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan     ––      Chairperson 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Shantara m Laxman Naik  
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 5. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
  LOK  SABHA 
 6. Shri Shailendra Kumar  
 7. Shri S. Semmalai 
 8. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad  
 9. Shri Manish Tewari 
 10. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 11. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
  NON  OFFICIAL WITNESSES  
 1.  Shri B.V. Acharya, Senior Advocate, Bangalore;  
 2.  Shri M. Rajender Reddy, Advocate, Member Bar Council of India, Hyderabad; and 
 3.  Shri M.A. Rangaswamy, Advocate, New Delhi 
2.  Shri B.V. Acharya, while deposing before the Committee, expressed his reservations on the present form 
of the Bill and suggested that the Bill should not be passed  in its present form as the proposed Bill, if enacted, 
would stall the recruitment of deserving and meritorious  candidates for the next three years. He, however, 
suggested two safeguards that may be incorporated in the present Bill if the likely unwarranted outcomes of the 
Bill are to be dealt with. Firstly, the amendment proposed in the Bill should come into force prospectively. 
Secondly, the benefits of enhancement of the retirement age of judges should be conferred only on deserving 
and meritorious judges after a thorough scrutiny. 
3.  Shri M.A. Rangaswamy, on the other hand, supported the proposed Bill on the grounds that 
enhancement of the retirement age of the judges of High Courts would provide a reasonable career opportunity 

to them as they come in High Courts when they are between 40 to 50 years of age. He further added that the 
proposed Bill would also ensure the benefit of the experience of brilliant senior judges for a longer period. 
4.  Referring to the reasons provided by the Government to bring forth the Bill, Shri M. Rajender Reddy 
expressed his disagreement with the reasoning that the present Bill would help in clearing the pendency of 
cases. While making his presentation before the Committee, he  stated that in view of the present status of the 
vacancies of judges in High Courts, passing of the pr esent Bill would have no significant impact on clearing 
the huge pendency of cases. Rather he suggested that the Government should first consider the issues which 
are responsible for non filling up the vacancies. Accusing the present collegium system for its inability in 
timely filling up of vacancies, he stressed on the need to replace this system with an accountable and 
answerable system. He also submitted that instead of enhancing the retirement age of judges the Government 
should make use of article 224 A of the Constitution to ensure the services of efficient and competent judges to 
the Judiciary. 
5.  The Committee took note of the issues raised by the witnesses. The Members, then, sought clarifications 
from the witnesses which were responded to in detail. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7.  The Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
  The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 7th December, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan     ––      Chairperson 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Shantara m Laxman Naik  
 3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi  
 4. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 5. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
 6. Shri O.T. Lepcha 
  LOK  SABHA 
 7. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
 8. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi  
 9. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 10. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
 11. Shri S. Semmalai 
 12. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad  
 13. Shri Manish Tewari 
 14. Adv. P. T. Thomas (Idukki) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
2.  * * * 
3.  Thereafter, the Members took up for consideration the draft 44th Report on the Constitution (One 
Hundred and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Members shared their views on the draft Report and 
suggested some additions in the report. The Committee thereafter adopted the draft report along with the 
changes suggested. 
3.1.  The Committee nominated Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik and in his absence Shri O.T. Lepcha to present 
the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi and in her absence Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) to 
lay the same on the table of the Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2010. 
 

4.  * * *  
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.  The Committee adjourned at 3.20 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - A 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 103 of 2010 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
further to amend The Constitution of India. 
 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:– 
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and 
Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 2010. 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2.  In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause ( 1), for the words 
“sixty-two years”, the words “sixty-five years” shall be 
substituted.  
3.  In article 224 of the Constitution, in clause ( 3), for the 
words “sixty-two years”, the words “sixty-five years” shall be 
substituted.
 
 
Short title  and commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of article 217.  
 
 
 
Amendment of article 224.
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 Clause (1) of article 217 of the Constitution of Indi a allows every Judge of a High Court to hold office 
until he attains the age of sixty-two years. Clause (3) of  article 224 of the Constitution provides that no person 
appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court shall hold office after attaining the age of sixty-two 
years. The age of retirement of High Court Judges, which was fixed at sixty years in the beginning, was 
enhanced to sixty-two years by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Since then, no revision has 
taken place in this regard. 
2.  The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice, in its 39th Report dated the 29th April, 2010, has recommended to raise the retirement age of the 
Judges of the High Courts from sixty-two to sixty-five to be at par with the retirement age of the Judges of the 
Supreme Court. Further, most of the reasons adduced by the Fifth Central Pay Commission in support of its 
recommendation for increasing the age of retirement of the Central Government employees, such as global 
practices, increase in life expectancy, improved health standards, need for utilisation of experience and wisdom 
of senior employees, etc., would also apply to the Judges. 
3.  In view of the present state of vacancies of Judg es in High Courts, it is extremely difficult to clear the 
heavy pendency of cases in the High Courts. Increasi ng the age of retirement by  three more years would 
restrict occurrence of new vacancies on account of superannua tion for the next three years during which time 
the existing backlog in vacancies could be cleared. This would have a clear impact on reduction of pendency of 
cases in the High Courts. 
4.  It is, therefore, proposed to increase the age of retirement of Judges and additional or acting Judges of 
High Courts from sixty-two years to sixty-five years. 
5.  The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks to achieve the aforesaid 
objectives. 
 
 
N
EW DELHI; M. VEERAPPA  MOILY 
The 13th August, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (1) of ar ticle 217 of the Constitution of India to provide for 
increase in the age of retirement of Judges of the Hi gh Courts from the existing sixty-two years to sixty-five 
years. 
2.  Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (3) of article 224 of the Constitution to provide for increase in 
the age of retirement of additional Judges or acting Judg es of High Courts from the existing sixty-two years to 
sixty-five years. 
3.  The proposal does not involve any financial implications as their continuation of three more years in the 
office would not affect any increase in their salaries and allowances. 
4.  The Bill does not involve any expenditure of either recurring or non-recurring nature from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
 
  * * * * * 
217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the 
President by Warrant under his hand and seal after consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India, th e Governor of the State, and, in 
the case of appointment of a Judg e other than the Chief Justice, 
the Chief Justice of the High Court, and shall hold office, in the 
case of an additional or acting Judg e, as provided in article 224, 
and in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years: 
 Provided that – 
 (a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
President, resign his hand addressed to the President, resign his 
office; 
 (b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the 
President in the manner provided in clause ( 4) of article 124 for 
the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court; 
 (c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being 
appointed by the President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or 
by his being transferred by the President to any other High Court 
within the territory of India. 
 * * * * * 
224. (1) * * * * * 
 (3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of 
a High Court shall hold office afte r attaining the age of sixty-two 
years. 
 * * * * * 
 
Appointment and conditions of 
the office of a Judge of a High 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment of additional and 
acting Judges.
 
 
 
 
 

 
LOK  SABHA 
–––––– 
A 
BIIL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
–––––– 
(Shri M. Veerappa Moily, Minister of Law and Justice) 
 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE - B 
Part-I:        COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL 
Clause No. 
Sl. No. Name of organization/ Comments/suggestions Response of Government 
 individual   
1 2 3 4 
1. Prof. K.  
Chandrasekharan 
Pillai 
(i) Suggested that unless a 
performance evaluation of the 
judicial works done by each judge 
is not undertaken, the proposed 
amendment should not be passed. 
In so far judicial order passed by a High 
Court Judge is concerned, an appeal always 
lies in the Supreme Court. 
  (ii)  A machinery be in a position to 
ensure only the meritorious entry 
into the judiciary. It is unfortunate 
to note that the present mechanism 
of Collegium has really collapsed. 
Appointment of Judges in the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts are made in 
accordance with Article 124 (3) and Article 
217 (2) of the Constitution of India.  
  (iii)  The present amendment may be 
revised in such a manner that only 
the efficient judges are allowed 
extension of 3 years. The non-
performing judges might be asked 
to step down by giving them 
adequate pensionary benefits. 
Presently, there is no system where increase 
in the age of retirement can be linked to 
performance. The existing constitutional 
provision does not envisage stepping down 
of a Judge by giving him adequate 
pensionary benefits. 
  (iv)  There should be a provision for 
appointing a “Performance Review 
Commission” to undertake the 
review of the performance of each 
High Court judge in the proposed 
amendment. 
The concept of Performance Review 
Commission in respect of constitutional 
authorities like Judges does not seem to be 
appropriate. 
2. Shri R.D. Bhardwaj   Instead of increas ing the age of 
retirement of various judges of 
High Courts and also because most 
of the judges also feel that they are 
overburdened, it shall be better if 
the Government fills up the vacant 
posts of High Court Judges so that 
the pending work gets distributed 
Filling up of vacancies is a continuous 
process, as vacancies keep arising due to 
retirement, resignation, elevation of Judges, 
etc. The Government make all efforts to fill 
in the vacancies of the Judges in accordance 
with laid down procedures. 
Even with the best efforts, with the current 
procedure, clearance of backlog of vacancies 

among them. is likely to take three years. 
3. Smt. Asha Rao  The ages of all judges should not 
be increased to 65 years. Instead, 
the extension of time period should 
be given to only those judges 
whose work record is found 
satisfactory. Also additional 
parameters like their health and 
sound mind should also be taken 
into consideration. 
The constitutional provision does not permit 
an extension of service to a Judge of the 
High Court. 
4. Shri R.R. Shenoy (i) Increasing retirement ages of high 
court judges from 62 to 65 will 
amount to rewarding incompetence. 
The Constitution should be 
amended so that all judges 
including those in Supreme Court, 
retire at 60 as any government 
servant. 
Reduction in the age of retirement is not 
admissible under proviso to article 221 (2) of 
the Constitution. 
  (ii) Rather than increasing retirement 
age, Government should fill up all 
vacancies of judges in all courts 
urgently. If necessary the number 
of courts and judges shall be 
increased to deliver fast justice. 
The Central Government ensures prompt 
filling up of vacancies in the superior 
judiciary. The Judges’ strength of High 
Courts is reviewed periodically and 
strengthened whenever justified. 
5. Shri Sanjay Shama  I fully  agree with the proposal to 
increase the retirement age of the 
High Court Judges as experience 
counts in the delivery of qualitative 
justice. But a Judge whose conduct 
is doubtful should not get the 
benefit of increase in the retirement 
age. 
Age of retirement and dealing with doubtful 
conduct of a judge are two different 
matters. A case of doubtful character has to 
be dealt under relevant rules. 
6. Shri A.Z. Siddiqui  Inst ead of increasin g the age of 
Judges by proposed amendment the 
efficient judges may be re-
appointed as additional judges and 
they may be allowed to work up to 
the age of 65 years. 
Article 224 ‐A which provides for 
appointment of retired Judges at sittings of 
High Courts does not provide. for any age 
limit. 
7. Shri Vinayak 
Madhubani  
 It will deprive the expectations of 
large number of aspirants lawyers 
who are very keen and ambitious 
for post of judgeship of High Court 
As on 30.04.2010, the working Judge 
strength in all the High Courts was 625 
Judges leaving 270 vacancies to be filled up. 
In other words, there are always sufficient 

and also several senior District 
Judges due for retirement at the age 
of 60 years may not be 
elevated/promoted as additional 
judges of High Court, due to 
increase in the age of retirement of 
sitting Judges to 65 years. 
vacancies for elevation of aspiring lawyers 
and senior District Judges. 
8. Shri Vinaya  Shanker 
Mishra 
(i) 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
(iii) 
The present age limit 62 years is   
sufficient, no need to change. 
 
 Vacancies must be filled by new 
selection because our Constitution 
confers equal opportunity to all.  
  
The selection procedure for 
becoming the judge of High Court 
must be changed. The selection 
may take place from BARs and by 
promotions by a competitive 
examination organized by 
Supreme Court and BCI jointly. 
Increase in life expectancy, improved health 
standards, need for utilization of experience 
and wisdom of senior Judges justify increase 
in their retirement age. 
Filling up of vacancies in the High Courts is 
a continuous, consultative process among the 
constitutional authorities. 
The present system for appointment and 
transfer of the Judges of the Supreme Court 
of India and the Judges of the High Courts is 
based on the Supreme Court Judgment of 
October 6, 1993 in the Supreme Court 
Advocates-on-record & Arnr. Vs. Union of 
India, read with advisory opinion of October 
28, 1998. 
9. Shri Tansif Shaikh  The judges should have 
competitive examination so that we 
get brilliant and talented Judges to 
solve public Issues. 
There is no provision of competitive 
examination for selection of judges to the 
higher judiciary in the Constitution of India. 
 
Part-II:   OTHER ISSUES NOT COVERED BY THE BILL 
Sl. No. Name of 
organization/Individual 
Comments/suggestions Response of Government 
1 2 3 4 
1. Shri R.D. Bhardwaj (i)  Like many other spheres, judges 
should also be made accountable and 
pronounce judgments within a specified 
time-frame of 2/3 years and in some 
more complicated cases, to a maximum 
of five years. 
Transparency and accountability in the 
higher judiciary are at present being 
enforced and maintained through an ‘in ‐
house’ system by the peer group. Further, 
the computerization of the courts would 
bring in openness and transparency in the 
working of the courts. 
  (ii)  The rich and powerful party 
should not be allowed to derive the 
 

undue advantage/reliefs due to other 
party’s poor financial position.  
2. Smt. Asha Rao  A non-judicial Forum should be 
established where public/ litigant can 
put forth their grievances. This will 
enable them to register their complaints 
against any judge and get suitable 
remedy.  
 
The Judicial Standards and Accountability 
Bill, 2010 is under consideration which sets 
out the judicial standards to be practiced by 
every Judge, who shall practice universally 
accepted values of judicial life, norms, 
guidelines and conventions essential for 
their conduct and behavior. 
3. Shri R.R. Shenoy (i) The higher judiciary including 
SC and State HC be brought under the 
control of the President, so as to make it 
accountable. The President shall not be 
bound by advice by any Ministry on any 
case. But the President shall have an 
advisory body consisting of Attorney 
General and 5 eminent private lawyers. 
There is a provision in ‘The Judicial 
Standards and Accountability Bill, 2010’ to 
establish a ‘National Judicial Oversight 
Committee’ which will be responsible for 
dealing with complaints relating to 
misbehavior or incapacity of Judges. 
  (ii) All the courts including the 
Supreme Court shall be brought under 
the Right to Information Act, so that 
litigants can know reasons for delay in 
cases filed by them. 
The current programme of computerization 
of courts would bring in openness and 
transparency in the working of the courts. 
  (iii)  Do away with the vacations like 2 
months in summer, diwali vacation etc. 
All courts shall follow working 
hours/days of CV Central Government 
offices.  
 
The question of curtailing/discontinuing the 
vacations in the courts has been considered 
in the past, but it has not been found 
feasible or advisable to do so because of 
the taxing nature of work of the Judiciary 
and the Bar. 
  (iv) A mechanism to evaluate judges 
and suitably punish inefficient, should 
be in place, under the President. 
The Supreme Court and High Courts are 
exercising contempt power as court of 
records under the constitutional provision. 
The primary object of the Contempt of 
Court Act is to maintain dignity of the Court 
and therefore repealing it is not advisable. 
   Contempt of Court Act should be 
repealed. Citizen must have freedom to 
criticize delayed/wrong verdicts by 
courts. 
 
4. Shri Sanjay Kale (i) Govenment should increase the 
daily work hours of Supreme Court and 
High Courts by 30 minutes. The weekly 
The working hours in the Supreme Court 
and High Courts are regulated by the rules 
framed by the respective Courts. However, 

holiday of every Saturday should be 
converted to second and fourth Saturday 
of every month.  
Department of Justice has formulated a 
proposal which inter alia  covers operation 
of morning/ evening / special judicial 
metropolitan magistrates / shift courts to 
facilitate administration of justice in the 
States. 
  (ii) The Government should plan for 
Indian Judiciary Services. Youth talent 
law graduates should be screened 
through UPSC or more tough scrutiny 
test which is away from political 
interference.  
A proposal for creation of  an All India 
Judicial Service is under consideration.  
5. Shri Tansif Shaikh (i) There should be a system’ in 
ground level courts such as how much 
time required to declare a Result. There 
should be “Time Limit” for Result 
declaration. 
or examination while formulating proposals of 
judicial reforms. The ongoing 
computerization of courts through the e ‐
Court project would bring in transparency 
in the working of the courts. 
  (ii) Also there is “Online System” for 
the current and pending issues in the 
courts. 
 
  (iii) A structure which gives us details 
of Judges working, working reports, 
how many cases solved in one month? 
 
  (iv) There should be separate 
department to solve issues like 
corruption in higher and technical 
education such as student vs. 
Management of Engineering, Medical 
Colleges, Students, Youths issues etc. 
 
  (v) There is CET (Common Entrance 
Test) for ‘Advocates’ and ‘Judges’ also. 
There is limitation for taking 
application fees from Advocates. 
 
 
 
 

Part-I : COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE CONSTITUTION (ONE 
HUNDREDAND FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
Clause No. 
 
Sl. No. Name of 
organization/Individual 
Comments/suggestions Response of Government 
1 2 3 4 
11. Dr. Kashinath  Constitution should be amended 
                      V. Chitte                           to extend the services of Judges 
  of High Courts subject to their medical 
fitness. There has to be a Medical Council 
who will formulate the criteria of fitness 
as per the prevailing medical standard of 
our country, giving consideration to the 
age factor. 
12. Shri Vipul B.  The age limit for High Court Judges 
                 Joshi, Chairman,  should be at par with the age limit of 
 Law &, Represen- Supreme Court Judges. Most of the 
                 tation Committee developed countries, retirement age of 
Judges is above 65 years. For example, in 
U.K. and Canada, the retirement age is 75 
years, while for Japan the retirement age 
is 65 years. With the increase in age, there 
is always increase in experience, 
knowledge and wisdom, which are very 
important attribute for a Judge and useful 
to judiciary. 
13.        Shri Biswanath  Nowadays, the average life span  
In view of the general increase in life 
expectancy and improved health standards, 
the proposal to increase the retirement age of 
High Court judges a medical fitness criteria 
does not seem necessary.  
 
 
 
It supports the proposal for increase in the 
retirement age of the High Court Judges.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It supports the proposal for increase in the 
retirement age of the High Court Judges. 

Ganguly of human being has increased a lot due to 
developed medical facilities, high 
standard of living and modern life style. 
An aged and experienced person can give. 
his best and matured opinion/judgment. 
This step will help Government not to 
search such experienced judges from their 
field for another few years and it will also 
help concerned department to reduce their 
work pressure for time being. Extension 
of time will give more opportunity to the 
junior judges for getting promotion in 
their next higher post. Extension of ages 
of the Judges may be awarded subject to 
willingness and mental fitness. There is 
no age limit for the legislators and that is 
accepted. So, the relaxation of age in case 
of Judges may be considered. 
 14. Shri Marthand  The increase in the retirement age 
Singh Chauhan of High Court Judges from 62 to 65 years 
will be in the interest of the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It supports the proposal for increase in the 
retirement age of the High Court Judges.  
15. Shri Krishna  (i)  Another Bill has to be passed to 
 B. Patil  increase the age of retirement of Supreme 
Court Judges from 65 to 68 which may 
decrease quality of work at Supreme 
Court due to old age. It will stop new 
recruitments at lower level, leading to 
unemployment. After increase of age to 
65, efficient work cannot be expected 
from old aged Judges due to huge 
pendency of work at High Courts thereby 
pendency of work will raise and quality of 
work may decrease. 
  (ii)  Instead of incr easing the age of retirement 
of High Court Judges from 62 to 65, 
reduce it to 52 years and that of Supreme 
Court Judges from 65 to 55; 
  (iii)  Appoint young and talented advocates by 
conducting National level Judges 
Recruitment Exam. in similar manner as 
that of Civil Services Exam
As on 30.04.2010, the working Judge 
strength in all the High Courts was 625 
Judges leaving 270 vacancies to be filled up. 
In other words, there are always sufficient 
vacancies for elevation of aspiring lawyers 
and senior District Judges and it will not 
adversely affect the recruitment in 
subordinate judiciary. It would take good 
deal of time to fill up as many as 270 
vacancies. At the current rate of filling up of 
vacant posts, it may take more than 3 years. 
Thus, the opportunities for being appointed 
to the High Court would not be lost. Further, 
the need for utilization of experience and 
wisdom of senior Judges justify the increase 
in their retirement age. 
Reduction in the age of retirement is not 
admissible under proviso to article 221 (2) of 
the Constitution.  
There is no provision of competitive 

 examination for selection of judges to the 
higher judiciary in the Constitution of India.
  
 
 
 
 

16. Shri Sidhu   Increase in the age of retirement  
 Ranjit Singh  is not necessary and it should be sixty 
years only. 
17. Shri B.V. Acharya  (i) There will be no regular vacancies  
 & 59 Others  for the post of High Court Judges for the 
next 3 years and the authorities are totally 
deprived of the opportunity to recruit 
deserving and meritorious candidates. 
 
  (ii) The services of the ‘deadwood’ or those 
who have outlived their utility, but to 
recruit talented new faces based only on 
merit and after a thorough scrutiny of 
their antecedents. 
  (iii) The proposed amendment may be made 
prospective i.e. make it applicable only to 
the judges appointed hereafter. 
18. Shri J.R. Poswal,   The present age of retirement of  
 Advocate  High Court Judges i.e. 62 years is justified 
and reasonable. There is no need to 
increase the same. In case the age of 
retirement is increased, it will amount to 
discourage the aspirants/advocates who 
want to become High Court Judges. After 
the age of 60 years, the physical and 
mental fitness of an individual decreases 
and as such has a bad effect on over all 
performance of the incumbents in old age. 
Increase in the age will not only stop the 
entry of young blood in the judiciary but 
will also badly affect the performance of 
the judiciary in general. 
19. Shri Ishita Das,   There should be a selection
Student, BBA   procedure to 
evaluate the Judges 
 (Hons.) LLB (Hons.)  at the age of 62. 
Reduction in the age of retirement is not 
admissible under proviso to article 221 (2) of 
the Constitution. 
As on 30.04.2010, the working Judge 
strength in all the High Courts was 625 
Judges leaving 270 vacancies to be filled up. 
In other words, there would be sufficient 
vacancies of High Court Judges to be filled 
up in 3 years.  
 
Presently, there is no system where increase 
in the age of retiremen t can be linked to 
performance.  
 
 
It is not permissible.  
 
Increase in life expectancy, improved health 
standards, need for utilization of experience 
and wisdom of senior Judges justify increase 
in their retirement age. There are always 
sufficient vacancies of High Court Judges for 
entry of the experienced advocates. It cannot 
be said that increase in the retirement age 
will adversely affect the judicial 
performance.  
 
 
 
 
 
There is no provision in the Constitution for 
linking age of retirement with performance. 
 

20. Shri Ashok Kumar   Judgments of 65 years aged
Walia, (Conversant   Judges must 
be treated as
of Law)  excellent and 
complied with first in  
   comparison to the other. Salary of Judges 
above 60 years must be reduced 25 per 
cent as they have no 
obligations/responsibilities and they are 
not accountable for fu ture liabilities in 
general after 60 years age. 
21. Shri M.A. Bohra,   The proposed amendment will  
 Advocate  be detrimental to the fresh candidates. 
 
 
22. Shri Amresh B.   Nation is not facing with lack of  
 Sharma, Advocate  good competent judicial officers/district 
judges or competent advocates who could 
be elevated to High Courts. Article 224-A 
provides for appointment of retired Judges 
as sitting Judges of High Court after the 
age of 62 years. There is inequality in age 
of retirement of the High Court Judge and 
that of a District Judge. 
23. Shri Dalu Ram  (i)  The proposed amendment will  
 Patidar  encroach upon the peaceful retired life of 
Judges as at this age, they would 
definitely suffer fro m some kind of 
diseases. The Judges should retire at the 
age of 62 thereafter their services could be 
utilized in Commissions etc. 
  (ii)  This amendment Bill will be a barrier to 
the employment opportunities of young 
aspirants. 
24. Shri Kanta Prasad,   No suggestion offered on the issue 
 District & Sessions   of incr ease in the age of retirement  
 Judge  of Judges in the proposed amendment. 
25. Shri Talwant Singh, (i) In crease in the retirement age  
 
                  Coordinator,   along with increased use of
 
                  Co-ordination                 services of the retired judges can 
The suggestions cannot be accepted for 
obvious reasons.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sufficient vacancies of High Court Judges 
would be available for fresh aspirants in view 
of heavy backlog of vacancies. 
 
There are always sufficient vacancies of 
High Court Judges against which District 
Judges and competent advocates may be 
elevated. Even at present there is a difference 
of age of retirement between a High Court 
Judge and a District Judge. 
 
 
Increase in life expectancy and improved 
health standards belie the suggestion. 
Services of retired Judges after 65 years can 
be utilized in the Commissions, Committees 
etc.  
 
 
There are always sufficient vacancies of 
High Court Judges for young aspirants. 
 
No comments.  
 
 
Article 224-A provides for appointment of 
retired judges at sittings of High Courts.  
 
 
 

 Committee of   positively help a great deal in
Registered lending support to the legal 
system 
 Associations of   and in removing perennial shortage 
 Judicial Officers   of  judges for which alarming
of India, Tis voices are being raised at 
various 
 Hazari Courts, Delhi   forums.    
  (ii) The retirement age of sub-ordinate judges 
should also be suitably enhanced to bring 
it at par with the proposed increase in the 
retirement age of High Court Judges as 
recommended by Justice Shetty 
Commission. The difference in retirement 
age creates a serious impediment in 
matters of promotion/elevation. 
 
26. Shri M.A.  (i) An extension policy would
Rangaswamy,  ordinarily be part of a
Advocate comprehensive review, 
covering  
   recruitment, removal of the unfit and a 
transfer policy. 
 
 
  (ii) A strict screening of Judges of age 55 and 
above for fitness. Those found unfit may 
be pensioned off with a handsome 
handshake. This can be made to help in 
improving the turnover of judges, by 
making it a condition that they will not sit 
in the same court where they have 
practiced for many years. 
27. Shri P.N. (i) The amendment was not based on 
 Ramalingam,   any Law Commission Report, it 
 Advocate-  is only based on the Department  
 on-record,   Related Parliamentary Standing 
 Supreme Court  Committee. The reason for 
recommendation was not based on any 
Committee/Commission, or any public 
grievance, any analysis/survey by any 
agency or at the request from any quarters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order 
dated 21.3.2002 in W.P. (C) No.1022 of 
1989 - All India Judges Association & Ors. 
Vs UOI & Ors. had inter-alia observed that 
“It will not be appropriate seeing the 
Constitu-tional framework with regard to the 
Judiciary, to have an identical age of 
retirement between th e members of the 
Subordinate Judicial Service and a High 
Court.” 
The present system for appointment and 
transfer of the Judges of the Supreme Court 
of India and the Judges of the High Courts is 
based on the Supreme Court Judgment of 
October 6, 1993 in the Supreme Court 
Advocates-on-record & Arnr. Vs. Union of 
India, read with advisory opinion of October 
28, 1998. 
It is not permissible under the provisions of 
the Constitution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The National Commission to Review the 
Working of the Constitution and the Law 
Commission (229th Report - August, 2009) 
have, inter-alia, recommended the increase 
of retirement age of the Judges of the High 
Courts from 62 to 65 years.  
 
 

of the judiciary/judges. 
28. Shri L. Sunil Kumar (i) If the judges retirement age is increased, it 
can lead another unemployment problem 
for the law graduates. The students belong 
to SC/ST community are facing problems 
in getting into the court as lawyers and 
later as the judges. The other minorities 
like Muslims, Christians, Buddhist and 
others are under-represented or sometimes 
unrepresented in this system. So, this 
should be considered. 
 
Appointment of Judges in the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts are made in 
accordance with article 124 (3) and article 
217 (2) of the Constitution of India which 
do not provide for reservation. There are 
always sufficient vacancies of High Court 
Judges for young aspirants. 
  (ii)  The ratio of the judges is low comparing 
to lawyers and the cases where the Judge 
benches have not been increased. 
 
 
 
  (iii) It is well-known that the 
people/population in India above 55 years 
of age are prone to many diseases 
mentally and physically. 
29. Shri R.L. Jangid,   On account of pressure of work,  
 Addl. Advocate   majority of Judges face serious 
 General, Rajasthan  ailments and diseases. The IAS, IPS and 
other high rank officer s are retired at the 
age of 60 years.  
 
30. Shri Prateek Gupta  There is tendency amongst senior High 
Court Judges to start lobbying for 
elevation to the Supreme Court as it 
ensures a longer tenure. Some Judges 
nearing retirement indulge in parleys and 
negotiations so as to seek appointments in 
tribunals and commissions and have a 
secure post-retirement life. Such practices 
should be disallowed as it impinges upon 
the image and credentials of the Judge and 
the judiciary as a whole.  
31. Dr. D.C.   The Judges are short in relation  
 Bhattacharyya  to the backlo g of cases in the High Court 
and they feel overburdened and have been 
working under acute wo rk pressure. It has 
The Judge strength is periodically reviewed 
keeping in view the institution, pendency and 
disposal of cases. One such review is due and 
likely to be undertaken short1y. The Judge 
strength is not fixed with reference to 
number of Lawyers or the Benches of High 
Courts. 
Increase in life expectancy and improved 
health standards belie the suggestion.  
 
 
The averment that majority of judges face 
serious ailments and diseases is not correct. 
One of the reasons for increase in the 
retirement age of judges is the increase in the 
retirement age of the AIS officers made in 
May, 1998. 
The suggestions go in favour of the proposal.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The need to enhance the age of retirement of 
High Court Judges by 3 more years has been 
necessitated to restrict occurrence of new 
vacancies on account of superannuation for 

also been not possible for Chief Justice of 
High Court to constitute 5 Judge benches 
on a regular basis to hear cases involving 
interpretation of the Constitutional law, as 
doing that would result in constitution of 
less number of Division benches, which, 
in turn, will result in delay in hearing of 
other civil and criminal matters. 
32. Shri Praveen   The proposed amendment is
Vyapari, Co undesirable and unwarranted
ordinator-Group under the present 
circumstances 
the next three years during which time the 
existing backlog in vacancies could be 
cleared. This would have a clear impact on 
reduction of pendency of cases in the High 
Courts. 
 
The number of advocates has no relation 
with the number of judges appointed from 
Bar. 
 on Legislations  when the influx in the profession of 
practice of law has increased multi-fold 
and the strength of the Judges appointed 
from the Bar is not proportionately 
increased across the country. 
33. Prof. K.   Only those judges with a good 
Chandrasekharan   record of 
performance alone be
Pillai, former   given the 
benefit of extension of 
 Director, ILI  service from 62-65 years. 
34. Shri M. Rajender  (i)  The proposed amendment should  
 Reddy, Advocate,   be based on the integrity, conduct 
 Member, BCI  and efficiency of the individual judge. It 
should not benefit all Judges. 
  (ii) In case of enhancement of age from 62 
years, there should be recommendation 
from the Supreme Court and the Govt. 
should take final decision which will be 
final otherwise it will be difficult to 
impeach the corrupt Judges. 
35. Shri Hiro Rai &   The proposal will have a 
Vipul B. Joshi, favourable impact on the 
high Advocates, Income pendency of 
cases before the High 
 Tax Appellate   Courts. Several retired Judges of 
 Tribunal Bar   High Courts are rendering valuable 
 Association, Mumbai. services in various forums. Even after 
attaining the age of 62 years they are able 
and competent to exercise these functions.
 
 
 
 
 
The suggestion/classification will amount to 
discrimination among Judges. Besides, the 
Constitutional provisions do not permit to fix 
such criteria. 
 
The benefit of increase in the retirement age 
cannot be linked to the integrity, conduct and 
efficiency of a Judge.  
 
The suggestion cannot be accepted.  
 
 
 
 
 
It supports the proposal for increase in the 
retirement age of the High Court Judges. 

OTHER ISSUES NOT COVERED BY THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND 
FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
Part-II : 
Sl. No. Name of 
organization/Individual 
Comments/suggestions Response of Government 
1 2 3 4 
 
6.              Shri Sidhu  (i) Introduction of fresh and new 
 Ranjit Singh  talent in the system, to keep the 
system fresh and young. 
                                         (ii) Saturday and Sunday off or any two 
holidays per week. If public holidays 
overtake Sat-Sun, then Sat-Sun will 
be a working day. 
                                       (iii) Introduction of photo on the net, area 
of job, type of expertise in job 
(Judges). 
                                        (iv) Introduction of Talent Search Team 
(TST) to trace/find best talent, or fit 
for the job, without any pre-condition. 
Provisions already exist in the Constitution 
for appointment of advocates as High Court 
Judges. 
The working hours/holidays in the Supreme 
Court and High Courts are regulated by the 
rules framed by the respective Courts. 
 
This is for higher judiciary to decide.  
 
 
No such proposal is under consideration. 
7. Shri Marthand                 Certain High Courts are still 
Singh Chauhan  functioning in old 
buildings. They  
                          should be housed in the latest building 
with all infrastructure and logistic 
facilities.  
A Centrally Sponsored Scheme relating to 
development of infrastructural facilities for 
the judiciary since 1993 ‐94 is being 
implemented with a view to augment the 
resources of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations. The scheme includes 
construction of court buildings and 
residential accommodation for 
Judges/Judicial Officers covering High 
Courts and Subordinate Courts. 
8. Shri J.R. Poswal,                The procedure to appoint the high  
 Advocate                court judges is defaulted one therefore 
there should be a written test and 
thorough medical examination before 
appointment. There are many 
instances where a -person who failed 
to become Civil Judge (Jr. 
Divn.)/Addl. Sessions Judge 
ultimately become High Court Judge 
without facing any interview.  
The present system for appointment of the 
Judges of the Supreme Court of India and 
the Judges of the High Courts is based on 
the Supreme Court Judgment of October 6, 
1993 in the Supreme Court Advocates ‐on‐
record & Am. Vs. Union of India, read with 
advisory opinion of October 28, 1998. 
There, is no provision of competitive 
examination for selection of judges to the 
higher judiciary in the Constitution of India. 

The existing procedure of appointment of 
judges has a requirement for medical 
fitness. 
9. Shri M.A. Bohra,                Instead of raising the retiring age,  
 Advocate                existing vacancies should be filled in 
accordance with the Constitutional 
provisions. The procedure for 
appointment of judges should be 
modified so that Judges are not 
appointed on the castes, community, 
etc. Only 10% -25% of the Judges are 
utilizing the modem techniques and 
they do not have knowledge of 
computers.  
There is sufficient backlog of vacancies of 
High Court Judges for young aspirants. 
Filling up of vacancies is a continuous 
process, as vacancies keep arising due to 
retirement, resignation, elevation of 
Judges, etc. The Government make all 
efforts to fill in the vacancies of the Judges 
in accordance with laid down procedures. A 
training of computer and other modern 
techniques is imparted to the serving 
Judges from time to time. 
10. Shri Kanta Prasad,                Process of Collegium and selection 
 District & Sessions                of the puisne judge of High Court 
 Judge               is no t transparent. There is no test to 
examine their ability. Public cannot 
know what is the special quality in 
the person who is recommended. That 
is under the cover of confidentiality. 
The procedure for appointment of 
Hon’ble Judge of High Court is not 
amended as required by the change of 
time. So, there is a need of a 
comprehensive legislation for the 
appointment of judges. It has been 
experienced that each and High 
Court, there is gender bias. It cannot 
be said that females are not so 
competent to be appointed as a Judge, 
but the judiciary is male dominant. 
People of SC and ST are not 
recommended on the basis of non-
availability, but the position is 
contrary to it. Females, Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and 
Backward Class are not sufficiently 
represented in the judiciary and as 
such, they are not getting fair justice. 
Amendment of article 124 is required. 
Judicial officers are very much 
experienced. For appointments under 
article 217, at least their percentage of 
quota must be 50%. The age of 
Appointment of Judges in the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts are made in 
accordance with Article 124 (3) and Article 
217 (2) of the Constitution of India. 

retirement of the district judges must 
be increased to 65 years on the same 
principle applicable to High Court 
Judges. 
11. Shri P.N.                Clause 2(b) of article 217 must  
 Ramalingam,                be amended to include a condition 
 Advocate-on-record,               for appointment that any period 
 Supreme Court               during which the person has held 
judicial office or the office of a 
member of a tribunal or any post 
under the Union or a State requiring 
special knowledge of law after he 
became an advocate. 
This requires Constitutional amendment. 
12. Shri R.L. Jangid,                The minimum age of High Court  
 Addl. Advocate                Judges should not be less than 55 
 General, Rajasthan               years which can be said to be a 
matured and most experienced age. 
Hence, there is a need for amending 
clause (1) of article 217 and clause 
(3) of article 224 of the Constitution 
by prescribing minimum age for 
appointment. 
The Constitution does not provide for any 
such minimum age. The Government is not 
considering any such proposal at the 
movement.  
13. Shri Praveen               (i) The cry of the Hour is more 
         Vyapari, Co-                benches of the High Courts in  
        ordinator-Group                 different States of the Union. The 
 on Legislations                long pending suggestion of 
constituting Courts of Appeal in Four 
Regional Centres is worth considering 
which would see the need of more 
judges being appointed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                        (ii) The Constitution does not prescribe 
the age of appointment of an 
Advocate as Judge of High Court and 
Setting up of a Bench of a High Court is 
considered only if a complete proposal in 
terms of section 51(2) of the States’ 
Reorganisation Act, 1956 is received from 
the State Government concerned, including 
the consent of the Chief Justice of the High 
Court and the Governor of the State and also 
if it satisfies the broad guidelines and criteria 
recommended by the Jaswant Singh 
Commission. 
According to the article 130 of the 
Constitution, the Supreme Court shall sit in 
Delhi or in such other place or place as the 
Chief Justice of India may, with the approval 
of the President, from time to time, appoint. 
The Supreme Court has not favoured 
creation of a Bench away from its principal 
seat at Delhi. 
The appointment of advocates as Judges of a 
High Court was considered in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India. No advocate 

merely prescribes the age of 
retirement.  
                                      (iii)  The method of appointment is non--
transparent and no change has been 
prescribed for that. It requires 
consideration prescribing not only the 
criteria of appoint-ment but also 
fixing an age for entry in the seat of 
Judgeship of the High Court which 
ought not to be lower than 52 years or 
practice of law of at least 30 years. 
While fixing the age of appoint-ment 
at 52 years, the age of superannuation 
could be reduced to 60 years which is 
2 years more than the district judges. 
who is less than 45 years of age is considered 
for appointment as a Judge of High Court.  
The existing procedure for appointment of 
Judges of the Supreme Court and the High 
Courts is based on the Supreme Court 
Judgment of October 6, 1993 in the case of 
Supreme Court Advocates-on-record & Arnr. 
Vs. Union of India, and the advisory opinion 
of the Supreme Court dated October 28, 
1998. There is, at pr esent, no specific 
proposal to bring about any change in the 
present system of appointment of Judges in 
the Supreme Court and the High Courts. 
14. Prof. K.              (i) There is no mechanism in our  
 Chandrasekharan                 system to review the judicial work  
 Pillai, former                done by HC Judges. There should 
 Director, ILI                 be an audit of the work carried out by 
each HC Judge in our country before 
the proposed amendment is passed. 
There should be a provision for 
appointing a “Performance Review 
Commission” to undertake the review 
of the performance of each HC Judge 
in the proposed amendment. 
                                        (ii) There are judges who do not write 
judgments. The non-performing 
judges might be asked to step down 
by giving them adequate pensionary 
benefits. 
The concept of Performance Review 
Commission in respect of Judges is not 
provided in the Constitution. An appeal 
against an order passed by a High Court 
Judge always lies in the Supreme Court.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is not permissible under the provisions of 
the Constitution.  
15. Shri M. Rajender              (i) State Governments may be  
         Reddy, Advocate,                directed to enhance the retirement 
 Member, BCI                age of the members of subordinate 
judiciary from 60 to 63.  
 
 
 
 
                                        (ii) Introduce the system of process of 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order 
dated 21.3.2002 in W.P. (C) No.1022 of 
1989 All India Judges Association & Ors. Vs 
UOI & Ors. had inter alia observed that “It 
will not be appropriate seeing the 
Constitutional framework with regard to the 
Judiciary, to have an identical age of 
retirement between th e members of the 
Subordinate Judicial Service and a High 
Court.” 
Filling up of vacancies in the High Courts is 

filling up the vacant posts of Hon’ble 
Judges in the respective High Courts 
and appoint the judges even before 
the vacancy arises. 
 
 
 
  (iii) The Govt. should also fix an 
appointment age of HC Judges, no 
HC Judge shall be appointed before 
the age of 50 years.
 
a continuous, consultative process among the 
Constitutional authorities. 
Government has been periodically reminding 
the Chief Justices of High Courts, Chief 
Justice of India and the Chief Ministers of 
the States to initiate proposals for filling up 
all vacant posts of judges in the High Courts. 
The Constitution does not provide for any 
such minimum age for appointment as a 
Judge of the High Court. However, no 
Advocate is considered for appointment as a 
Judge of High Court if he/she is below 45 
years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 