 
 
                                 
 
 
          PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
          RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
   135 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON "DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)" 
PERTAINING TO 
THE DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING 
(MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2023) 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2023) 
 

 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs 
 

 3 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                            6-8 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                    9 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                              10-20 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                   21-48 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                  49-53 
                                                                                    
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                                 54-56                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M.C.Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
3.  Smt. Indira Chaturvedi, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
5. Ms. Chinmayee Chakravarty, Assistant Committee Officer 
___________ 
 

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred 
Thirty Fifth Report (135th) on Action Taken on One Hundred and Twenty Sixth 
(126th) Report of the Committee on "Demands for Grants (2023-24)" pertaining to the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions.  
2. The One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 
Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha on 15 th March, 2023 and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on the 20th March, 2023.  
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions, furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report of the 
Committee on 22nd June, 2023 . The Committee considered the draft One Hundred 
Thirty Fifth Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 07th December, 2023. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
11th December, 2023      SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
                                                       Chairman, 
                                                         Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
                                                       Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                               Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 

 6 
ACRONYMS 
 
ACC   Appointments Committee of the Cabinet   
ACWG   Anti-Corruption Working Group 
AGMUT  Arunachal Pradesh-Goa-Mizoram and Union Territory 
ASIs Assistant Sub-Inspectors 
BE   Budget Estimates 
CAT   Central Administrative Tribunal  
CAPF   Central Armed Police Forces 
CBC   Capacity Building Commission 
CBI   Central Bureau of Investigation   
CCA   Cadre Controlling Authority 
CCS    Central Civil Services 
CET Common Eligibility Test 
CIC    Central Information Commission   
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CPGRAMS   Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CPSE   Central Public Sector Enterprise 
CRC  Cadre Review Committee 
CSCS                         Central Secretariat Clerical Service 
CSE   Civil Services Examination   
CSOI    Civil Services Officers' Institute   
CSS   Central Staffing Scheme   
CSSS  Central Secretariat Stenographers Service  
CTV   Centralized Technology Vertical 
CVC    Central Vigilance Commission   
DARPG  Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
DFFT    Domestic Funding for Foreign Training 
DJB   Delhi Jal Board 
DoE   Department of Expenditure 
DoFS   Department of Financial Services 

 7 
DoP   Department of Posts 
DoPPW  Department of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare 
DoPT   Department of Personnel and Training 
DPC Departmental Promotion Committee 
DR Direct Recruitment 
EO    Establishment Officer   
EPF   Employees' Provident Fund 
EPFO   Employees' Provident Fund Organization   
ESIC   Employees' State Insurance Corporation 
GoI   Government of India 
GSL   Goa Shipyard Limited 
HAL   Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
IAS   Indian Administrative Service 
IBPS Institute of Banking and Personnel Selection 
IFS                             Indian Forest Service 
iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training 
ICEFS   International Centre for Excellence in Forensic Sciences 
ICEI   International Centre for Excellence in Investigation 
IIPA   Indian Institute of Public Administration  
IPS                             Indian Police Service 
IR   Information Right 
ISTM    Institute of Secretariat Training & Management   
JCM    Joint Consultative Machinery   
LBSNAA   Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration 
MCD   Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
MCTP Mid-Career Training Programme 
MDL Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders 
MH Major Head 
MIDHANI Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited 
MoF Minister of Finance 
MoS Minister of State 

 8 
NCGG   National Centre for Good Governance   
NDMC  New Delhi Municipal Committee 
NeGP   National e-Governance Plan   
NPCSCB   National Programme for Civil Services Capacity Building 
NRA National Recruitment Agency 
O&M   Organisation and Method 
OBCs   Other Backward Classes 
PESB    Public Enterprises Selection Board 
RE   Revised Estimates 
RRB Railway Recruitment Board 
RRFAMS  Recruitment rules formulation, Amendment Monitoring System 
RRs Recruitment Rules 
RTI    Right to Information 
S&V    Services & Vigilance   
SCS  State Civil Services 
SCs   Scheduled Castes 
SIs   Sub-Inspectors 
SSC    Staff Selection Commission   
STs   Scheduled Tribes 
UNCAC                     United Nations Convention Against Corruption 
UPSC    Union Public Service Commission  
UTs   Union Territories 
 
  

 9 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions on the recommendations / 
observations of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred and Twenty Sixth  
(126th) Report on "Demands for grant (2023 -24)", which was presented to the Rajya 
Sabha on 15th March, 2023 and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 20th March, 
2023. 
2. The Committee had made 34 recommendations/observations in its 126th   
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized 
under three chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have 
been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations (9) which have b een accepted by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.8, 2.14, 2. 17, 2.50, 3.9, 4.16, 
4.20, 6.4 and 6.10 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note 
that the Department has accepted those recommendations.  
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations ( 22) which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. in 
respect of paras 2.53, 3.3, 3.4, 3.7, 3.11, 3.15, 4.4 , 4.8, 4.11, 4.17, 
5.7, 5.8, 6.7, 6.13, 6.20, 6.21, 6.25, 6.26, 6.31, 6.32, 6.37 and 6.38 of 
the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the explanations 
advanced by the Department and does not wish to pursue those as of 
now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations ( 3) in respect of which Committee 
has not accept ed the replies of the Department, i.e. with regard to 
paras 4.5, 4.10 and 6.17 of the Report. The Committee does not 
accept the reasons given by the Department and reiterates the same. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapter s in the 
succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e. of 
126th Report) have been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
--- 
 

 10 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.0 The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions apprised the 
Committee that it had projected an outlay of 2996.89 crore to the Ministry of Finance 
during the Pre -Budget Meeting under Demand no.74 for BE 2 023-24. However, the 
Finance Ministry sanctioned an outlay of 2207.74 crore, i.e only 73.66% of the 
projected outlay. The Committee is of the opinion that the pattern and extent of 
utilization of funds by the Ministry during the current fiscal influences t he allocation 
of funds during the next fiscal. A careful scrutiny of the expenditure pattern of the 
Ministry over the years makes it clear that the Ministry has not been able to fully 
utilize the outlay sanctioned to it. For instance, the Ministry was sanc tioned an outlay 
of 2337.18 crore in BE 2022 -23. The Ministry has been able to spend only 1753.15 
crore till 31st January, 2023. This slow pace of expenditure contributed to the 
reduction in allocation made to the Ministry at RE stage. The Committee, there fore, 
urges the Ministry to take necessary measures to enhance the utilization rate to 100% 
in the upcoming fiscal so as to avoid any reduction in allocation.         (Para 2.8) 
 
Action Taken 
1.1   Against the RE 2022 -23 allocations of 2320.37 Cr., the actual expenditure 
incurred in FY 2022-23 was 2280.59 Cr. (98.30%).  
A conscious effort is being made to fully utilise  the allocated budget in FY 2023 -24 
and for this purpose, expenditure trends are being closely monitored regularly by 
Heads of various organisations as well as by the Senior Officers of the Department.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.2 The Committee notes th at the performance of the three Departments of the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the fiscal front needs to be 
improved. While DoPT has been able to utilize only 75% of the funds allocated to it 
till 31st January 2023, the other t wo Departments performed no better. In view of the 

 11 
Finance Ministry’s instructions imposing a ceiling limit on the expenditure that can be 
incurred in the last quarter and last month, the Committee feels that the Departments 
will not be able to optimally u tilize the remaining funds by the end of the ongoing 
fiscal year. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to look into the reasons for 
slow pace of utilization of funds and corrective measures as per fixed timelines may 
be taken.                     (Para 2.14) 
Action Taken 
1.3 Pace of expenditure during the initial part of the FY 2022 -23 was on the slower 
side. However, against the RE 2022 -23 allocations of 2320.37 Cr., the actual 
expenditure incurred in FY 2022-23 was 2280.59 Cr. (98.30%).  
The suggestions by the Committee have been duly noted and measures to achieve 
higher pace and quality of expenditure are being implemented by various 
organizations of the Department to ensure an even pace of expenditure. The pace and 
quality of expenditure of all Departmental organizations is being closely monitored at 
senior levels in the organisations as well as in the Department, regularly.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.4 The Committee notes that SPV Karmayogi Bharat is the only institution under 
DoPT to have utilized 99% of the funds allocated to it. The Committee observes that 
Capacity Building Commission and ISTM have not been able to utilize the allocated 
funds optimally. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensio ns to keep a constant watch and monitor the spending pattern 
of the institutions under its administrative control on quarterly basis to ensure that the 
allocated funds are fully utilized.            (Para 2.17) 
Action Taken 
1.5 The recommendation regarding  utilization of funds allocated to the 
organizations in an optimal manner in the FY 2023 -24 has been noted for 
compliance. 
Expenditure pattern of the organizations are being monitored at all levels on the 
regular basis to ensure compliance. 
 

 12 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.6 The Committee observes that there is an inordinate delay in the disposal of 
vigilance cases inspite of timelines being stipulated for each and every stage, right 
from the stage of receipt of complaint to finalization of disci plinary action. On being 
asked about the causes of such delays, the Commission informed that delay is mainly 
at the stage of further processing of vigilance cases after the Commission has tendered 
its First Stage Advice (FSA). The Commission further said t hat there is delay on the 
part of the respective departments/organizations in initiating departmental action and 
taking further steps to bring the cases to logical conclusion. In view of the above, the 
Committee recommends the Central Vigilance Commission to create a Dashboard on 
its website reflecting the status of each case right from the stage of filing of complaint 
to its disposal. This will not only ensure transparency but will also facilitate real time 
tracking of the status of complaint. The Committe e further recommends CVC to use 
data mining tools, time stamping and artificial intelligence methods to monitor delays 
in the processing of cases. Central Vigilance Commission may, accordingly, seek 
additional resources for the abovementioned purposes at R E stage, as per the 
requirement.                    (Para 2.50) 
Action Taken 
1.7 The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) has in place a Dashboard on its 
intranet to track progress of vigilance cases and implementation of advice tendered 
by the Commission to the respective organizations. Through the Dashboard, status of 
each individual c ase is monitored on real time basis. In case of any delay in 
disciplinary action by the respective authorities, the matter is taken up with them for 
bringing cases to logical conclusion expeditiously. In addition, the Commission also 
calls for online perfo rmance reports from CVOs on quarterly basis, which contains 
updated information about all complaints/cases initiated and finalized during that 
quarter. The reports are scrutinized in the Commission and clarification/explanation 
is sought from the organization concerned in case any delay is observed.  
Insofar as complaints are concerned, the Commission launched an updated Complaint 
Management System (CMS) Portal on 03.11.2022, which enables the complainants to 
lodge complaints online and to track status of t heir complaints on real time basis. The 
complaints received in physical form are also uploaded and processed through CMS 
portal only. In respect of complaints forwarded by the Commission to the Chief 
Vigilance Officers (CVOs) concerned, they are required t o update information about 
action taken on such complaints, on CMS portal.    

 13 
The Commission agrees with the recommendation of the Committee for seeking 
additional resources for upgradation of the Dashboard. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.8 The Committee notes that a large number of IAS officers are not filing 
Annual Immovable Property Returns. The Committee also notes that India is a 
signatory to the United Nations Convention against Corruption which mandates the 
state parties to establish and promote eff ective practices aimed at the prevention of 
corruption. The Committee further notes that DoPT is the nodal Department for anti -
corruption including the matters concerning UNCAC. Keeping the wider 
ramifications of corruption in public administration in mind , the Committee 
recommends the Central Government to constitute a Committee to examine the issue 
of Non -submission of Annual Immovable Property Returns by public servants in 
detail. The Committee also feels that DoPT should put a mechanism in place to chec k 
the veracity of the property return statement filed by public servants.              (Para 3.9) 
 
Action Taken 
1.9 As per extant rules and instructions, every member of the service is required to 
submit an annual immovable property return by 31 st January of the next year. Failure 
on the part of the members of the Service to comply with the requirements of the 
aforesaid provisions constitutes good and sufficient reason for institution of 
disciplinary proceedings, among other things as provided in t his Department's OM 
NO.104/33/2005-AVD-1 dated 29.10.2007 and 07.09.2011, against them.   
             Based on the recommendations of the 122 nd Report, an Expert Committee 
consisting of 3 senior IAS officers of DoPT, of the level of Additional Secretary t o 
Govt. of India, had been constituted. A meeting on the issue of non -filing of IPR by 
IAS officers was convened on 31 st May, 2023 wherein the matter was discussed in 
detail. It was observed by this Expert Committee that the data available from the 
online IPR filing portal requires extensive purification, as names of many officers 
who are not currently in service due to retirement/VRS/dismissal etc. and those 
officers who are not in the country presently (due to Study Leave etc.) are appearing 
in the list of defaulting officers, thereby inflating the extent of non -compliance. Prima 
facie, it appears that there are around 35 such officers whose names are thus featuring 
as defaulters in filing IPR of 2022, erroneously. Hence, it was decided to get this data 

 14 
corrected and purified with the help of a Sub Group of officers of the concerned 
Divisions dealing with the matter within DoPT.  
1.9.2.         It is further submitted that it was also noted by the Expert Committee that 
Vigilance Clearance is being denied to  officers who have failed to ensure timely 
filing of IPRs for the relevant year. The following table illustrates the number of 
officers who have been denied Vigilance Clearance on this ground.  
 
Year 2020 2021 2022 
No. of cases where VC has been denied due  to non-
filing of IPR 
11 14 14 
 
1.9.3.      Note was taken of the special drive undertaken by DoPT for updation of 
missing IPRs due to non -filing of the same in the previous years by officers, by 
opening a window of two months last year in 2022 from 15.07.2022 to 14.09.2022, 
wherein 404 offi cers updated their previously missing IPRs. A similar window is 
going to be provided this year from 15.06.2023 to 14.07.2023 in a similar manner. 
However, it was directed by the Expert Committee that the status of any such IPRs 
filed later as part of a spe cial drive, shall continue to be considered as ‘Delayed 
Filing’, unless explicit relaxation is granted.  
 
1.9.4.   Finally, the Expert Committee made the following recommendations and 
decided to hold another meeting shortly to review the compliance with respect to its 
recommendations and make a further roadmap for a lasting resolution of the matter, 
as recommended by the DRPSC.  
 Recommendations of Expert Committee for implementation by DoPT:  
A. For officers who are not physically located in the country at the time of filing of 
the IPR, the EO (PR) division may notify a dedicated official email which may be 
duly publicized amongst officers, where such officers can email the scanned copies of 
their IPRs duly filled and the same may be reflected as on -time filing of IPR provided 
the same is received from the officer within the online IPR filing deadline.  
B. SMS alerts and  email reminders may be sent to all officers at least thrice before 
the due date (31 st January) for online submission of IPR in order to aid them in 

 15 
ensuring timely compliance. The concerned EO(PR) division was directed to explore 
the technical aspects of  introducing this feature and initiate the same after due 
approvals.  
C. The GADs/Personnel Departments of the State Governments and the Admin. 
Divisions of various Central Government bodies/ Ministries/Departments may be 
sensitized to reach out to officer s through concerned Nodal Officers notified for this 
purpose, to remind and encourage them to file their IPR online, on time, when the 
deadline for the same is nearing.  
 
 Recommendations regarding Policy-level changes:  
A. The possibility of shifting of th e deadline of online submission of IPR from 1 st - 
31 st January to 1 st - 30 th April may be explored in order to bring the IPR filing 
process in greater sync with the Income Tax and APAR filing cycles and promote 
easier compliance and greater accuracy of  the information being provided by the 
officers.  
 
B. It is recommended that the provision mandating the timely submission of IPR for 
being promoted to next higher grade applicable to the officers of the All India 
Services may be made applicable to officer s of all Central Government services so as 
to ensure uniform standards of transparency, accountability and probity. Thus, all 
present and future (if any) mechanisms to promote greater compliance regarding 
timely filing of IPR should be applicable uniformly  to all officers of the Central Civil 
Services.  
The action on all the above observations/recommendations of the Expert Committee, 
formulated in compliance to the directions of the 122nd and 126th Report of the 
DRPSC, has already been initiated. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.10 The Chairman of National Recruitment Agency informed the Committee that 
NRA is undertaking a detailed study of examination practices so that the problems 

 16 
encountered by other recruitment agencies are addressed ab initio. The  Committee 
recommends NRA to hold consultations with stakeholders and weigh the pros and 
cons of existing system of multiple examinations and the proposed system of single 
examination and evolve a model that strikes a harmonious balance between the two. 
The Committee hopes that these fundamental issues are addressed at the earliest and 
the first common eligibility Test would be held soon.            (Para 4.16) 
Action Taken 
1.11 Noted for compliance. NRA will continue to conduct study of examinations 
practices in various States/ Organization including consultation with stakeholders.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
 
1.12  The Committee notes that there is a huge gender gap in top managerial 
posts in Public Sector Enterprises. The Committee was apprised that  there are only 7% 
women in the eligible pool for Board level posts in CPSEs and that the percentage of 
women at Board level is barely 8%. The Committee is of the considered opinion that 
gender equality is paramount for an inclusive and accountable public administration 
and is in line with the Government’s policy of Nari Shakti. Since DoPT is the nodal 
agency for matters relating to Personnel Management, the Committee recommends 
that the Department should hold consultations with stakeholders and look into t he 
reasons for under representation of women in leadership and decision making 
positions and take appropriate steps to eliminate factors hindering their ascent.  
                         (Para 4.20) 
Action Taken 
1.13  Recommendation/ observations contained in 126th Report has been noted. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
 
1.14  The Committee while appreciating the Central Government for undertaking 
the much needed comprehensive cadre restructuring of the CBI, feels that vacancies 
in CBI are not being filled up at the required pace. The Committee is of the opinion 
that vacancies i n the Cadres of Executive ranks, Law officers and technical officers 
will unquestionably increase pendency of cases, hamper the quality of investigation 
and ultimately impact the effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency. In view of the 
above, the Committ ee recommends that every effort should be made to fill up 

 17 
vacancies at the earliest. The Committee impresses upon the Staff Selection 
Commission to avoid delays in furnishing dossiers/nominations to the CBI. The 
Committee further recommends that the Direct or of CBI should monitor the progress 
made in filling up of vacancies on quarterly basis and take necessary measures to 
ensure that the organization is sufficiently staffed.              (Para 6.4) 
Action Taken 
1.15  The vacancy position is being reviewed by the CBI regularly. The 
following steps have been taken to fill up vacancies in different quotas (Deputation / 
Direct/ Promotion) : 
( A )  Deputation : 
 JD/DIG/SP:- Vacancies in the rank of JD/DIG/SP under deputation quota are 
filled up with a regular follow up with the State Governments for nominations of 
SP, DIG and Joint Director for deputation. All branches of CBI are regularly 
tasked to identify officers for deputation. 
 Dy.SP/Inspr./Ct.:- To fill up vacancies in various ranks under the Deputation 
Quota, Circulars/Advertisements were issued/published for inviting applications 
for filling up of various gazetted and non-gazetted posts. 
 Induction of officials of CPOs / State Police/Banks etc. in CBI on deputation 
basis is an ongoing process. Requisition is regularly sent to their parent 
departments for furnishing service particulars, ACR folders, etc. of willing 
personnel. 
 Pool of selection of personnel has been expand ed. Requests have been sent to 
Banks/MHA/NABARD/ SIDBI/IDBI/Additional Deputy Comptroller and 
Auditor General (Human Resources and Local bodies) for sponsoring names of 
Inspector for deputation in CBI. 
 Requests have been sent to DGs of CPOs, CBIT & Customs , Commissioner of 
Police, Delhi and Cabinet Secretariat for sponsoring names of Inspectors for 
deputation in CBI. 
 Personnel in the rank of Constable from various CPOs/State Police are being 
regularly inducted from the panel received. 

 18 
 Proposals have been se nt to UPSC for induction of suitable officers in various 
Technical ranks in CBI. 
 Due to these efforts the following inductions in different ranks were made from 
1.1.2022 to 31.12.2022:- 
Rank Number 
Joint Director 01 
Dy. Inspr. Genl. of Police 04 
Supdt. of Police 09 
Dy. Supdt. of Police 11 
Inspector of Police 55 
Constable 228 
Total 308 
 
 
 
( B ) Direct Recruitment:- 
 
 Requisitions were/are being made to Recruiting Agencies i.e. UPSC/SSC for 
filling up of the posts under the Direct Recruitment quota for  Law Officer, Sub -
Inspector, LDC & Stenographers. 
 Due to these efforts, the following Direct Recruitment in different ranks were 
made from 1.1.2022 to 31.12.2022:- 
Rank Number 
Public Prosecutor  38 
Asstt. Public Prosecutor 26 
Steno Grade-II 05 
Jr. Hindi Translator 02 
Sub-Inspector 47 
Lower Division Clerk 36 
MTS 20 
Washboy 01 
Total 175 
 

 19 
(C) Promotion:- 
 DPCs were held for promotion of officers/officials in various ranks.  
 The following promotions in different ranks were made from 1.1.2022 to 
31.12.2022:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, observations of the Committee regarding monitoring the progress made in 
filling up of vacancies on quarterly basis have been noted for compliance.  
As per Staff Selection Commission (SSC) , the timeline for completion of all stages 
of recruitment process may vary from examination to examination. Sending of 
dossiers/ nominations to the user Departments/ organizations constitutes the last stage 
of the recruitment process. 
In the mission mode of recruitment, SSC prioritized various activit ies related to 
recruitment with a view to complete the entire exercise within 9 -12 months. 
Rank Number 
Dy. Inspr. Genl. Of 
Police 
07 
Sr. Supdt. of Police 12 
Supdt. of Police 30 
Addl. Supdt. of Police 67 
Dy. Supdt. of Police 76 
Inspector of Police 137 
Sub-Inspector 28 
Asstt. Sub-Inspector 91 
Head Constable 78 
Dy. Legal Adviser 16 
Sr. Public Prosecutor 28 
Public Prosecutor 02 
Office Superintendent 14 
Crime Assistant 26 
Upper Division Clerk 52 
Lower Division Clerk 04 
Sr. Private Secretary 14 
Private Secretary 10 
Steno Grade-I 86 
Sr. System Analyst 01 
TOTAL 779 

 20 
Since Document verification is now going to be done by the User Departments/ 
Agencies, the process of dossier nominations is going to be expedited.  
As per the result s declared during the last three years, of all the mandated 
examinations except MTS, CBI had reported 254 vacancies against which the 
Commission made 254 nominations. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
1.16  The Committee, in its previous Reports, had expressed its displeasure 
over the slow pace of utilization of funds by CBI. The Committee is of the considered 
opinion that underutilization of funds often contribute to reduction in the allocation 
made at the RE stage and consequently in the Budget Estimates of ne xt fiscal year 
also. The Committee notes that state of the art Projects of CBI such as Centralized 
Technology Vertical, International Centre of Excellence in Investigation and 
International Centre of Excellence in Forensic Sciences are yet to take off. The  
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that a robust monitoring mechanism 
should be set up in the CBI to monitor the pace of utilization of funds and 
implementation of pending schemes and projects.         (Para 6.10) 
Action Taken 
1.17       Noted for compliance.  
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 21 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.0 The Committee notes that Union Public Service Commission spends almost 
half of its sanctioned outlay only for the purpose of conduct of Examinations. The 
Committee was given to understand that, approximately, 32.39 lakh candidates applied 
for examinations conducted by UPSC in 2022 -23. However, only 16.82 lakh 
candidates, (51.95 %) actually appeared for examinations. For instance, 11.35 lakh 
candidates applied for Civil Services Examination in 2022 but only 5.73 lakh 
Candidates (50.51%) actually appeared for  the examination. UPSC also  apprised the 
Committee that the increase in RE 2022 -23 is mainly to meet additional expenditure 
on conduct of Examinations and Selections due to increase in number of 
candidates/Exam Venues, number of Exam functionaries. The Co mmittee recommends 
UPSC to furnish the details of examination fee collected from the candidates during 
the last five years, year -wise. The Commission may also provide the details of 
expenditure incurred by it on the conduct of the examinations for the same  period. The 
Committee also recommends UPSC to examine the reasons for low turnout of 
candidates and share the findings thereof with the Committee.             (Para 2.53) 
Action Taken 
2.1  Details of fee collected & expenditure incurred by the Union Public  
Service Commission (UPSC) in conducting the Examinations is as under:  
Rs. in crore 
Year Exam Fee Expenditure on Exam’s & Selections 
2017-18 25.14 115.35 
2018-19 25.41 146.56 
2019-20 24.68 157.04 
2020-21 19.73 146.82 
2021-22 26.43 159.07 
2022-23 21.53 197.98 
 

 22 
Regarding absenteeism, an Expert Committee, chaired by Shri B S Baswan (IAS 
Retd.) former Secretary, Ministry of Education, was constituted in August, 2015 to 
comprehensively examine the various issues raised from time to time regarding Civil 
Services Examinations. One of the Terms of Reference of the Committee (Sub -Para 
vii) is as under: 
“To review the logistical requirements and constraints of conducting the Examination 
and suggest improvements, given that almost half the number of cand idates who 
apply do not appear at the Preliminary Examination.” 
The recommendations of the Baswan Committee are under consideration.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.2  The Committee notes that there is a huge shortage of 1472 IAS officers in 
the country. The Committee infers from the data provided by DoPT that there are 850 
vacancies in the Direct recruitment posts and 622 vacancies in the promotion posts. 
The Committee notes that in order to address the issue of shortage of IAS officers and 
to ensure their optimal intake, Central Government has been recruiting 180 IAS 
officers on annual basis through Civil Services Examination. The Committee 
recommends DoPT to consider i ncreasing the annual intake of Direct recruit IAS 
officers further to bridge the deficit. The Committee further notes that the deficit of 
IAS officers stems partly from the fact that promotion quota IAS vacancies are not 
being filled up by states on time. This issue needs to be taken up by the Centre with 
the State Governments and the Centre should impress upon them to take immediate 
steps to fill up promotion quota IAS vacancies on time so that shortage of IAS 
officers at the state level can be meted out w hich will help in effective functioning of 
the Government.                            (Para 3.3) 
Action Taken 
2.3  The annual intake of direct recruit IAS officers through the Civil Services 
Examination (CSE) is reviewed from time to time. As regards promotion quota, it is 
stated that the Central Government is already seriously seized of the above matter. A 
D.O. letter to all the State Governments, duly conveying the above observations of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee and urging them to take immediate measures to 
ensure timely submission of proposals for determination of vacancies and expeditious 
forwarding of pr oposals to the UPSC thereafter so that the Selection Committee 

 23 
Meeting can be convened well in time, was circulated on 03.05.2023. Thereafter 
Secretary, DOPT, reviewed the issue, individually with the Principal Secretary 
(Personnel / GAD) of all the State Governments through video conference on 9 th, 10th 
and 11 th May, 2023. The issue would again be monitored during the Annual 
Conference of Principal Secretaries (Personnel / GAD) of all the Slate Governments / 
UTs to be chaired by Hon'ble Minister of State in charge of DOPT to be held shortly. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.4 On being asked about the impact of IAS crunch on administration, DoPT stated 
that the total authorized strength comprises Senior Duty Posts and various reserves 
such as State Deputation Reserve, Junior Reserve, Leave Reserve, Training Reserve 
and Central Deputation Reserve. Of these reserves, except for the Central Deputation 
reserve, all other reserves are being utilized by the States. DoPT further said that out 
of the prescribed Central  Deputation Reserve of 1469, only 442 officers are working 
at the centre. The Committee is of the considered opinion that IAS officers are a 
common and shared asset of the country and therefore, it is incumbent upon them to 
serve both the Centre and States.                 (Para 3.4)
  
Action Taken 
2.5 It is to state that the certain requisite elements viz. Application/ nomination of 
officers for deputation on yearly basis, forwarding of nomination by the concerned 
Cadre Controlling Authority, past experienc es etc. have to be taken into account, 
while filling various central deputation posts. 
This Department deals with the framing of Rules/Policies related to All India Service. 
Accordingly, as per IAS (Fixation of Cadre Strength) Regulations, 1955, Total 
Authorized Strength (TAS) comprises of Senior Duty Posts (SDP) and various 
Reserves viz. State Deputation Reserve (@ 25% of SDP), Junior Reserve & Leave 
Reserve (@16.5% of SDP), Training Reserve (@ 3.5% of SDP) and Central 
Deputation Reserve (40% of SDP).  
 
With regard to the observations of the Committee, the IAS (Fixation of Cadre 
Strength) Regulations, 1955 issued by AIS -II Division already stipulates Central 
Deputation Reserve (CDR) to be 40% of SDP. 

 24 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.6  The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Central 
Government should designate DoPT as the nodal agency for monitoring backlog 
vacancies in all Ministries/Departments of the Central Government and hopes that the 
Department will soon create a Dashboard on its site reflect ing the data of backlog 
reserved vacancies and the progress made in filling them up. The Committee 
recommends DoPT to impress upon Ministries/Departments to take steps to fill up 
backlog reserved vacancies at the earliest.                              (Para 3.7) 
Action Taken 
2.7  Ministries/ Departments have been requested to create similar dashboard 
on backlog reserved vacancies. DoPT has also created a tab titled ‘Backlog Reserved 
Vacancies’ on the RRCPS portal of DoPT for uploading of data on backlog reserved 
vacancies for SC, ST and OBCs by all the Ministries and Departments of the Central 
Government including attached/ subordinate offices, CPSEs etc. In order to educate 
the Ministries/ Departments about the operation of this tab, as a first step, a 
Workshop was held on 12 th April, 2023 in CSOI, KG Marg, New Delhi with 20 
Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India, (including 10 major Ministries/ 
Departments having more than 90% of the employees of the Central Government) to 
demonstrate how to upload data on backlog reserved vacancies on the Dashboard. 
The Ministries/ Departments were requested to take effective steps to fill up backlog 
reserved vacancies at the earliest.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.8  The Committee notes that menstruation debilitates most women and 
affects their productivity and performance at workplace. The Committee notes that, at 
present, there is no policy in place to address this need. The Committee takes note of 
Article 42 of the Indian Constitution which directs the state to make provision for 
securing ‘just and humane’ conditions of work. The Committee further takes note of 
Article 7 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights which 
recognizes the right of everyone to ‘just and favourable’ working conditions. The 
Committee is of the view that the Government should create an inclusive and equitable 
work place for women. Keeping the physical and mental well being of women in mind 
and taking cognizance of th eir unique needs, the Committee, recommends the 
Department to hold consultations with stakeholders and frame a menstrual leave policy 

 25 
allowing women who suffer from menstrual cramps, dysmenorrhea and similar 
conditions to take time off from their work. The  Government may consider granting a 
certain number of ‘Menstrual leaves’ or ‘sick leaves/Half Pay Leaves’ per month/year 
for women without seeking any medical certificate or justification in return. The 
Committee feels that this measure will have a positiv e impact on the female labour 
force participation rate in the formal sector and will help unlock the gender dividend 
for inclusive and broad-based growth.               (Para 3.11) 
Action Taken 
2.9    The CCS (Leave) Rules 1972 provide for a variety of incentives in the form of 
various kinds of paid leave for welfare of female Central Government Servants such as 
Maternity Leave, Child Care Leave etc.   A Government employee is also provided 
with 30 days Earned Leave and 8 days Casual leaves in a year to fulfill certain needs 
of personal necessities. Further, the matter with reference to the requirements for grant 
of a special menstrual leave to a female Government employee because of the pain 
occuring during menstrual period is a health related issue and can be best examined by 
MoHFW, being the nodal Ministry. However, the recommendation of the 126th Report 
on the Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry by Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Com mittee in this regard has been duly noted. If there is any 
change made in this regard, the same will be widely circulated to all Ministries / 
Departments. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.10 The Committee appreciates the Department of Personnel and Training f or 
formulating guidelines for posting husband and wife who are in Government service 
at the same station. However, the Committee feels that there is a lacuna in the policy 
which needs to be addressed. It is observed that DoPT’s guidelines do not provide an y 
relief to spouses where one of the spouses belongs to an All India Service and the 
other spouse belongs to the Indian Foreign Service. The IFS does not have positions 
earmarked in the state Governments except for postings in Regional Passport Offices 
and Branch Secretariats. Moreover, these positions are restricted to certain pay levels. 
Secondly, the AIS officer can opt for deputation but the rules require him/her to go 
back to the cadre for ‘cooling off’ period or in case of other exigencies. Accordingl y, 
the Committee recommends that appropriate guidelines to extend the relief envisioned 
in the above mentioned guidelines be framed for AIS -IFS couple also. The 
Department may further consider allocating the AIS officer to AGMUT cadre and 

 26 
post him/her in D elhi or alternatively allocate him/her to the States contiguous to 
Delhi where the IFS officer remains posted for long periods to the extent possible so 
that the couple can remain posted at the same station.          (Para 3.15) 
 
Action Taken 
2.11 In so far as All India Services officers are concerned, as per Rule 7 of the 
IAS(Cadre) Rules, 1954 and analogous provisions in IPS (Cadre) Rules, 1954 and 
IFS (Cadre) Rules, 1966, all appointments to cadre posts in case of a State Cadre 
shall be made by t he State Government concerned. Further, Rule 5 (2) of the IAS 
(Cadre) Rules, 1954 and analogous provisions in IPS (Cadre) Rules, 1954 and IFS 
(Cadre) Rules, 1966 provide the provisions for change of cadre of All India Service 
officers on marriage grounds. 
Further, in so far as a particular situation regarding posting of spouse belonging to 
Indian Foreign Service Officers is concerned, they are either posted abroad or in 
India and, therefore, it would be difficult for their cadre controlling authority (MEA) 
in posting the officers to the station or the State where their spouse is posted.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.12  The Committee notes from the data provided by UPSC that the average 
time taken for civil services examination from the date of issue of Notification to the 
date of declaration of final result is nearly 15 months. The Committee is of the opinion 
that the duration of any recruitment examination should not ordinarily exceed six 
months as long and protracted recruitment cycles waste prime year s of a candidates’ 
life besides taking a heavy toll on their physical and mental health. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that UPSC should take steps to reduce the duration of the 
recruitment cycle significantly without compromising the quality.          (Para 4.4) 
 
Action Taken 
2.13  The Union Public Service Commission has been established as a 
Constitutional body to undertake various functions as mentioned in Article 320 of the 
Constitution, which also include conducting Examinations for appointments to the 
services of the Union. In p ursuance of this Constitutional Mandate, at present, in 
addition to the various Recruitment Tests for appointment to posts in various 

 27 
Ministries/Departments/UTs. etc., the Commission conducts 13 Structured 
Examinations annually including the Civil Services  Examination in accordance with 
the Rules of the Examinations notified by the Government (DoP&T).  
As stated in reply to Para 2.53 above an Expert Committee, chaired by Shri B S 
Baswan (IAS, Retd.) former Secretary, Ministry of Education, was constituted in  
August, 2015 to comprehensively examine the various issues raised from time to time 
regarding the Civil Services Examination. One of the Terms of Reference of the 
Committee is as under: 
“To examine the time frame in which the Examination is conducted and suggest 
suitable changes to reduce the time taken for selection of candidates by utilizing 
information and communication technologies, as well as by making changes to the 
various procedure mandated by the Examination Rules, including the methodology 
for operating reserve lists/waiting lists (if any).” 
The stand of the Commission in this aspect is detailed as under:  
(a) Civil Services Examination is a flagship Examination of the Commission which is 
conducted once in a year only. This Examination comprises fo llowing three stages: 
 
i. An objective type Preliminary Examination for screening of candidates for the 
next stage. The candidature for this Examination has been continuously 
crossing a million mark in the last few years. 
ii. Main written Examination comprising 0 9 papers for the candidates, who 
cleared the Preliminary Examination; and  
iii. Interview/Personality Test of Main Examination qualified candidates.  
A Statement showing the time taken at different stages of the examination during the 
period 2017 -2021, right fro m the stage of advertisement (notification of the 
examination) to declaration of final result is attached as Annexure-I. 
(b) As per the current trend, number of applications for the Civil Services 
(Preliminary) Examination comes over a million every year. In the year 2022, this 
Examination was held at 79 Centres (cities) across the country at 2,882 Venues to 
accommodate 11.53 lakh candidates. For ensuring smooth conduct of this 
Examination, numerous activities are required to be completed by the Commission 

 28 
viz. (i) selection of Venues in each Centre; (ii) processing/ scrutiny of applications 
received in order to allow only eligible candidates; (iii) distribution of candidates 
(after availability of exact count on completion of application process) in these 
Venues; (iv) preparation and release of e -Admit Cards of the candidates; (v) 
preparation of Scannable Attendance Lists of candidates, printing and dispatch of the 
same to the Venue Supervisors; (vi) packing/dispatch of OMR sheets/ stationeries to 
the Venues ; (vii) preparation/ desptach of sensitive material to the Centres; (viii) 
deployment of large number of examination functionaries at different levels; (ix) 
release of funds to the Centres and Venues; (x) conduct of meetings with various 
stake holders like  police, postal authorities, railway authorities, Centre Supervisors, 
Inspecting Officers etc.; (xi) issue of number of  letters from different levels to 
number of authorities etc. 
(c) All these processes are to be executed with extreme care following vari ous 
checks & counter -checks at different levels in coordination with the examination 
functionaries to rule out any possibility of any error at any stage. It would be seen 
from the attached statement ( Annexure-I) that the time duration for such activities 
has been around 2.5 to 3 months. This much time is a must for successful conduct of 
Examination by the Commission and it may be appreciated that there is hardly any 
scope of further reduction in time cycle between the date of advertisement 
(notification) and date of holding the Civil Services (Preliminary) Examination owing 
to the reasons cited above.  
(d) After taking due care and completing all the processes, result of the 
Preliminary Examination is declared within 20 days from the date of conduct of the 
Examination. Earlier, time taken to declare the result was somewhere between 40 -50 
days, which has now been considerable reduced. Again, for smooth conduct of the 
Main Examination, which is a 5 days’ affair having 9 descriptive type papers, the 
drills of ar rangement are almost the same as those of the Preliminary Examination 
except the level of scale involved. The average time gap between declaration of the 
result of the Preliminary Examination and conduct of the Main Examination is about 
2-3 months. At this  stage, the Candidates who qualify Preliminary Examination 
needed adequate time to prepare for the Main Examination because of the number of 
papers and their toughness level. Any attempt to reduce this gap may cause distress to 
the candidates. Therefore, t here is hardly any possibility to further compress the time 
frame. 

 29 
(e) The Civil Services (Main) Examination, being a 9 Papers -Examination of 
descriptive type takes more time for evaluation of answer scripts i.e. about more than 
two months as nearly 1.20 l akh scripts of different subjects are to be evaluated by 
different teams of experts. Therefore, at this stage also, there is little scope of 
reducing the time -line between the date of completion of the Main Examination and 
the declaration of its result. 
(f) After declaration of result of the Main Examination, as per existing scheme, 
the successful candidates are required to fill up Detailed Application Form (DAF -II) 
for which time is given to them. Once these DAFs -II are received from them, the 
same are pro cessed for generation of E -Summon Letter and scheduling of their 
Personality Tests. The Personality Tests are held at the UPSC, so the candidates are 
required to come to the UPSC for attending the same from their places of stay across 
the country. Therefore, a lead time is to be given to them for arranging their transport, 
necessary documents and stay in Delhi. As such, the Personality Tests cannot be 
scheduled immediately after the declaration of result of the Main Examination. 
Further, a maximum of 12 can didates are interviewed in a day by one Personality 
Test Board, which is the optimal number and ensures the quality of the Personality 
Test process to assess the candidates as per their aptitude, skills and capabilities. 
Besides, these Personality Test, Bo ards are chaired by the Hon’ble Members of the 
Commission. Hence, the number of such Boards depends on the availability of 
Hon’ble Members. Furthermore, the entire duration of the Personality Test process is 
dependent on this aspect as also on the number o f candidates, which in turn depends 
on the number of vacancies to be filled up on the basis of the Examination. On 
completion of the Personality Tests, final result of the Civil Service Examination is 
declared within 4 days. As such, there is hardly any sc ope of reducing the time-line in 
completion of Personality Test process. 
(g) It may be seen that the time cycle for the Civil Services Examination has been 
optimized to the extent possible despite increase in the number of candidates, Centres 
and Venues ov er the years after analyzing the time taken in the pre -examination and 
post examination activities in detail. One of the most vital factors that go into the 
determination of the time schedule of an Examination is the need to maintain the 
utmost confidentia lity and the integrity of the examination process. Various checks 
and balances have been integrated in the examination system gained through years of 
experience to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and transparency.  

 30 
Further, it may also be appreciated that the UPSC presently holds another 12 
Structured Examinations and takes due care to also ensure the time cycle of these 
Examinations at the optimum level. Further, UPSC ensures that a judicious balance is 
maintained at all stages of all its Examinations  including the Civil Services 
Examination. 
Further reduction in the above time cycle (which is already optimized to the fullest) 
of the Civil Services Examination may not only impinge upon the integrity/quality of 
the Examinations but may also create resentment amongst the candidates due to 
getting lesser number of days for their preparation at each stage of the Examination.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.14 The Committee has recommended in its 104th, 106th, 108th and 112th Reports 
that an expert Committee must be constituted to assess the impact of the changes 
brought about by the Commission in the scheme of Civil Services examination since 
2010 on administra tion and candidates. UPSC has time and again reiterated that the 
report of Baswan Committee is under consideration. The Committee is aware that 
Baswan Committee was constituted to make recommendations on the eligibility, 
Syllabus, Scheme and Pattern of Exa mination. However, what the Committee has 
been emphatic about in its recommendations is ‘Administrative Impact Assessment’, 
i.e. an assessment of the impact of administrative decisions. While UPSC has changed 
the pattern of Civil Services Examination from time to time on the basis of 
recommendations made by various Expert Committees, no study has been 
commissioned to assess how such changes impacted the aspirants, nature of 
recruitment and administration at large. The Committee reiterates its recommendation  
that an expert group or Committee should be appointed to assess the impact of 
changes made in the scheme, pattern and syllabus of Civil services examination in the 
last ten years on the quality of recruitment and administration at large. The expert 
group so constituted may assess if the present scheme of recruitment provides an 
equal opportunity to both English -medium educated urban candidates and non -
English medium educated rural candidates. The expert group may also assess whether 
the existing pattern of  preliminary and mains examination provides a level playing 
field for all candidates irrespective of their academic background. The Committee is 
of the considered opinion that DoPT/UPSC should consider making further changes 
in the scheme and syllabus of C ivil Services Examination in the light of the findings 
of the Impact Assessment study.                     (Para 4.8) 

 31 
 
 
Action Taken 
2.15 The report of Baswan Committee on the Civil services Examination is still 
under consideration of the Government. ln  order to have a comprehensive 
examination of the same, a Committee, comprising of two former Secretaries of the 
Department of Personnel & Training, has been constituted vide order dated 
30.01.2023. This newly constituted committee is mandated to submit it s report within 
a period of six months from the date of its constitution. lt is felt that pending the 
report of the newly constituted committee and the decision of the Government 
thereupon, it would be premature to constitute another Committee.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.16  The Committee takes cognizance of the manpower constraints being 
faced by the Commission in the wake of transition to online mode of conduct of 
examinations and accordingly recommends DoPT to provide specialized personnel 
and adequate infrastructure to the meet the requirements of the Commission.  
                (Para 4.11) 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.17  Few specialized posts borne on the strength of Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC) have been revived by Department of Expenditure and SSC is in 
process of filling up of those posts. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.18  Keeping in view the difficulties encountered by ca ndidates especially 
differently-abled and women candidates,  the Committee recommends Union Public 
Service Commission, Staff Selection Commission and National Recruitment agencies 
to take steps to ensure that candidates are allotted an examination centre within 5 
kilometres from their home as far as practicable.                  (Para 4.17) 
Action Taken 

 32 
2.19  The examination centres would be decided by NRA considering various 
aspects such as security, integrity, logistic and likely number of candidates for an 
examination etc. 
As a general practice, female candidates as well as PwD candidates are allotted the 
examination centers of their first choice, by the SSC. PwD candidates are allotted 
PwD friendly venues. Even when owing to logistics and capacity issues it is required 
to allot candidates to a centre other than the centre of their first choice, care is taken 
not to disturb the allotment of female and PwD candidates in the Centres of their first 
choice. 
The Commission (UPSC) allots the venue(s) for differently abled candidate s ensuring 
that: 
 
(i) The venue(s) are located at prime location and accessible in all aspects;  
(ii) Arrangement of wheel chair(s) and availability of ramp at the venue(s);  
Seating of such candidates in rooms at ground floor preferably.  
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.20  As per the information provided to the Committee, LBSNAA has a 
sanctioned faculty strength of 37 out of which 20 posts are vacant whereas ISTM has 
a sanctioned faculty strength of 28 and 19 faculty are in position. The Comm ittee has 
been informed that IIPA has 21 faculty in place but has no sanctioned strength 
approved by the Government. The Committee notes that faculty shortage in training 
institutions has become a permanent feature. The Committee further notes that these 
institutions are making generous use of adhoc/part time faculty and are barely 
meeting the requirements of teaching. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons 
for the shortage of faculty. The Committee recommends DoPT to take immediate 
steps to fill up the vacant posts in LBSNAA and ISTM as shortage of faculty impacts 
the effective functioning of these institutions. The Committee also recommends the 
Department to prescribe a sanctioned strength for IIPA. The Committee is of the 

 33 
considered opinion that inv estment in human capital and physical capital should go 
hand-in-hand as both the elements are crucial in positioning India as a knowledge 
economy.                      (Para 5.7) 
Action Taken 
2.21  In so far as vacancy position at Lal Bahadur Shastri  National Academy 
of Administration, (LBSNAA), Mussoorie, it keeps on varying from time to time and 
is dynamic due to movement of officers who complete their tenure. However, the 
manpower shortage is not seen as a major impediment in the organizations trai ning 
and its other activities because of wholesome measures which has been taken to 
overcome the deficiencies. 
2.   As regards ISTM also the vacancy position varies from time to time.   Presently 
the incumbency  position has improved substantially.  All neces sary steps are being 
taken to fill up the posts at the earliest. 
  
3.     In IIPA the training programmes are conducted on demand basis. As IIPA does 
not have regular programmes catering to specific target group, IIPA engages Subject 
Matter Specialists and Professional Consultants depending upon demand and need of 
Capacity Building Programmes. This ensures quality expertise and helps in 
sustainability. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.22  The Committee notes that the Training Division of the Department of 
Personnel and Training is the nodal agency for training of government functionaries 
and is primarily responsible for formulating policies concerning training. The 
Committee was given to understand that the Division itself sponsors a number of 
training programmes on a variety of subjects for different categories of Central and 
State Government employees. The Committee also learnt that LBSNAA, ISTM, IIPA 
and of late, Capacity Building Commission are also involved in training Central and 
State Government funct ionaries. The Committee is of the view that there is a 
significant jurisdictional overlap among these institutions and that there are a 
multiple training schemes. The Committee recommends DoPT to delineate the 
jurisdiction of the training institutions func tioning under its administrative control 
and also to rationalize the training schemes as far as practicable.           (Para 5.8)
                                    

 34 
Action Taken 
2.23  The Department of Personnel & Training is the nodal agency for training 
of government functionaries and is primarily responsible for formulating policies 
with regard to training. It also designs and implements training programmes on a 
variety of subjects f or different categories of Central and State government 
employees.   It also provides financial assistance to State/UT Administrative Training 
Institutes (ATIs)  with the aim of developing (a) skill and functional knowledge of 
employees and (b) a cadre or p rofessional trainers and resource persons from 
amongst the employees of Central and State/UT Governments.  
2.     There are 3 training institutions  functioning under its administrative control 
namely: 
(i) Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administrati on, Mussoorie:  The 
LBSNAA has the mandate to train Civil Services in India,  on foundational and 
fundamental subjects to all those who are recruited for senior grades of service; so 
that they might imbibe the true spirit and discharge their duties in a mann er which 
will raise their efficiency and establish concord between them and the public 
completely. The LBSNAA focuses on building whole of civil service capacities 
through its foundational programmes and its operational programmes for the purpose 
of enhancing behavioural changes and for ushering in high standards of ethics.   
The Academy also has the exclusive mandate to train the IAS at the level of the 
whole and at the  individual level. In this regard, larger skill  upgradation areas and 
skill building areas for the IAS, and developing this capacity through  structured mid-
career training programmes, and the Mission  Karmayogiled Digital Learning are 
carried out. 
(ii) Institute of Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM), Delhi:  The 
mandate of the Institute is to impart training to officers of Central Secretariat Service 
(CSS), Central Secretariat Stenographers Service (CSSS) and officers of other 
organized/ subsidiary service functioning in the Central Secretariat.   The Institute 
also provides training suppo rt to the State Governments, Union Territory 
Administrations, Central Public Sector Enterprises, Central Autonomous Bodies and 
other organisations in specialized and general areas.  
(iii) Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA):  The Institute has been set up 
to equip the public servants with domain knowledge, functional skills, and 
behavioural competencies required for managing the task of governance. The 

 35 
Institute provides technical skills of management, human skills for coordination roles 
and con ceptual skills for taking up leadership roles in public policy planning and 
execution. In its effort to enhance the leadership, managerial, and administrative 
capabilities of the executives in government and public sector enterprises, the 
Institute works in close collaboration with national and international organisations.  
   
3. The Capacity Building Commission has been set up as a part of the institutional 
framework of MissionKarmayogi and   has the responsibility of facilitating the 
preparation of Annual C apacity building Plans(ACBPs), monitor and evaluate the 
implementation of plans, functionally supervise the training institutions for the 
purpose of adherence to and achievement of ACBPs and creation of an ecosystem of 
shared learning resources, provide in sights and analytics, coordinate with  MDOs to 
evolve a harmonious de -siloed approach to improve capacity and build shared 
resources etc.  It has been spearheading various initiatives for capacity building 
through various policy guidelines related to accredi tation, competency framework, 
etc.  
4.    The jurisdiction of these Institutions is mutually exclusive in nature and not 
overlapping. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.24  On being asked about the reasons for delay in filling up of vacancies, 
CBI informed the Committee that it is not receiving sufficient nominations of officers 
from CAPFs and State Police which have traditionally been a major source of 
induction, particularl y up to the rank of Inspector in the organization. CBI further 
said that CAPFs and State Police are under increasing pressure within their own 
jurisdictions and hence have expressed challenges in sparing officers and personnel to 
the same extent as in the past. The Committee, in its previous Reports, recommended 
CBI to reduce its dependence on deputationists and strive to recruit permanent staff in 
the ranks of Inspector of Police and Deputy Superintendent of Police. However, CBI 
showed unwillingness and ju stified its stand citing that deputationists bring in fresh 
ideas, novel strategies and varied skill sets with them and that direct recruitment at 
higher levels would affect career progression. The Committee fully agrees with the 
view of CBI that deputatio nists benefit the organization with their expertise and skill 
sets, however, it feels that an organization should keep the mode of recruitment 
through deputation to minimum. The Committee observes that the mode of 

 36 
recruitment to the rank of Inspector of Po lice (1024 posts) is 50 % through 
deputation/absorption and 50% through promotion. Keeping in view the problems 
being faced by CBI in inducting officers through deputation, the Committee 
recommends that the percentage of officers inducted through deputatio n at the level 
of Inspector of Police be restricted to 10 percent and the remaining 40% officers may 
be recruited through Direct Recruitment/Limited Departmental Competitive 
Examination.                        (Para 6.7)
                                    
Action Taken 
2.25  It is mentioned that after due deliberations and keeping in view the 
functional requirement, this Bureau has recently proposed suitable amendments in 
Recruitment Rules for the various posts of CBI including the post of Inspector.  
The proposed amendments in mode of the Recruitment for the post of Inspector is as 
under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
The aforesaid proposal is already under consideration. However, the position will be 
reviewed in case the proposed amendment does not meet out the functional 
requirement. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.26  The Committee notes that the details of cases registered with the CBI, 
the progress made in their investigation and the final outcome are not available in 
public domain. The Committee also observes that the Annual Report of CBI is also 
not accessible to th e general public. The Committee is of the opinion that in this age 
of transparency, every Public Authority should strive to proactively disclose the data 
available with it or held by it in public domain to the extent possible. The Committee 
feels that providing access to information will not only empower the citizens but will 
also make the functioning of CBI more accountable, responsible, efficient and 
Post Existing Mode of 
Recruitment   
Proposed 
Mode of 
Recruitment 
Inspr. Filled by 50:50 
Promotion: 
Deputation/Absorption 
Filled by 
60:40 
Promotion: 
Deputation 

 37 
transparent. The Committee, therefore, recommends CBI to publish case statistics 
and annual Report on its website. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation 
that CBI should maintain a case management system which would be a Centralized 
database containing details of cases registered with it and the progress made in their 
disposal. The case management sy stem should also enable tracking of the progress of 
each individual case and should be, by and large, accessible to the general public.  
                    (Para 6.13)
                                    
Action Taken 
2.27  Investigation is carried out as per provisions of law.  Upon completion 
of the investigation, all the relevant documents pertaining to the case, filed along with 
the final report, are available in Courts.  Besides, brief of important registration, 
searches, arrests, filing of charge -sheet, conviction etc., are available in Media 
column of CBI Website, which is accessible to all. So far as maintaining a case 
management system in CBI, it is to be intimated that the same under implementation. 
Sharing of progress to public may be pre -judicial to investigation.  Regarding placing 
CBI Annual Report on its website, it is submitted that Annual Report, as of now, 
being submitted to CVC, MHA, DOPT, Parliamentary Standing Committee etc.  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.28  The Committee underlines that g rant of sanction for prosecution is a 
statutory requirement and therefore, the competent authority is bound to strictly 
adhere to the timeline stipulated for the grant or otherwise of the sanction for 
prosecution. The Committee is of the view that advice i s tendered by the Central 
Vigilance Commission based on reasoned appreciation of all the facts, documents 
and records. Therefore, the Committee recommends that in vigilance cases, the 
Disciplinary authority should not deviate from the Commission’s advice a s far as 
possible. In case of difference of opinion between the Disciplinary authority and the 
Commission regarding the same, the prescribed consultation mechanism should be 
strictly adhered to.                   (Para 6.20)
                                    
Action Taken 
2.29  The Commission agrees with the recommendation of the Committee that 
the Disciplinary Authority should not deviate from the Commission’s advice as far as 
possible. 

 38 
               It is also stated that the Commission has an advisory role as per the 
provisions contained under Section 8(1)(g) of CVC Act, 2003. The competent 
authority generally agrees with the advice tendered by the Commission. However, 
there are some i nstances, when the competent authority takes a view which is 
different from the advice tendered by the Commission. In case of difference of 
opinion between the competent authority and the Commission regarding grant of 
prosecution sanction, the same is to b e resolved in terms of DoPT’s OM No. 
372/6/2017-AVD-III dated 01.03.2019 ( Annexure-II), which has been reiterated by 
DoPT vide their OM No. 372/6/2017-AVD-III 02.12.2020 (Annexure-III).  
                In respect of departmental action against officers fo r whom the appointing 
authority is the President, in case of difference of opinion between the Disciplinary 
Authority and the Commission, further action is to be taken as per DoPT’s OM No. 
372/3/2017-AVD-III dated 01.03.2017 ( Annexure-IV) and OM No. 119/2/ 2019-
AVD-III dated 02.09.2019( Annexure-V).The Commission, vide its Circular No. 
10/06/21 dated 23.06.2021 ( Annexure-VI) has also issued guidelines about the 
mechanism to be adopted for reporting of cases of deviation from Commission’s 
advice in respect of those officers, whose cases are not covered under DoPT’s OM 
dated 02.09.2019.  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.30  The Committee recommends DoPT to issue instructions/guidelines 
impressing upon authorities concerned to strictly adhere to the prescribed 
consultation mechanism with the Commission. The Committee notes that there are 
significant irregularities and lapses ranging from delay in the grant or otherwise of 
sanction for prosecution, failure on the part of disciplinary authority to follow laid 
down procedures, delay in seeking advice, lack of awareness and ignorance of rules 
and regulations in conducting disciplinary proceedings among others. The Committee 
recommends DoPT and CVC to apprise it about the measures contemplated by them 
to deal with suc h irregularities and lapses as they could vitiate the vigilance process, 
shield the corrupt and breed a culture of impunity   (Para 6.21)                                    
Action Taken 
2.31  It may be noted that Section 8 (1)(f) of CVC Act, 2003 mandates the 
Commission to review progress of applications pending with the competent 
authorities for sanction for prosecution under PC Act, 1988 (as amended on 
26.07.2018). In case of delay on the par t of the competent authority to decide on 

 39 
CBI’s request for prosecution sanction, the Commission reviews and promptly takes 
up such cases with the Chief Executives of the organizations concerned, impressing 
upon them the need for taking a view without further delay.  
The Commission has issued guidelines prescribing time limit for different stages of 
disciplinary action and has reiterated the same time and again. At the time of 
tendering First Stage Advice, the Commission specifies the time period within whi ch 
actions including issuance of charge sheet and appointment of IO/PO etc. are to be 
completed. The progress of implementation of Commission’s advice is reviewed at 
regular intervals through meetings with the CVOs concerned. Through the interaction 
with CVOs and other vigilance functionaries in zonal and sectoral review meetings 
undertaken by the Commission at various places, they are also sensitized about the 
importance of timely action in disciplinary matters. The Commission has also started 
a new initia tive of conducting Management Audit of Vigilance Units of major 
Central Government organizations, during which the status of action taken on 
complaints and in disciplinary matters is reviewed with specific reference to the time 
line issued by the Commission. 
In order to ensure that lack of awareness of rules and procedures does not become a 
factor for delay/non implementation of Commission’s advice, as a capacity building 
measure, the Commission has undertaken regular training programmes for CVOs, 
other vigilance functionaries and potential IOs/POs. In addition, the Commission also 
shares training modules on preventive vigilance with Central Government 
organizations to institutionalise preventive vigilance training through online/offline 
mode.  
Comments of DoPT: 
 In order to ensure timely processing of the disciplinary proceedings, Central 
Civil Services (Control, Conduct and Appeal) Rules, 1965, timelines have been 
prescribed for various stages of the disciplinary proceedings. These timelines have 
been consolidated and are placed at Annexure VII. Further, in order to expedite the 
conclusion of disciplinary proceedings against officers of All India Services posted 
on Central deputation, an OM No. 142/6/2022 -AVD-I/C-I dated 03.02.2023 was 
circulated to all Ministries/Departments (Annexure VIII). 
 
 Various instructions issued from time to time for handling of disciplinary 
proceedings have been consolidated as a single OM which is placed in the public 

 40 
domain. A Flow chart has been issued vide OM No. 43020/14/2021 -Estt.A-III dated 
08.11.2021 indicating various steps involved in disciplinary cases  for better 
understanding of Rules by Disciplinary Authorities, and is also available in the public 
domain ( Annexure IX ). Further, vide OM No. 11012/09/2016 -Estt.A-III date d 
08.12.2017,  FAQs on timeline for completing Disciplinary proceedings in a time 
bound manner have been issued (Annexure X). 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.32  The Committee was informed that as per the Central Administrative 
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules, 198 7, every application should be heard and decided as 
far as possible, within six months from the date of its registration. However, the 
Committee notes that there are about 1350 cases pending for over ten years. The 
Committee also learnt that there are appr oximately 3716 cases related to pension 
pending in the Tribunal. The Committee recommends that CAT should dispose of 
cases related to pensions, matters related to senior citizens and cases which are more 
than 10 years old on priority basis and conduct special drives, if need be.        
              (Para 6.25)
                                    
Action Taken 
2.33  The pension related matter have  been made as a Single Bench matter so 
that the matter may be disposed of speedily without the necessity of having presence 
of two Hon’ble Members. Furthermore, CAT, PB had issued directions that cases 
relating to the senior citizens may be taken up for di sposal on priority by listing such 
cases in the daily cause list with a note “No adjournment will be allowed”.  Similar 
directions for disposal of cases pending for more than ten years are issued to the 
extent that hearing of cases more than 10 years old a re to be taken up on day to day 
basis and if needed be by constituting special Benches by not permitting 
adjournments barring exceptions.  
Regarding the conduction of special drive, it may be worth mentioning that for 
organization of iconic/ impactful even ts as part of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, CAT, 
PB ordered for special drive for listing/ hearing of cases related to pension and those 
of senior citizen, which was conducted on 18.04.2022 and 19.04.2022 and a good 
number of cases related to pension and matter s of Senior Citizen were decided 
on18.04.2022 and 19.04.2022. The feasibility of conduction of such special drives in 
future will be assessed and will be organized accordingly.  

 41 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.34  The Committee notes the mounting pendency of cases in CAT and feels 
that one of the major reasons for pendency is non -availability of sufficient number of 
Members. The Committee was informed that in some Benches of the Tribunal, some 
cases are pending for want of Division Bench as sufficient number of Division 
Benches are not available due to vacancy of Members. The Committee infers from 
the data provided by the Tribunal that Allahabad, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Jammu and 
Patna Benches are operating with 50% of  the sanctioned strength. The Committee 
recommends that steps should be taken to ensure that these vacancies are filled up at 
the earliest. The Committee is happy to note that CAT is contemplating to implement 
an Advance Case Information system which facil itates hearing of cases through video 
conferencing and complete digitization of the functioning of the Tribunal and hopes 
that it is operationalized soon.                    (Para 6.26)
                                    
Action Taken 
2.35  Out of sanctioned strength of 70 (01 Chairman, 34 -Judicial Member and 
35 Administrative Member), presently 53 posts are in position in Central 
Administrative Tribunal (CAT).     The process of filling up existing and anticipated 
vacancies of Members in CAT for the  years 2022 and 2023 is under progress and the 
Government is taking expeditious action to complete the selection process at the 
earliest possible.  
Furthermore, the matter of implementation of Advance Case Information system will 
be expedited and it will be operationalized in a time bound and phase wise manner . 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.36  On being asked about the reasons for recruiting such a large number of 
outsourced staff, the Commission said that it had not been able to fill all the vacant 
posts due to non -availability of suitable candidates. The Committee is of the view 
that contractual staff can supplement the regular work force but cannot be a substitute 
for it and accordingly, recommends that, the Staff Selection Commission should look 
into the reasons hindering the filling up of Direct recruit vacancies in CIC and apprise 
the Committee about it.                       (Para 6.31)
                                    

 42 
Action Taken 
2.37  The Commission has 160 sanctioned posts, out of these only 52 posts 
(ASOs, Sr. Assistants, Stenographers & MTSs) are to be filled on direct recruitment 
quota through Staff Selection Commission. At present there are only 07 posts vacant 
in respect of Assistant Section Officers/ Senior Assistants/ Stenographers and 
requisition in this regard has already been sent to SSC. In addition to the above, 09 
posts o f MTSs will be requisitioned with SSC as soon as a circular in regard for 
filling these posts are issued by them. 
Regarding filling up the posts on deputation basis the Commission has issued 
advertisements in the years 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2017, 2018, 2020 & 2021 and no 
suitable candidates was found for appointment. Recently, the Commission had 
advertised the posts vide circular dated 24.03.2022 and 06.10.2022 seeking 
applications from the prospective candidates for consideration.   The screening of 
application and preparation of other documents were under process but held up due to 
deemed abolition of these posts being vacant for more than two years.  The process 
for appointment to these may be done on revival of such posts.  
Further, out of 19 encadred posts, filling up of 08 vacant posts is also under 
consideration in the Department. 
As per Staff Selection Commission (SSC) , The assessment of vacancies and their 
reporting to SSC for filling the same through its recruitment examinations falls within 
the exclusive domain of the user Departments/ Organizations. SSC publishes its 
calendar of examinations in advance and makes concerted efforts to ensure that the 
process is completed in a scheduled and time bound manner. 
 
The Commission has also been squeezing the timelines for declaration of results and 
following the acceptance of the recommendations of the Expert Committee which 
had been constituted to review the scheme of var ious examinations, the timelines for 
declaration of results of various examinations including CGLE and CHSLE has been 
squeezed further and the results of most of the examinations are expected to be 
declared within a period of 6-9 month. 
As per the results declared during the last three years, of all the mandated 
examinations conducted by SSC except MTS, CIC had not reported any vacancies.  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 

 43 
2.38  On being asked about the reasons for recruiting such a large number of 
outsourced staff, the Commission said that it had not been able to fill all the vacant 
posts due to non -availability of suitable candidates. The Committee is of the view 
that contractual staff can supplement the regular work force but cannot be a substitute 
for it and accordingly, recommends that, the Staff Selection Commission should look 
into the reasons hindering the filling up of Direct recruit vacancies in CIC and apprise 
the Committee about it.                       (Para 6.31)
                                    
 
 
Action Taken 
2.39  The Commission has 160 sanctioned posts, out of these only 52 posts 
(ASOs, Sr. Assistants, Stenographers & MTSs) are to be filled on direct recruitment 
quota through Staff Selection Commission. At present there are only 07 posts vacant 
in respect of Assistant Section Officers/ Senior Assistants/ Stenographers and 
requisition in this regard has already been sent to SSC. In addition to the above, 09 
posts o f MTSs will be requisitioned with SSC as soon as a circular in regard for 
filling these posts are issued by them. 
Regarding filling up the posts on deputation basis the Commission has issued 
advertisements in the years 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2017, 2018, 2020 & 2021 and no 
suitable candidates was found for appointment. Recently, the Commission had 
advertised the posts vide circular dated 24.03.2022 and 06.10.2022 seeking 
applications from the prospective c andidates for consideration.   The screening of 
application and preparation of other documents were under process but held up due to 
deemed abolition of these posts being vacant for more than two years.  The process 
for appointment to these may be done on revival of such posts.  
Further, out of 19 encadred posts, filling up of 08 vacant posts is also under 
consideration in the Department. 
As per Staff Selection Commission (SSC) , The assessment of vacancies and their 
reporting to SSC for filling the same through its recruitment examinations falls within 
the exclusive domain of the user Departments/ Organizations. SSC publishes its 
calendar of examinations in advance and makes concerted efforts to ensure that the 
process is completed in a scheduled and time bound manner. 

 44 
 
The Commission has also been squeezing the timelines for declaration of results and 
following the acceptance of the recommendations of the Expert Committee which 
had been constituted to review the scheme of various examinations, the timelines fo r 
declaration of results of various examinations including CGLE and CHSLE has been 
squeezed further and the results of most of the examinations are expected to be 
declared within a period of 6-9 month. 
As per the results declared during the last three year s, of all the mandated 
examinations conducted by SSC except MTS, CIC had not reported any vacancies.  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.40  The Committee notes that as per Section 25 of the Right to Information 
Act, there is a statutory requirement for the Public Authorities to submit Quarterly 
Returns to CIC. However, it is observed that during 2021 -22, only 95 percent of 
Public Authorities submitted all four Quarterly Returns during the reporting year. The 
Committee notes that Public Authorities are not fu lfilling their statutory obligations 
and recommends CIC to impress upon all Ministries/Independent Departments to 
take steps to ensure 100% compliance.                    (Para 6.32)
                                    
Action Taken 
2.41  The exercise of submission of quarterly returns by Public Authorities 
has been started since 2005 -06, since then the number of Public Authorities (PAs) 
who have not submitted their quarterly returns has come down to zero in year 2017 -
18 and 2018 -19. However, COVID pandemi c situation had affected adversely the 
compliance of filing the quarterly returns which resulted in not making full 
compliance in the consequent years. It is also worth mentioning that PAs which fail 
to submit their quarterly return  even for a single quart er in a Financial Year are 
treated as non-compliant and counted as defaulters. 
The Commission, throughout the year, encourages all PAs to submit the quarterly 
returns. However, the returns from some PAs are not received due to the following 
reasons: 
 Contact details of Nodal CPIOs have not been updated by the Public 
Authorities.  

 45 
 No response from the PAs after multiple reminders etc.  
The Commission, in its annual report 2021 -22, has also requested the Appropriate 
Government to advise/ instruct suitably the controlling Ministries/ Departments of 
105 PAs who have not submitted their quarterly returns. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.42  The Committee notes that Section 5 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas  Act, 
2013 lays down that the President shall take or cause to be taken all necessary steps 
for the appointment of a new Chairperson and Members atleast three months before 
the expiry of the term of the Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in the Act. The Committee notes that 
Justice Pinaki Chandra Ghose demitted the office of Chairman of Lokpal in May 
2022 on attaining the age of 70 years and since then Justice Pradip Kumar Mohanty 
has been acting as the Cha irperson of Lokpal. The Committee further notes that 
vacancies of two Judicial Members have also not been filled up since the year 2020. 
The Committee desires to be apprised about the steps taken by the Government to fill 
up vacancies of Chairperson and Ju dicial Members of Lokpal. The Committee hopes 
that the Inquiry and Prosecution wings are constituted soon..           (Para 6.37)
                                    
Action Taken 
2.43  The appointment of the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal is 
regulated in terms of section 4 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and is 
undertaken by the Selection Committee composition of which is laid down under the 
said section.  
In view of the co mposition of the Selection Committee being incomplete, a 
meeting  of four Members - Hon'ble Prime Minister, Hon'ble Chief Justice of India, 
Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha and Hon’ble Leader of largest party in Opposition 
(Special Invitee) was convened for reco mmending to the President the name of an 
eminent jurist for being nominated as a Member of the Selection Committee. 
Presidential approval to the said recommendation has since been received, thereby 
making the composition of the Selection Committee complete . 
          So as to ensure that the functioning of the Lokpal is not hampered, in the 
intervening period, Justice Pradip Kumar Mohanty, Judicial Member was authorised 
by the President to act as Chairperson, Lokpal in terms of section 9 of the Act, 

 46 
pursuant to demitting of office by the incumbent Chairperson, Justice Pinaki Chandra 
Ghose on 27th May, 2022.  
As regards vacancies of the Judicial Members, it may be stated that in terms of 
section 3 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, the total strength of Members in 
the Lokpal should not exceed eight. Thus, the strength of Members in the Lokpal can 
be a maximum of eight or less than eight.  
The process for appointment of new Chairperson and Members will now be taken 
forward by the Selection Committee by con stituting a Search Committee to provide a 
panel of names for consideration of the Selection Committee for being appointed as 
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal. 
Insofar as constitution of Inquiry Wing and Prosecution Wing is concerned, the 
Lokpal has informed that the process is already under way. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.44  The Committee infers from the data provided by Lokpal that a large 
number of complaints are being disposed of on the ground that the complaint is not in 
the prescribed format. Lokpal has submitted to the Committee that it has not 
prosecuted even a single person accused of graft till date. The Committee is of the 
considered opinion that Lokpal was set up to strengthen the legal and institutional 
mechanism to deal with corruption in public life. However, the performance of 
Lokpal seems to be far from satisfactory. The Committee is of the view that Lokpal 
was established in an effort to promote clean and responsive governance and 
therefore, it should act as an enabler rather than an  inhibitor. The Committee 
recommends Lokpal not to reject genuine complaints merely on the technical ground 
that the complaint is not in the prescribed format. At this juncture when India is 
heading the G20 Anti Corruption Working group, Lokpal should rise  to the occasion 
and make every effort to strengthen anti corruption landscape in the country.    
               (Para 6.38)
                                    
Action Taken 
2.45  In reply to the Questionnaire forwarded by the Hon’ble Committee, it 
has already been clarified that filing of the complaints in the prescribed format is a 

 47 
statutory requirement in terms of section 2(1)(e) read with section 59(2)(a) of the Act. 
Accordingly, the form of complaint has been prescribed under the Lokpal 
(Complaint) Rules, 2020, which have also been laid on the Table of both the Houses 
of Parliament.   Any departure from this statutory procedure may have legal 
implications. 
It may, however, be per tinent to mention that to facilitate complainants in filing 
complaints in the prescribed format, Lokpal has taken a number of initiatives 
including provision of a dedicated complaint corner on its website giving detailed 
guidelines for the purpose, launchi ng an online, interactive and user -friendly digital 
platform for filing complaints online, dedicated help -desk for guidance of the 
complainants etc. 
As regards prosecution by the Lokpal, as already conveyed in reply to the 
Questionnaire forwarded by the Ho n’ble Committee, section 20 of the Act provides 
for a detailed and well -defined statutory procedure for conducting preliminary 
inquiry and investigation into complaints received by the Lokpal.    
  
The prosecution in a given case begins only upon completion  of the preliminary 
inquiry and investigation for which the Act provides for clear timelines of maximum 
180 days and 360 days respectively in terms of sub -section (4) and (5) of section 20 
of the Act.  
The investigation report, as submitted by the investig ating agency, is then considered 
by a three -member bench of the Lokpal in terms of section 20(7) of the Act, and 
based on the investigation report, comments of the public servant complained against 
and the concerned competent authority, the three -member bench decides whether to 
grant sanction to launch prosecution or direct filing of a closure report before the 
Special Court or direct the competent authority to initiate departmental proceedings 
or any other action against the concerned public servant, as pr ovided for under 
clauses (a) and (b) of section 20(7) of the Act. 
Moreover, a case for prosecution is made out only when the Lokpal is satisfied that 
there is sufficient material, as collected during the course of investigation, which may 
be preceded by pr eliminary inquiry and the fact that the case is likely to stand the 
judicial scrutiny.  

 48 
Lokpal, based on its experience, has also stated that although there are clear statutory 
timelines for completion of preliminary inquiry and investigation, there are de lays on 
account of non -receipt of comments from the public servant complained against and 
the concerned competent authorities, as mandated under the Act.   The process of 
investigation also takes much longer than anticipated and the Statute itself provides 
that the timeline for investigation may be extended for a period of six months at a 
time as per section 20(5) of the Act. 
*** 
  

 49 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.0 UPSC apprised the Committee that it releases the answer key of the 
preliminary test of the Civil services examination only after the completion of the 
entire process of the said examination.  In other words, the Commission is depriving 
the candidates of an opportunity to contest the answer key before progressing to the 
next stage of the said examination. This practice not only demoralizes the candidates 
but also compromises the validity and fairness of the examination process.  
                          (Para 4.5) 
Action Taken 
3.1 Position in respect of Answer Keys: 
In respect of the release of the answer key, it is stated that the Commission releases 
the answer keys of the Civil Services (Preliminary) Examination (objective type) 
after completion of the entire process of the Civil Services Examination. This policy 
of the Commission is being followed in all Examinations of the Commission and it 
has been working smoothly. Further, after conduct of the Examination, the 
Commission opens a Representation Window in its web -portal for a week for the 
candidates to represent a gainst any of the Questions of the Examination. The 
observations made by the candidates in their representations are carefully considered 
in the Commission through the subject experts and the remedial action is taken, if 
required.  
Moreover, it may also be  worth mentioning that the Commission is declaring the 
result of Preliminary Examination within a period of 15 -20 days after conduct of the 
Examination.  If the Answer Keys are declared before declaration of result, it may 
adversely impact the timely decla ration of CSP result and thereby further activities 
such as conduct of CS Main Examination and Interviews will also be affected. 

 50 
Furthermore, timing of release of Answer Key is applicable to all the candidates of 
the Examination uniformly and in the larger public interest. 
In view of the above and the fact that this system has been working well since 
inception and serving the larger public interest, it may not be appropriate to revisit 
this system. 
 
Position in respect of feedback: 
As intimated earlier, the Commission has an impeccable system of obtaining 
feedback from the candidates.  This is a continuous and regular process.  It may also 
be worthwhile to submit that the Commission with its vast experience and expertise, 
has evolved, a credible systems and procedures in carrying out its functions entrusted 
to it by the Constitution under Art 320 in a fair and impartial manner without any fear 
and favour. The feedbacks received occurring from time to time are examined in the 
Commission and appropriate action is taken, if necessary.  
The number of references received as feedback by the Commission from different 
sources are of varied nature. The majority of those relate to change in eligibility 
conditions such as increasing age -limits, number of attempts, inclusion of a subject 
etc. which being matters of policy do not come under the purview of the 
Commission. Some relate to opening of Examination Centres at different locations of 
the country. In recent past, the Commission has increased the number of Centres for 
Civil Services (Preliminary) Examination, NDA & CDS Examinations and CAPF 
Examination keeping in view the number of applicants for these Examinations and 
certain other considerations towards maintaining the integrity and confident iality of 
the Examinations at all the levels. It is also worth to point out that the Commission 
suo moto takes all necessary steps within its domain to make the entire system more 
candidate-friendly as much as possible without lowering its guard on integri ty and 
confidentiality. 
Further observation of the Committee 
3.2 The Committee would like to state that though the procedure presently 
being followed by the Commission of releasing the answer keys of the Civil 
Services (Preliminary) Examination (objective type) after completion of the 
entire process of the Civil Services Examination may be working smoothly, but 
it is depriving the candidates an opportunity to contest the answer key before 

 51 
progressing to the next stage of the said examination. The Commission , which is 
declaring the result of Preliminary Examination within a period of 15 -20 days 
after conduct of the examination, may open a Representation Window in its 
web-portal for a week for the candidates to represent against any of the 
Questions and within  the next week itself may solve the issues raised. This will 
also lead to reducing litigations and representations against the answer -keys at a 
later stage. Hence, there would be no loss of time overall. It would just prevent 
dissatisfaction and disgruntle ment amongst the candidates appearing as all the 
queries would be resolved at the initial stage only before proceeding to next level 
of examination. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.3 The Committee appreciates Staff Selection Commission for making efforts 
to squeeze the recruitment cycle to 6 -9 months. The Commission informed the 
Committee that it has decided to do away with the descriptive examinations in an 
attempt to expedite the rec ruitment cycle. The Committee is of the considered 
opinion that the skills of the personnel should be in consonance with their job 
requirements. Candidates requiring to take up high management posts are required to 
have aptitude, in -depth knowledge, good w riting skills and communication abilities. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends SSC to reconsider its decision to do away 
with the descriptive tests.                               (Para 4.10) 
Action Taken 
3.4  Staff Selection Commission has been mandated wi th the task of making 
recruitment to all Group ‘B’ (Non -Gazetted) and Group ‘C’ (Non -Technical) posts in 
various Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India and their Attached and 
Subordinate Offices except those posts which are specifically exempte d from the 
purview of the Commission. SSC does not make recruitment for high management 
posts or specialized posts. 
The decision to do away with the descriptive paper is based on the recommendation 
of the Expert Committee constituted to review the scheme a nd syllabus of the 
examinations which was accepted by the Government. 
 
Further observation of the Committee 

 52 
3.5 The Committee is of the opinion that the staff which is recruit ed by SSC to 
some of the Group ‘B’ (Non-Gazetted) posts, at later stages of their career rise to 
higher levels by way of promotion wherein they take up high management posts 
requiring good aptitude, in -depth knowledge, good writing skills and 
communication abilities. Such Group ‘B’ (Non -Gazetted) posts should not be 
exempted from descriptive tests just to reduce the recruitment time cycle as this 
would lead to induction of candidates who may n ot be capable enough and 
possess the aptitude and expertise required to man the higher posts at later 
stages of their career. The Committee howeve r, agrees that Group ‘C’ (Non -
Technical) posts in various Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India 
and their Attached Offices do not rise to such high level management posts and 
thus no change in their pattern of examination is required.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.6 The Committee notes that CBI was established in 1963 and is governed by the 
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, which was enacted during the second world 
war to regulate the functioning of the Special Police Establishment which  was set up 
in 1941 to investigate cases of bribery and corruption involving purchases and 
supplies during the World War II. The Committee further notes that as per the 
provisions of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, the consent of the state 
government is a pre -requisite for any investigation by the CBI. The Committee 
further notes that, as on date, nine States have withdrawn the general consent they 
had given to the CBI for investigating cases. The Committee feels that the Delhi 
Special Police Es tablishment Act has many limitations and therefore, recommends 
that there is a need to enact a new law and define the status, functions and powers of 
the CBI and also lay down safeguards to ensure objectivity and impartiality in its 
functioning.                      (Para 6.17) 
 
Action Taken 
3.7 Power of CBI to investigate emanates from the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment (DSPE) Act, 1946. 
As per Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment (DSPE) Act, 1946, 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) n eeds the consent from the respective State 

 53 
Government for conducting investigation in its jurisdiction. In terms of  
the provision of Section 6 of the DSPE Act, 1946, the State Governments have 
granted a general consent to CBI for the  
investigation of speci fied class of offences against specified categories of persons 
enabling CBI to register and investigate those specified matters.  
For investigation of any matter in such State, which is not covered in the aforesaid 
consent, specific consent of State Government is required for the CBI to investigate in 
the State. CBI seeks such consent on case to case basis.  
Further observation of the Committee 
3.8 The Committee takes note of the reply that as per the provision of 
Section 6 of the DSPE Act, 1946, the S tate Governments have granted a general 
consent to CBI for the investigation of specified class of offences against specified 
categories of persons enabling CBI to register and investigate those specified 
matters. For investigation of any matter in such St ate, which is not covered in the 
aforesaid consent, specific consent of State Government is required for the CBI to 
investigate in the State and CBI seeks such consent on case to case basis. With 
reference to this only the Committee reiterates that as on d ate, nine States have 
withdrawn the general consent they had given to the CBI for investigating cases. 
This has led to severe limitations on powers of CBI to investigate crucial cases 
impartially and objectively which will give rise to corruption and organ ized 
crimes in states. Hence, as recommended earlier, apart from the DSPE Act, 1946, 
there is a dire need to enact a new law and define the status  and functions and 
give wider powers to CBI to investigate such crucial cases without the need of 
State’s cons ent and  interference. At the same time, in the same Act, some  
safeguards should also be laid down  to ensure objectivity and impartiality in the 
functioning of CBI so that the States also don’t feel discriminated and absolutely 
powerless.  ‘State’s consent clause’ should be removed only in such cases which 
are considered to be a threat to the nation’s security and integrity and any delay 
in investigation of such cases by the CBI may lead to a general dissatisfaction 
among the citizens of the country.   
 
 
*** 

 54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 55 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                   
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
V 
FIFTH MEETING  
 The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM on Thursday, 07.12.2023, in 
Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Malook Nagar 
(viii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(ix) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
(xv) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
3. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 

 56 
2.           At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the meeting 
of the Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. 
consideration and adoption of the following draft reports of the Committee:  
(i) *     *                    * 
(ii) 135th Report on Action Taken on 126 th Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) pertaining to Department of Personnel 
and Training ; 
(iii) *               *                    * 
(iv) *               *           * 
(v) *               *           * 
(vi) *      *           * 
(vii) *      *            * 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted all the draft Reports and decided to 
present those Reports to both Houses of Parliament on 11 th December, 2023.  The 
Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absenc e Shri P. Wilson and Shri 
Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri 
Malook Nagar and in his absence Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru for 
laying the reports in Lok Sabha.  
4.  *       *     * 
5.      The meeting adjourned at 4.30 PM. 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN  
7th December, 2023                                                                               DIRECTOR   
 
 
 
*pertains to other matter 
 
 
 
 