Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
REPORT NO.
81
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th March, )15 2016
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th March, )15 2016
Role of Ministry of Law and Justice in Framing/
Approving the Provisions of International Covenants/
Multilateral/Bilateral Treaties or Agreements
EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)

47
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT
Role of Ministry of Law and Justice in Framing/
Approving the Provisions of International Covenants/
Multilateral/Bilateral Treaties or Agreements
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 15th March, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available
CS (P & L) - 161


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iv)-(vii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (vi ii)-(ix)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-23
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS – A T A G LANCE ............................................................ 24-26
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 27-46

ACRONYMS
ASA : Air Service Agreement
ASEAN : Association of  South East Asian Nation
BBIN : Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal  
BIT : Bilateral International Treaty
BLI : BRICS Law Institute
BRICS : Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa
CARA : Central Adoption Resource Authority
CAR T AL : Centre for Advanced Research and Training in Arbitration Law
CBEC : Central Board of Excise and Customs
CBDT : Central Board of Direct Taxes
CEDAW : Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
CHEARS : Centre for Human Rights Education Research and Studies
CHILD : Centre for Human Rights of Children and Institutional Law Development
CRC : Convention on the Rights of the Child
CWS : Centre for WTO Studies
DeitY : Department of Electronics and Information Technology
ECOSOC : International Convention on Economic and Social Rights
EEZ : Exclusive Economic Zone
FRI : Forest Research Institute
FSI : Flag State Inspection
FT A : Free Trade Agreements
FTP : Foreign Trade Policy
ICCPR : International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
ICESCR : International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
ICPS : Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary studies
ICT : Information and Communication Technology
(viii)

IIP : Indian Institute of Petroleum
IJAL : The Indian Journal of Arbitration
ILI : Indian Law Institute
ILO : International Labour Organisation
IMO : International Maritime Organisation
IPR : Intellectual Property Rights
IRS : Indian Revenue  Service
ISIL : Indian Society of International Law
JWG : Joint working Groups
LAAC : Legal Aid and Awareness Committee
LABSNAA : Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
MEA : Ministry of External Affairs
MLA T : Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty
MoUs : Memorandum of Understanding
NADT : National Academy of Direct Taxes
NJA : National Judicial Academy
NRI : Non-Resident Indian
ONGC : Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
PSI : Port State Inspection
RECP : Regional Comprehension Economic Partnership
UN : United Nation
UNCTAD IIA : United Nation Conference on Trade and Developments  - International Investment
Agreement
WTO : World Trade Organisations
(ix)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September , 2014)
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K.T. S. Tulsi
*10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Subrata Bakshi
13. Adv. Sharad Bansode
14. Shri P .P . Chaudhary
15. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
16. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
17. Shri Shanta Kumar
18. Shri Santosh Kumar
19. Shri S. Bhagwant Mann
20. Shri Anoop Mishra
21. Shri B.V . Naik
22. Shri Vincent H. Palla
23. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
24. Shri Vithalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Dr. A. Sampath
26. Shri Bharat Singh
27. Shri Udhayakumar M.
28. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
29. Dr. Anshul Verma
#30. Shri Tariq Anwar
$31. Adv. Joice George
(i)
* Nominated vice Shri Aayanur Manjunatha w.e.f. 30th September, 2014.
#  V acancy existing since the constitution of the Committee and filled-up on 11th September, 2011.
$  Change in the nomination of Shri Innocent w.e.f. 22nd December, 2014.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Re-constituted on 1st September, 2015)
1. Dr. E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
5. Shrimati Rajani Patil
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Adv. Sharad Bansode
15. Shri P . P. Chaudhary        
16. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary 
17. Adv. Joice George
18. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
19. Shri Santosh Kumar
20. Shri Bhagwant Mann
21. Shri Anoop Mishra
22. Shri B.V . Nayak
23. Shri Vincent H. Pala
24. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
25. Shri V . Panneer Selvam
26. Dr. A. Sampath
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri  M. Udhayakumar
29. Shri Varaprasad Rao V elagapalli
30. Dr. Anshul Verma
*31. Shri Shanta Kumar
(ii)
* Resigned from Committee w.e.f. 9th October, 2015.

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok  K.  Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the
Eightieth Report on the Subject ‘Role of Ministry of Law and Justice in Framing/Approving the Provisions
of International Covenants/Multilateral/Bilateral Treaties or Agreements’. The Committee identified the Subject
for examination and report on 21st January, 2015.
2. The Committee heard the views of Additional Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs during
its meeting held on 28th September, 2015 and representatives of Ministries of Home Affairs,
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), Commerce and Industry and Ministry of Law and
Justice on 7th October, 2015 (Department of Legal Affairs). The Committee also heard the views
of Secretaries of Ministries of Road Transport and Highways, Shipping Civil Aviation,
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Electronics and Information
Technology), and Agriculture and  Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries and Joint Secretary of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
during its meeting held on 27th October, 2015 and Chairmen of Central Board of Excise and
Customs (CBEC) & Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), Joint Secretaries of Ministries of
Finance (Department of Revenue),  Social Justice & Empowerment (Department of Social Justice
& Empowerment and Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), Women and Child
Development, Additional Secretary of Ministry of Labour & Employment, Representatives of Indian
Institute of Foreign Trade, Indian Society of International Law, Foreign Service Institute, Ministry
of External Affairs and UN International Law Commission on 28th October, 2015. The Committee
also heard the views of Secretaries of Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative Department,
Department of Justice, Representatives of Indian Law Institute and National Judicial Academy
during its meeting held on 1st March, 2016.
3. The Committee interacted with the representatives of Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy
of Administration, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP) and
Forest Research Institute (FRI) during its study visit to Dehradun on 5th and 6th November, 2015.
The Committee also interacted with the representatives of National Law University, Jodhpur during
its study visit to Jodhpur on 29th January, 2016.
4. While considering the Subject, the Committee took note of the following documents/
information placed before it:-
(i) Background  Note on the subject received from Legislative Department, Ministry of
Law and Justice;
(ii) Background Note on the subject  received from Department of Legal Affairs,
Ministry of Law and Justice;
(iii) Background Note on the subject  received from Department of Justice, Ministry of
Law and Justice;
(iv)

(v)
(iv) Views of the Ministry of External Affairs on the subject;
(v) Reconsidering Treaty-Making in India: An Argument for Reform through the Prism
of International Investment Agreements-Extracts from Indian Journal of International
Law [New Delhi, V ol.54, Nos. 3&4; July-December (2014) p.p. :317-369];
(vi) UNCTAD IIA Issues Note (April, 2014);
(vii) Background Note and replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance;
(viii) Replies to the Questionnaire on the subject received from Department of Economic
Affairs, Ministry of Finance;
(ix) Replies to the Questionnaire on the subject received from Ministry of External
Affairs;
(x) Replies to the Questionnaire on the subject received from Department of Electronics
& Information Technology;
(xi) Replies to the Questionnaire  on the subject received from Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(xii) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Ministry of Road Transport
& Highways (IC Division);
(xiii) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Ministry of Shipping;
(xiv) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Ministry of Agriculture &
Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries);
(xv) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Ministry of Women and
Child Development;
(xvi) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Ministry of Social Justice
& Empowerment;
(xvii) Replies to the Questionnaire on the subject received from Department of
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities;
(xviii) Replies to the Questionnaire on the subject received from Department of Commerce,
Ministry of Commerce & Industry;
(xix) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Ministry of Labour and
Employment;
(xx) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Ministry of Environment,
Forest & Climate Change;
(xxi) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation  and Farmers  Welfare ;
(xxii) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Department of Legal
Affairs;

(xxiii) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Department of Revenue,
Ministry of Finance;
(xxiv) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from International Cooperation
Division, Ministry of Home Affairs;
(xxv) Background Note and replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from the
Indian Institute of Foreign Trade;
(xxvi) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Foreign Services Institute
(Ministry of External Affairs);
(xxvii) Background Note on the subject received from the Indian Society of International
Law;
(xxviii) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from Oil & Natural Gas
Corporation;
(xxix) Replies to the questionnaire on the subject received from CSIR-Indian Institute of
Petroleum;
(xxx) Background note on the subject received from O.P. Jindal Global University;
(xxxi) Clarifications received from the Legislative Department on the discrepancy in the
background note on the subject submitted by the Department;
(xxxii) Supplementary submissions of the Indian Society of International Law as sought
by the Members in the meeting held on 28 th October, 2015;
(xxxiii)  Replies of the Ministry of External Affairs to the queries of Members in the
meeting of the Committee held 28 th September, 2015;
(xxxiv) Background note on the subject received from Lal Bahadur Shastri National
Academy of Administration;
(xxxv) Replies of the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA),
Mussoorie to the queries of Members during its study visit on 5 th November, 2015;
(xxxvi) Background Note on the subject received from National Law University, Jodhpur;
(xxxvii) W ritten replies on the subject received from National Academy of Direct Taxes
(NADT), Nagpur;
(xxxviii) Brief Note on the subject received from Prof. (Dr.) Sreejith S.G., Associate Dean
(Academic Affairs) & Executive Director, Centre for International Studies Jindal
Global Law School; and
(xxxix) Brief Note on the subject received from Department of Justice, Ministry of Law
and Justice.
5. The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the representatives of the
Ministries/Departments for furnishing necessary information/documents and rendering valuable
assistance to the Committee in its deliberations. The Committee also wishes to express its gratitude
(vi)

(vii)
to all the distinguished persons who appeared before the Committee and placed their valuable views
on the Subject and furnished written notes and information in connection with the examination of
the Subject.
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
7. The Committee considered and adopted its Report in its meeting held on the 14th March,
2016.
DR. E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
14th March , 2016 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha

1
1
REPORT
A. Introductory Observation:
Treaties are frequently described as contracts between nations. As instruments of
International law, they establish obligations with which International law requires the parties to
comply at national level as well as international level. Entering into treaties and agreements with
foreign powers is one of the attributes of State sovereignty. The Vienna Convention of Law of
Treaties is the main instrument that regulates treaties. Article 2(1)(a) of the Vienna Convention of
Law of Treaties defines treaties as an international agreement concluded between States in written
form and governed by International Law, whether embodied in a single instrument or in two or
more related instruments and whatever its particular designation. The doctrine of pacta sunt
servanda  contained in articles 26 and 27 of the Vienna Convention, 1980 which lays down that
every treaty in force is binding upon the parties to it and must be performed in good faith.
2. The Consultation Paper under the auspices of National Commission to Review the Working
of the Constitution on topic of “Treaty Making Power under Our Constitution” begins with the
note, “ Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign powers is one of the attributes of State
sovereignty. No State can insulate itself from the rest of the world whether it be in the matter of
foreign relations, trade, environment, communications, ecology or finance. This is more true since
the end of the World War II. The advent of globalisation and the enormous advances made in
communication and information technology have rendered independent States inter-dependent. Every
State has entered into and is entering into treaties – be it multi-lateral or bilateral – which have a
serious impact upon the economy and the social and political life of its society. In spite of the
fundamental importance of the treaty-making power, it has unfortunately received very little
attention in our country, though in many other countries, good amount of research and debate has
gone into it .” (January 8, 2001) The above mentioned specific topic under the National
Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution was headed by Hon’ble Justice Shri B. P.
Jeevan Reddy.
B. Current Practice of Entering into International Treaties and the Executing Agencies
3. Article 51 of the Constitution of India enjoins the State to endeavour to “ foster respect for
international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another ”. For
the purpose of international relations and international obligations, the ‘State’ referred to in Article
51 is understood to be the Union of India, i.e. the Central Government. According to the
Constitutional arrangements, in particular Entries 10 and 14 of List 1 of the Union List in the
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, all matters of foreign affairs which bring the Union into
relation with foreign countries including entering into treaties and agreements fall within the ambit
of the Union of India, the Central Government.
4. Under the Government of India (Allocation of the Business) Rules, 1961, as per Rule 3 of
the Second Schedule regarding ‘Distribution of subjects among the Departments’, the Ministry of

2
External Affairs has been entrusted the responsibility to negotiate Political treaties, agreements and
conventions with foreign and Commonwealth countries in various disciplines and subjects which
inter alia  include:
 matters relating to Law of the Sea, including the Indian Territorial Waters,
Contiguous Zone, Continental Shelf and Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ);
 questions of international law arising on the high seas including fishery rights; piracy
and crimes committed on the High Seas or in the air;
 offences against the Law of Sovereign States committed on land or the High Seas or
in the air;
 legal matters concerning the International Seabed Area and Authority;
 United Nations, Specialised Agencies and other International Organisations and
Conferences;
 extradition and laws relating to extraditing of accused persons from India to foreign
and commonwealth countries and vice versa;
 demarcation of the land frontiers of India;
 maritime boundaries of India;
 human Rights law including: (a) interaction with Human Rights abroad; (b)
international declarations, treaties, conventions and conferences; (c) references
received from the United Nations and other specialised agencies and organisations
thereof; (d) implementation of reporting obligations, in coordination with the
concerned Ministries, required under the United Nations and international
conventions, to which India is a State party.
4.1 The same Rules has also allocated the subject “Treaties and agreements with foreign
countries in matters of civil law” to the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice.
5. The Committee has been informed by the Ministry of External Affairs that for discharging
its allocated functions and responsibilities in this regard, the Ministry has created the Legal and
Treaties Division in 1957 which is entrusted with the work relating to public international law. The
Division is approached for private international law work/issues by other Ministries and deals with
cases before the International Court of Justice and international arbitrations as well. The Division
also advises MEA and other Ministries/Departments of the Government of India on all issues of
international law including negotiations of treaties and agreements; and vetting of bilateral and
multilateral treaties/Memorandums of Understanding from international law angle.
6. As regards the role of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, it has
informed the Committee that the Department is primarily concerned with tendering of advice to
Ministries on legal matters including interpretation of the Constitution and the laws and conduct of
cases in the Supreme Court and the High Courts on behalf of the Central Government and on
behalf of the Governments of States participating in the Central Agency Scheme. It is also
concerned with reciprocal arrangements with foreign countries for the service of summons in civil

3
suits for the execution of decrees of Civil Courts, for the enforcement of maintenance orders, and
for the administration of the estates of foreigners dying in India.
7. The Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department (Ministry of Law) are required
to be consulted as per the Transaction of Business Rules on all Legislative proposals before the
proposal is brought before the Cabinet for approval. The Ministry does not deal with cases in
which legal opinion on questions of International Law or Treaties is sought by other Ministries
Departments in view of O.M.No.F.3(8)-O&M/61/1/152 dated the 30
th August, 1961 of the Ministry
of External Affairs which has requested that cases in which legal opinion on questions of
international law or treaties are required to be referred to the Legal and Treaties Division of the
Ministry of External Affairs.
8. The Department of Legal Affairs, however, in its advisory capacity is concerned with all
bilateral and multilateral treaties on legal issues and its impact on domestic law and examines the
Constitutional aspects irrespective of the subject allocation. The Department also examines issues
like clarity and formulation of provisions, legal implications of the Agreements, predominance of
domestic law in giving effect to the Agreement, presence of mechanism for interpretation and
implementation of the same and presence of Dispute Resolution Mechanism provided in the
Agreement. In the event of signing of any Treaty relating to the subjects related to different
Ministries, the concerned Ministry moves a Cabinet Note seeking concurrence from all the
Ministries/Departments concerned including Ministry of External Affairs and the Department of
Legal Affairs with the approval of its Minister.
9. In its written submission to the Committee, the Department of Legal Affairs has stated that
in number of instances, representatives of the Ministry of Law have not been involved at the time
of negotiating a draft Agreement and merely the negotiated draft Agreements were sent to this
Department for comments. It has suggested that representatives of the Department are made part
of the initial negotiations as well, so that legal implications of provisions are appropriately
understood and timely taken care of.
10. Whenever the Ministry of External Affairs comes across a situation while examining the
provisions of a Treaty that it has impact on the rights conferred by domestic law, it consults the
Department of Legal Affairs for opinion on the legal issues arising therein. The Department is also
consulted whenever in the process of negotiation or other matter with a foreign country involving
examination of any domestic legislation or any clarification on any domestic law issues with the
view of ensuring conformity with the relevant municipal laws and whenever any amendment in the
existing municipal law or an implementing legislation is required to fulfil the obligations assumed
under any international treaty/agreement.
C. Trends in Some Democratic Countries
11. In the United Kingdom, a practice was established whereby any treaty subject to ratification
is laid before Parliament for at least 21 sitting days before ratification is carried out, though
ratification being an executive power. Article II, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution empowers the
President “ by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds
of the Senators present concur … ”. The President initiates and conducts negotiations of the treaties

4
and after signing them, places them before Senate for its “Advice and Consent”. In Australia,
treaties, both bilateral and multilateral are required to be tabled at least for 15 sitting days, after
signature but before they are ratified, to allow for parliamentary scrutiny. A joint Standing
Committee on treaties comprising Members of both Houses and consisting of Federal and State
Officers consider and report upon the treaties tabled before the House. The Canadian practice is
that, mandatory approval from the Parliament is required only in case of treaties that require
implementing legislation.
12. In New Zealand, the parliamentary treaty examination process introduced in 1997 and made
permanent in 2000 requires all multilateral treaties and major bilateral treaties of particular
significance to be presented to the House before binding treaty action is taken. In accordance with
the process, once Cabinet has approved the proposed treaty action, the Legal Division of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade is responsible for presenting the treaty and the National
Interest Analysis to the House of the Representatives. Once a treaty has been presented, it stands
referred to the Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Committee of the House.
D. Mandate to Indian Parliament to Give Effect to Treaties
13. Article 253 the constitution has empowered the Parliament to give effect to international law
treaties for the whole or any part the territory of India and reads:
“253. Legislation for giving effect to international agreements notwithstanding anything in
the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power to make any law for the
whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or
convention with any other country or countries or any decision made at any international
conference, association or other body .”
14. In Maganbhai Ishwarbhai Patel vs. Union of India [(2002) 3 SCC], the Supreme Court
observed that “A treaty really concerns the political rather than the judicial wing of the State.
When a treaty or an award after arbitration comes into existence, if has to be implemented and this
can only be if all the three branches of Government, the Legislature, the Executive and the
Judiciary, or any of them, possess the power to implement it. If there is any deficiency in the
Constitutional system it has to be removed and the State must equip itself with the necessary
power.” Justice J.C. Shah observed in the aforesaid decision that “the effect of Article 253 is that
if a treaty, agreement or convention with a foreign State deals with a subject within the competence
of the State Legislature, the Parliament alone has, notwithstanding Article 246(3), the power to
make laws to implement the treaty, agreement or convention or any decision made at any
international conference, association or other body. In terms, the Article deals with legislative
power: thereby power is conferred upon the parliament which it may not otherwise possess.”
15. India adopts dualistic approach in relation to Treaties/Conventions which regards
international law and municipal law are separate in which one does not prevail over the other. India
follows the British practice as it existed at the time of its independence. States’ obligation to
domesticate its valid international obligations can be drawn from the Permanent Court of
International Justice (PCIJ) decision on Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations Case , PCIJ
Reports, Series B, No. 10 (1925), 20. Also Article 27 of Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
to which India is not yet a party (to the Vienna Convention 1969) provides that national law cannot

5
be invoked to justify non-compliance with international law. This approach entrusted major role to
Indian Parliament to ensure the implementation of international law and also to protect national
interest. This approach led the Indian Parliament to harmonise the international aspiration vs national
interest.
16. In February, 2000, the Ministry of Law and Justice set up the National Commission to
Review the Working of the Constitution to recommend functional changes which could be made to
the Constitution and parliamentary system in the light of socio-economic developments. The
Consultation Paper of the Commission gave two principal suggestions, i.e., (i) the Parliament must
make a law to regulate the treaty making power and; (ii)  the Union Government must consult with
States prior to signing any treaty in order to reduce conflicts with State Governments. The Second
Commission on Centre-State Relation headed by former Chief Justice of India M.M. Punchhi
recommended in its report in March, 2010 that in view of the vast and plenary nature of the
power, the Parliament should enact a law  to streamline the procedures involved in treaty-making.
While acknowledging that treaty-making involved complex, prolonged, multi-level issues which
could only be well handled by the executive, the Commission nevertheless felt that “Constitutional
mandate on federal governance cannot be ignored” .
17. In India, the Executive has been taking action on giving effect to treaties under Article 73
read with Entries 10 and 14 of list I of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution while Article 253 of
the Indian Constitution has empowered the Parliament to make any law for the whole or any part
of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other
country or countries or any decision made at any international conference, association or other
body. The Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India also issued a notification no. 1/
13/2/2010-Cab dated 2011, whereby accession to or ratification of such convention/treaties, be
undertaken only after relevant domestic laws have been amended, or the enabling legislation has
been enacted in cases, where there are no domestic laws on the subject.
18. The Indian Society of International Law submitted that use of resources and expertise of
Parliament and that Indian Parliament has to be involved in such matters in order to permit the law
to evolve and to develop properly. Views have also been expressed that the involvement of
Parliament could reduce the risk of inconsistent body of laws and help to legitimise and
institutionalise the process of inclusion of international law into domestic law and would aid in
making the system sustainable. Some Members likewise endorsed this view.
18.1 The Ministry of External Affairs also, in its written submission, acknowledged that
Parliament continues to exercise exclusive power in cases where implementing legislation may be
necessary to give effect to treaties, which may necessitate the adoption of the necessary legislation
by the Parliament before the treaty in question may be ratified and that Parliament has necessary
oversight over the treaty-making power of the Union Government.
E. Indian Courts and International Law
19. There has been a tremendous increase in standard setting/law making of international law on
various subjects bearing direct implications on India’s national interest. In the absence of any
domestic law, many of the cases in the Supreme Court are now finding that the international

6
treaties, conventions and agreements are enforced as it is. The treaty law raises many difficult
issues concerning the proper balance to be found between the international law and Indian domestic
law. The general ‘proliferation’ and increasing importance of treaty law, inter-governmental
organisation, international courts and tribunals introduce both substantive and procedural obligations
on States. The numerous International Courts and tribunals are continuously interpreting the
existing international law principles and expect that a State including India has to comply with those
interpretations. This requires a dedicated State institution to ensure that its laws and practice give
effect to these interpretations or to bring the national law in accordance with interpretations
provided by complex regime of international courts and tribunals.
20. There has been a couple of recent high profile examples of what can only be described as
inconsistent decisions in national and international judicial bodies. Many are concerned with
fundamental issues, viz., impairment of the friendly relations with other nations, principle of
peaceful co-existence, obligation of State trading partners, breach of international duty,  providing
effective remedy for violations of human rights and rule of law, non-discrimination provisions in
the WTO, freedom of the seas, common heritage of mankind, common concern of mankind,
delimitation of seas, freedom of navigation, peaceful exploration of outer space, etc. In brief, there
are a plethora of issues arising in respect of the co-existence of municipal and international courts
and remedies stemming out from the complex web of international law regime and the ever-
growing number of legal proceedings, both at national and international levels brought by States/
individuals against another State. Therefore, the relationship between local courts and international
law to give effect to the international law obligations poses a challenge.
21. The Department of Legal Affairs has also submitted that treaties do not become part of
Municipal law and Courts in India cannot interpret them unless Parliament enacts a legislation by
exercising power conferred under Article 253 of the Constitution read with Entry 14 of the List I
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution in order to make it part of domestic law. As per the
existing norms, treaty is enforceable only when it is ratified by India after completing the
constitutional procedure.
22. The Supreme Court of India in Aban Loyd Chiles Offshore v. UOI (2008) 11 SCC 439)  held
that in the absence of municipal law, treaties can be looked into, if they are not in conflict with
municipal law. In Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan  ((1997) 6 SCC 241) and National Legal Services
Authority v. Union of India , ((2014) 5 SCC 438), the Supreme Court of India again applied
international law even when there was no municipal law. In T. N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v.
Union of India  ((2012) 4 SCC 362), the Supreme Court laid down a short but categorical directive
that treaties not contrary to municipal law are deemed to be incorporated in the municipal law. The
1969 and 1986 Vienna Conventions on the Law of Treaties between States and International
Organisations or between International Organisations mandate that their rules apply as binding
norms to the mutual relations entered into through Treaties/Covenants/Agreements.
23. There have been instances where Indian courts chose the random way in which questions
of international law are disposed of. In Xavier v. Canara Bank Ltd  (1969), the Kerala High Court
held that individual citizen could not complain about the breach of the International Covenants on
Human Rights in the municipal courts “ even if the country concerned has adopted the covenants
and ratified the Optional Protocol ”. At the time when this judgment was given, India was a party

7
to International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) which shows that the Court did not even evaluate
the difference between signing and ratification of treaties. In Biswambhar Singh v. Orissa  (1957),
the Orissa High Court observed that India is “ one of the parties to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights ” which was a General Assembly resolution and does not require signature or
ratification process of a treaty.
24. April 2014 issue of ‘ UNCTAD IIA Issues Note’ indicated that by end of 2013, 98 States
have been respondents in a total of 568 known treaty-based cases which is indicative of the rising
trend of arbitration cases brought by States and international investors. The said report has also
indicated India as the eighth most frequent respondent State in 2013 with Czech Republic topping
the list.
F. India’s Role in International Law Making
25. The Ministry of External Affairs has informed the Committee that in recent years, the
approximate number of multilateral and bilateral treaties, agreements and memoranda of
understanding concluded annually is over three hundred on various subjects pertaining to different
administrative Ministries. All treaties and agreements that are in force and having the intention of
the States Parties to create legal obligations are binding and such treaties and agreements shall be
observed in good faith (pacta sunt servanda) . Approximately, around 3,500 treaties have been
concluded by India since 1950.
26. India is also a member of various international Dispute Settlement Bodies whose
responsibility is to determine disputes involved on the subject of the treaties. The presence of
competent experts on international law to represent in these bodies is bound to ensure the national
interest. It has, however, been observed that the Indian representations in some of the Dispute
Settlement Bodies has been minimal.
G. Deliberations and Interactions with the Committee
27. The Committee also gathered feedback on the methodology followed by the various
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government. Some of the inputs received are listed below:
Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY)
 The Department has a dedicated International Cooperation Division which pursues
and coordinates to promote international cooperation in the emerging and frontier
areas of information technology under bilateral, multilateral or regional framework of
cooperation.
 Information Communications Technologies cooperation created opportunities for
business-to-business interactions and match making, open up collaborative avenues
to enter third countries’ market and joint regional development programs in the area
of Research and Development, IT infrastructure, Networking, Skill Development,
e-Governance, Cyber Security, etc..
 ICT is creating a virtually networked world, where Government and individuals are
contacted and interacting with each other in 24x7x365 format. Also, ICTs are

8
changing and developing very rapidly, therefore, technical MoUs/Agreements should
be more specific with focus approach in a time framework.
 MoUs are implemented through a Joint Working Group on Information
Communications Technology composed of representatives of the Parties. The
Working Group is responsible for defining methodologies, mechanisms and
procedures for the development of the activities provided in the MoUs including
feasibility and the financial requirements.
 The agenda of the JWG is evolved mutually with the International Partners and
consultation with various stakeholders/industry Associations from Indian side
including industry/industrial bodies.
 The Information related to cases of international arbitration is provided by the
concerned nodal Ministry/Department, i.e.  Department of Communications and
Department of Economic Affairs, which also provides the fees and handles the
cases.
Ministry of Shipping
 No biennial or annual reporting is done to the International Bodies. The compliance
of the international obligations are checked and verified at Flag State Inspection
(FSI) for Indian ships and Port State Inspection (PSI) for foreign flag ships visiting
Indian ports. Any important issue arising out of implementation of the International
Conventions, to which India is a party, are raised at the International Maritime
Organisation (IMO) during meeting, which are held every year.
 It is felt that an Advisor (Legal) in the Ministry of Shipping would be of great help
in dealing with issues relating to International Agreements/MoU etc.
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (IC Division)
 Motor V ehicle Agreements would go a long way in strengthening the ties and
promoting bilaterism/multilaterism among the countries.  This would also enhance
economic, social and technical collaboration for promoting and strengthening
collective self-reliance; and regional integration of the concerned countries by
removing the connectivity bottlenecks.
 Before entering into agreements/MoUs with other countries, the Ministry consults
concerned Ministries/Departments and Stakeholders and consider their inputs/
comments into the text.  Sometimes, workshops are convened with stakeholders in
connection with finalisation of agreement and its protocols.  Thereafter, approval of
the Cabinet based on inter-ministerial inputs is invariably taken.  Joint working
Groups (JWGs) involving officers from concerned Ministries, have been created for
implementation of various MOUs/agreements.
Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry
 The Department conducts a regular impact analysis and makes an assessment of the
Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) signed by India through preferential trade data.

9
 Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) has specific provisions primarily taken from the WTO
Agreement which states the basic principles for restrictions on imports and exports.
 The implementation of the trade agreements are done through customs notification
or notification in the Foreign Trade Policy.  Joint Committees under most of the
preferential trade agreements also keep a tab on the implementation of the
agreements.
 The Department has not appointed advisor(s) but takes the support of experts in the
field such as the Centre for WTO Studies (CWS) and law firms for WTO disputes.
 Under the WTO Dispute Settlement Mechanism, 23 cases have been filed against the
Government of India (against actions taken by various Ministries/Departments, both
at Central and State level).
 WTO Disputes whether as Respondent or Complainant or as Third Parties are
handled by the Rules Desk of the Trade Policy Division in the Department of
Commerce in consultations with the concerned administrative Ministry/Departments
and the law firm engaged to provide legal services.
Ministry of Civil Aviation
 The Ministry follows an elaborate mechanism for deciding bilateral agreements/
granting traffic rights.  An inter-ministerial meeting prior to the bilateral talks and
after obtaining clearance from the Minister of Civil Aviation, is held under the
chairmanship of Secretary/Joint Secretary with Ministries such as External Affairs,
Tourism, Overseas Affairs, Department of Commerce and the eligible Indian
Scheduled carriers.  In the meeting, the broad strategy is decided keeping in mind
tourist, commercial, NRI, political interests etc.
 If a new ASA is proposed to be discussed for the first time, the Indian model text is
usually given to the other State for comments and preparation.  Some consultations
take place through correspondence.  When a consultation or negotiation results in an
agreement on substance of a text, the chairman of each delegation initials each page
and each correction of the prepared text.  This exercise of initiating their agreement
serves as a guarantee of the text’s authenticity prior to its reproduction in form
suitable for formal signature.  Formal signatures take place once the constitutional
process amendments to ASAs require approval of the competent authority i.e.
Cabinet.  The entire process of inter-Ministerial consultation is followed before
seeking the approval of the Cabinet on the proposal.  MoUs which merely change
the capacity are finalised at the level of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare (IC Division)
 To protect our national interest for negotiating or formalising the international
Treaties/Covenants/Agreements of multilateral or bilateral nature/Conference
Resolution the concerned administrative Ministry/Departments and Ministry of Law
and Justice must be at the fore front.

10
 The Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare formulates draft provisions in
respect of treaties pertaining to Agricultural Sectors. In respect of multi-sector
agreements. The Ministry also provide inputs, comments and view in areas relating
to agriculture.
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
 MoUs/Agreements are finalised through consultation with the Ministry of External
Affairs, line Ministries and the foreign Government concerned.
 The Ministry has not appointed advisors for the purpose of advice on international
treaties. The advice of Legal and Treaties Division of the Ministry of External
Affairs is obtained before finalising MOUs/agreements.
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
 Only MoUs have been signed with the Government of Mauritius and Government of
Afghanistan. No assessment has been made on their implications.
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying &
Fisheries)
 Assessment of implications in respect of the Treaties/Agreements signed by the
Department has not been carried out.
 The Ministry has not appointed advisors for the purpose of advice on international
treaties.
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance
 With globalization of the economy and rising significance of tax matters, Central
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) has placed emphasis on development of internal
capacity and expertise in international taxation and tax treaty matters, and it is
compulsory for every officer of the Indian Revenue Service (IRS)-Income-tax to
undergo a detailed training module on international taxation and pass a paper on
International Taxation in Departmental Examinations as part of the induction training.
 Tax treaties are implemented and given effect to by Income-tax Authorities in the
same way as the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.  The treaties for
avoidance of double taxation usually specify that any term not defined in the treaty
will be interpreted as in the domestic laws.  The power to interpret the text of the
treaty lies strictly with the Indian tax authorities and the Courts, and as an additional
measure, these treaties provide for an avenue of resolution of any dispute related to
the treaty, through negotiations between the Competent Authorities of the two
countries.
 The follow-up by the Ministry of Law and Justice with the judiciary regarding
updating the knowledge of international law obligations will create a healthy practice
among the hierarchy of judiciary in the implementation, interpretation and
enforcement through the judicial process.

11
 Enforcement Directorate should be made part of any proposed agreement that
pertain to the ambit of Anti-money laundering and Foreign Exchange violations.
 The present system of negotiating or formalising the international treaties need to be
improved which can be done by way of increased participation of the functional
Ministries and Departments during the negotiation process and follow up.
 Treaties are reviewed constantly in international forums like OECD and the UN,
where representatives from CBDT also participate and share concerns of India and
discuss suggestions, if any, for further modification of the international Model
Conventions.
 Since the tax treaties are based on Standard Models, which are developed after
consultations with stakeholders, the same is not considered necessary by India or by
any other country, during the negotiation of bilateral tax treaties based on these
Models.
 As tax treaties are entered into by the Central Government under the provisions of
Section 90 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, which itself provides that the provisions of
such treaty will be applicable wherever they are more beneficial to the assessee, no
further domestic laws/amendments are required to be enacted for giving effect to
these treaties.
 Tax treaties do not require any reporting to any international body.
 Tax treaties entered by India, as also by most other countries, do not provide for
international Arbitration, which is considered detrimental to the sovereign ability of a
country to collect taxes on income arising from its territory.
 Any dispute arising out of the interpretation or implementation of MoUs/Agreements
shall be settled amicably through negotiations between the parities through diplomatic
channels. None of the tax treaties entered into by the Central Government under
Section 90 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provide for international arbitration.
Ministry of Labour and Employment
 The Ministry furnish periodical implementation reports to the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) on ratified Conventions and no further obligation is required
under ILO Constitution.
 The Conference Committee on the Application of Standards, a permanent tripartite
body of the International Labour Conference and an essential component of the ILO
supervisory system, offers the representatives of Governments, employers and
workers the opportunity to undertake a joint examination of the manner in which
States comply with their obligations deriving from the Conventions and
Recommendations adopted by the ILO.
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment
 The Ad-hoc  Committee constituted by the UN is responsible for drafting the

12
International Convention. The Ad-hoc Committee in turn may constitute working
groups for the purpose. The Working Group/Ad-hoc Committee holds negotiations
with the Member Countries through the concerned nodal Ministry/Department.
 The Ministry consults Ministry of External Affairs and other Ministries/Departments
for finalising its view/position on International Convention/Treaties.
Ministry of Women and Child Development
 Ministry of Women and Child Development has been submitting reports regularly to
the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
 The Ministry sends report to the Hague Secretariat once in 5 years. Special
Commission on the Practical Operation of the 1993 Hague Inter-country Adoption
Convention is normally held once in a period of 5 years. Various recommendations
of the Special Commission are implemented by the Ministry through Central
Adoption Resource Authority (CARA).
International Cooperation Division, Ministry of Home Affairs
 There has been good response in providing legal assistance from the contracting
States, under the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) in Criminal Matters
entered into by India. It is in the interest of India if MLATs are executed with
maximum number of countries.
 In all the inter-ministerial consultations and negotiations, the Ministry of Law and
Justice is consulted and their views are taken on board.  Once finalised, the draft
Treaty/Agreement/MoU is sent to the Ministry of Law and Justice for Legal vetting.
 Disputes, if any, arising under the Treaty/Agreement/MoU are resolved through
mutual consultation between the implementing authorities of the Contracting States
and/or through diplomatic channels.
Interactions and Deliberations of the Committee
28. The Committee interacted with the faculty of the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration (LABSNAA) with a view that in the globalised economy, provisions of Treaties/
Agreements signed/ratified by the Union Government are binding upon the citizens of the country,
and the civil servants being the implementing functionaries need to have sufficient knowledge and
awareness of provisions of those Treaties/Agreements. The Director, Lal Bahadur Shastri Academy
informed that apart from inclusion of WTO and Climate Change in the curriculum for civil servants
during training, no other exclusive curriculum has been included on the subject of international
Treaties/Agreements or International Law. Members of the faculty, however, welcomed the idea of
exploring the expediency of their inclusion in some form.
29. The Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, however, informed the Committee that no training
modules in the subject area neither under examination nor on the implementation of International
Laws are in place in the Institute. The Dean, Foreign Services Institute (Ministry of External
Affairs), during her deposition before the Committee informed that the Institute imparts courses for
basic grounding in various subjects, including international law. The idea, however, is not to make

13
them legal experts but to give them some elemental understanding on international law which
includes various aspects of human rights law, law of the seas, law of outer space, river water
disputes, the Vienna Convention, WTO, jurisdiction of States, recognition of statehood, State
responsibility, etc. within the 7-10 days of the law module in the Institute.
30. The Vice-Chancellor, Jindal Global Law University submitted that the country needs to build
its research capacity of our academic institutions in the area of international law. Director, Indian
Law Institute (ILI) while deposing on the need to strengthen the manpower in this area informed
the Committee that the ILI organises research, teaching, training and special lectures on
International Law. The Director, National Judicial Academy (NJA) impressed her view that there is
a need to have a central repository for international law which is accessible to all so that awareness
regarding international obligations increases. She also suggested that course work in colleges must
be re-oriented and made contemporary and judges may be given international exposure through
exchange programmes, which currently is limited.
31. The Committee visited the National Law University, Jodhpur and had an interaction with the
faculty members of the University. Members could appreciate that the University has been venturing
to impart its skills and expertise into action through the Legal Aid and Awareness Committee
(LAAC) which endeavours to enroot the principles of international law and human rights at the
grass root level of the society. Various activities have been undertaken to make the formulation of
international instruments successful, such as, dissemination of information on binding international
instruments on old age and gender rights through pamphlets, street plays and holding seminars and
village camps.
31.1 The Centre for Gender Studies of the University also proposes to take up several initiatives
which include National/International Seminars, preparedness for extending assistance in policy
drafting, Post-Graduate Diploma/Certificate in Gender Studies and collaboration with Government/
NGO’s/International Bodies. The University has also set up Centre for Human Rights of Children
and Institutional Law Development (CHILD) with a mission to institutionalise human rights in civil
society within the Indian context and to realise the ultimate aim of dignity, respect, protection and
development of every child in the light of various legal national and international instruments, viz.,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the Rights of child, The Juvenile
Justice Act and Protection under the Constitution of India.
31.2 The Centre for Environmental Law & Policy of the University serves as a resource centre
for teaching environmental law and research in national, regional and international context and
Centre for Human Rights Education Research and Studies (CHEARS) helps in the implementation of
international law within the domestic framework through either in collaboration with the institution’s
LAAC or on its own by disseminating the direct verdicts of International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR), International Convention on Economic and Social Rights (ECOSOC) and
the likes.
31.3 The Committee was also informed of The Centre for Advanced Research and Training in
Arbitration Law (CARTAL) established with the aim of furthering research and practice in the art of
Arbitration and brings out a bi-annual Journal ‘The Indian Journal of Arbitration (IJAL)’ which
encompass the writing talent of some of the greatest experts on Arbitration law, from India and
around the world. Also, in accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed at the

14
Euro-Asian Law Congress called “Law and National Interests in Modern Geo-politics” hosted by the
Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation at Ural State Law University,
Yekaterinburg during June 16-20, 2015, the BRICS Law Institute (BLI) has been established at NLU
Jodhpur in order to carry out further academic activities of concern for BRICS Nations.
32. In response to the Committee’s desire to interact with the faculty of National Academy of
Direct Taxes (NADT), a Central training institute providing Induction Training to the IRS (Income
Tax) probationers along with In-service Course to the Officers of the IT Department, the
Committee was informed that the Academy does not deal either in formulation of International
Laws or its implementation within the domestic legal framework, and therefore have no inputs to
make on the subject. The Department of Revenue had, in its written reply to the Questionnaire on
the subject informed the Committee that “ Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) has placed
particular emphasis on development of internal capacity and expertise in international taxation and
tax treaty matters, and it is compulsory for every officer of the Indian Revenue Service (IRS)-
income-tax to undergo a detailed training module of international taxation and pass a paper on
International Taxation in Departmental Examination as part of the induction training during
probation. ”
33. The representatives of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY)
during their deposition before the Committee stressed on the need for legal advice to be able to
draft and work on MoUs. They informed that, for the last eight months, they have been requesting
for posting of a Legal Advisor, especially, in the area of cyber security and cyber law which is an
emerging area of co-operation and since cyber threats are increasing, a number of MoUs have been
signed by the Emergency Response Team of India with their foreign counterparts. This sentiment
was also reiterated by the representatives of the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Women and Child
Development.
33.1 The representative of the Department of Justice also supported the need to have a legal
advisor to tender advice to the nodal Departments during the process of negotiations. However, he
stated that the legal advisers working with the Department of Legal Affairs have no experience in
dealing with international law and therefore, there is a need to strengthen Department of Legal
Affairs.
33.2 In the same vein, the representatives of the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways
impressed on the handicaps especially on issues relating to intellectual property, benefit sharing, etc.
They desired that every Ministry should, accordingly, have some group of experts in international
law and also the people who are well versed in the latest law-making at the international level. This
was also supported by the Executive President, Indian Society of International Law. They felt the
need for more participation of domestic legislative system since many treaty obligations require
amending of existing domestic legislation and rule-making before ratification.  They further stated
that in certain cases where disputes arise, many of the countries seek for international arbitration or
their own dispute resolution system taking away the jurisdiction of the country.
33.3 This view has also been supported by Director, Indian Institute of Foreign Trade that an
expert legal body to guide the nodal Ministry in formulation of treaties, etc., when they are drafted,
is needed. He, however, expressed apprehension that involving another Ministry would only add to
an additional bureaucratic delay. Therefore, he felt that there should be an independent and

15
exclusive expert body with the flexibility of giving its advice to the people who are drafting the
rules, laws etc. Similar opinion has also been raised by the Indian Society of International Law
(ISIL), Ministries of Road Transport and Highways, Shipping and Department of Commerce among
others.
34. The Committee was also apprised by the representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways that one of the weaknesses in our domestic system was the absence of an institutional
framework.  On the other hand, other countries have support of institutional framework which
cover finance of the infrastructure, interface with its States, etc.
35. While deposing on the subject before the Committee, the representative of the Ministry of
Shipping touched upon the process of negotiations and suggested that as has been the practice in
many other countries, a measure of encouraging think-tanks, research organisations, academia,
groups, etc. having interest in that particular subject should be associated in a more institutionalised
manner which would go a long way in improving the system. The representative of the Department
of Commerce also commented on the shortcomings of the negotiating team of the country in the
rounds of negotiations as under– –
“…it is a very asymmetrical mechanism. But, it is a sad reality that our negotiating teams
are not only small but they are stretched. I will give you an example. India is engaging with
Australia through the mechanism of RCEP . India also engages with Australia through the
WTO channels. India is also having a bilateral discussion which is going on a bilateral
relationship. On the Australian side, normally, for all these, they have three separate teams.
There may be some commonality. On our side, practically, it is the same set of negotiators
who have to handle all this.  While at one level, we have the advantage of having common
knowledge of what is happening on all three strands, but at the other level, our ability to
match their human manpower is stretched on our side. So, coming to the basic issue, in
fact, we would be very happy to strengthen our negotiating teams. We would be happy to
see an amalgamation of Ministry of Law as well as MEA handling the legal text . So,
additional manpower and additional legal help from both the Ministries would be of very
great use from our perspective. It is just a matter of making sure that the coordination and
the response becomes faster and not slower.  That is our basic concern in this issue. ”
36. During its interaction with the representatives of the Department of Agriculture, Co-
operation and Farmers’ Welfare, the Committee observed a disturbing variance between domestic
laws and international legal obligations due to overlap in the jurisdiction of Ministries. The witnesses
informed that the major international treaty recently entered by the Ministry is the International
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, which essentially involves a sub-set
from the Convention on Bio-diversity signed in 1982. That Treaty has an interface with the national
legislations, such as, the Bio-diversity Act, 2002 as well as Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) for
Plants, viz. the Protection of Plant V arieties and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001 which is, in essence
handled by the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
36.1 To the query relating to cases of Indian women abandoned and destitute in foreign
countries, the representative of Ministry of Women and Child Development informed the Committee
that many such complaints have been received but the Ministry does not have any wherewithal and

16
therefore can only request the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to intervene. Members are of the
view that the Ministry deals with international conventions such as the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Convention on the Rights
of the Child (CRC) and the Hague Convention, the Ministry is the most relevant Ministry to address
such issues. Therefore, evolving a mechanism to create wherewithal would be appropriate.
37. In the backdrop of sustainable development as one of the goals for 2015-2030 of the
Government, some Members of the Committee expressed apprehension about how equipped our
present set-up of negotiations for international obligations is and our performance on earlier
commitments which tells upon the sovereign country; whether our teams are well heard, accepted,
well received and acclaimed by the international bodies, especially, when there is reporting back to
the concerned bodies; and whether India is recognised competent in this arena.  Some Members
felt that the country is lagging behind in the international parameters and our contribution is very
low in certain ways.  Therefore, there should be wider discussion between the Ministry of External
Affairs, the Ministry of Law and Justice and the nodal Ministry concerned as every nodal Ministry
has international obligations because we are committing ourselves in different ways.  The
Committee, therefore, feels that some concrete structure should be created for this purpose. A
Member of the Committee distinctly expressed in this context as follows: –
“...anxiety is that whenever we enter into any legal obligation at the global stage, outside
our country, whether it is in the form of some treaty or some covenant or even a signatory
to various rules of conduct or the Geneva Convention or the U.N. Resolution, we have
commitments; we are bound by them as a member of the global community. Now, very often
we have experienced that we are ill-equipped. We are not on a par with other advanced
nations as far as promotion of our interest is concerned, whether it is in trade or commerce
or whether it is in laws. ”
38. The Committee also pondered over the question as to whether we have an effective internal
mechanism in place right from the beginning of participation as player in the international fora,
consultations with stakeholders, the drafting level, the ratification, the domestic legislation following
the treaty as it is and implementing it, and finally, implementing and reporting the matter. Especially
in the area of consultations with stakeholders, a Member expressed concern that certain sections of
stakeholders have always been excluded and cited the case of ASEAN Trade Agreement as follows: -
“At the time when the terms and conditions of this Agreement affect the plantation crops or
cash crops here, we could invoke this renegotiation clause and we can negotiate with the
parties of the Agreement for a higher tariff rate.  But, unfortunately, this is not happening.
In such circumstances, whether the affected parties, especially the State Governments, can
invoke all these things as a matter of right and compel the Government to invoke this
renegotiation clause for the purpose of protecting their interests.  That is not there.  That
internal mechanism is not there in our country.  This is only in the realm of the Central
Government.  The State Government does not have any say. If the State Government can
also intervene, they can, of course, approach the Central Government requiring them to
invoke this renegotiation clause for the purpose of protecting the interests of their farmers. ”
39. The Supreme Court has given verdicts in certain cases, such as Liverpool & London S.P .
& I. Assn. Ltd. v. M.V . Sea Success I[ (2004) 9 SCC 512, 540] and Pratap Singh v. State of

17
Jharkhand [(2005) 3 SCC 551, pp. 578-579],  that if there is participation in a treaty or agreement
by the country and if it is not followed by the domestic legislation, then the treaty or the
convention or the agreement will be obligated by the country to be implemented. This signifies that
absence of domestic legislation cannot take away the obligation of the country to implement it.
Members also raised concern that, after entering into Treaties, their implementation has been left to
the Supreme Court. Therefore, it is high time for the Parliament to look into this issue. The
Additional Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs also endorsed this disposition and stated during
the interaction with the Committee thus –
“At the moment we have a sort of mechanism.  Of course, as you have mentioned, whether
this is enough is perhaps something that we need to look at additionally and we would be
happy to revisit this issue and provide our comments on it.”
40. In this context, the representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal
Affairs), in support of the need to assign pivotal role to the Ministry of Law and Justice argued
that Article 53 of the Constitution mandates that all executive functions vest in the President and
for the purposes of that business which is allocated to the particular Ministry, President means the
Minister of that particular Ministry.  So, for all the legal issues arising out of the domestic business
as well as anything on behalf of the Government of India, President means the Minister for Law
and Justice.  Therefore, everywhere, wherever there is interpretation, whether of the law, rules,
guidelines, including the treaties, it is the subject matter which is allocated to the Department of
Legal Affairs.  He assigned the reason of the problem with respect to representation of the
Government in international delegation to the delegation which sometimes does not include the
legally trained persons of the Department of Legal Affairs or the Ministry of Law and Justice.
40.1 He impressed on the need for developing a mechanism whereby all the legal issues including
the treaties, conventions, etc., are created in a division and headed by the Minister for Law and
Justice.  He stated that in the existing arrangement, there is a duplication of work, and sometimes
there is lack of preparedness on the part of the Indian delegation.
40.2 Members voiced their concern in this regard, and especially in the case of Free Trade
Agreements, that although the stakeholders were consulted, the end result has been that our
industry and manufacturing is going down. Goods and services of other countries are flooding into
India.  This situation has brought the need to bring some coherence between the domestic law and
the international obligations. The international obligations should reflect the domestic law and the
domestic law should also imbibe the international obligations and bring out a law so that the people
and the judicial system can understand and make it implementable.
40.3 The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs supported in principle of the need for a separate
Department of International Law in India. He however raised apprehension that in view of the
current Allocation of Business Rules of Government of India, it would be difficult to implement it.
He further stated that given the size of the Government in India, it would be practically difficult for
one Department to implement international treaty obligations.
41. The Vice-Chancellor, Jindal Global Law University deposed before the Committee and
submitted that due to India’s increasing role in international context, the inter-dependence and
coordination of international law and domestic law has become essential. He appreciated the idea of

18
having a separate Department of International Law for promoting coordination between different
Ministries and agencies involved in the formulation and execution of treaties. He stated that there is
more work to be done in this regard, and as such the idea of having a Department of International
Law augurs well, promoting a coordinative framework between these Ministries.
41.1 He further submitted that the courts in India are also interpreting certain aspects of
international law as a part of domestic legislation.  Some of the judgements of the Supreme Court
of India reflect and actually read certain provisions of international law, international human rights
law and public international law into domestic law.  Therefore, the Legislature and the Executive
have to catch up with what the Judiciary is trying to do.
42. The Executive President, Indian Society of International Law, speaking on the intricacies of
international Law submitted that so far as the international part is concerned, we have complied
with all the formalities but when it comes to giving effect at the national level, we have faulted
there many a times. In respect of most of the treaties on Human Rights, of which we are a party
by ratifying them, we still have not made any law on them. Similarly, on the rights of the child,
there is no legislation. There is lack of coordination as to what is happening through the Ministry
of External Affairs by negotiating a treaty and when it comes to giving effect to the treaty at the
municipal level, how it is to be given, what laws to be looked into, etc.
42.1 She therefore, suggested for a nodal agency which should be exclusively assigned the task
of negotiating and implementing the Treaty or Convention in every respect. The task of putting up
treaties before Parliament with explanatory note and apprise Parliamentarians of the intricacies in
the treaties and what is required for its furtherance should also be mandated to this nodal agency.
This will enable the Parliamentarians to take a reasoned view as to what steps they need to take,
whether the Treaty should go for ratification, legislation, etc.
43. Representatives of the Department of Economic Affairs informed that there are more than
3,000 investment agreements globally and out of which, over 600 cases have gone into arbitration.
India has 83 agreements out of which 73 have come into force and 17 cases over the past decade
has arisen against India.  He highlighted that most international agreements do not have a State-to-
State dispute mechanism and keeping in view the issues experienced over the past few years,
various clauses to restrict the scope of international arbitration and narrow down the benefits or
redressal that investors get has been incorporated, as also to introduce that they have to approach
the domestic judicial system before approaching international arbitration.  Many countries in the
world do not have these restrictions and, in fact, India is the first one who would be introducing
these kinds of restrictions in BITs.
43.1 Members opined that cases in our system of dispute resolution in the conventional court
system could not be taken up as quickly as the international investors expect. Therefore, they
demand that arbitration should be made an alternative source of dispute resolution. In cases of
international arbitration, other international seats of arbitration have been opted to take up their
cases.  A situation then arises where our mechanism is not working in our own territory for the
purpose of that service of arbitration. A matured judicial system exists and our people are well-
versed in the international investment and other related areas, but the service industry of arbitration
shifts to other territories. Therefore, it is important that the seat of arbitration be made a part of

19
the treaty. Referring to the written replies of the Department of Revenue stating “ The IMG decided
that India should appoint an arbitrator and counsel without prejudice to its position …”, a Member
voiced his apprehension of who represents the interests of the Ministry in the international
arbitration forums and what steps have been taken to materialize the suggestion that an arbitrator
and a counsel should be appointed.
44. During the interaction with the Ministry of Shipping, a Member pointed out the flaws in the
existing set up reflected by the dispute regarding the delimitation of the maritime boundary between
India and Bangladesh in which the United Nations tribunal awarded Bangladesh 19,467 sq. km of
the 25,602 sq. km sea area of the Bay of Bengal.  He strongly felt that had the Ministry of External
Affairs amended our statute in line with the treaty on time, the need for the International Tribunal
to step in would not have arisen. He felt that, it is an anomalous situation, and therefore, there
should be one agency to coordinate, otherwise, such situations will continue.
45. The representative of the Ministry of Labour and Employment informed the Committee that
ratification of a Convention imposes legally binding obligations on the country concerned and,
therefore, treaties are always ratified after the national laws are made in conformity to the
Conventions. The Chairman of the Committee, however, pointed out that India had been a member
of the ILO even before becoming an independent country and had participated in many of the
conventions. But, at the same time, when there is a representation in the tripartite committee, there
is hesitation in bringing forward a domestic law to implement the ILO Conventions. He felt that the
country is participating in treaty making and the conventions, but not implementing it.
45.1  Another Member rejoined that out of the 189 UN Conventions on Labour only 45 including
Protocols have so far been ratified. He desired to know if any policy decision has been made by
the Government to not ratify these Conventions or whether they are just lying closed in office
records. The witness informed that the consent and agreement of various Ministries and agencies
where these laws are to be considered need to be obtained for which the Ministry is in the process
of consultations with them. The Committee observes that the treaty making process in vogue is
unarranged and better policy coordination on treaties and more accountability is required.
46. Chairman of UN International Law Commission deposed before the Committee and
highlighted a glaring instance of shortcoming in the procedure being currently followed. In his
words – –
“...there is a process of inter-Ministerial consultation even before the treaty negotiations are
initiated.  It is a different matter that sometimes, the Ministries or Departments who are in-
charge of the topic, themselves have no clue as to what they want. We have faced this
problem in the Legal and Treaties Division on many occasions. For example, there were
negotiations to be held in the FAO. It was practically at the last minute that L&T Division
was informed and asked to prepare some notes. When we consulted the concerned Ministry,
they very generously told us, ‘We will do whatever you want. We will agree to whatever you
tell us’. We said that is not the issue. The issue is,where do your interests lie; what is the
country’ s interest and they have no clue on that.  So this is one problem which we face in
a number of areas where the Ministries which are in-charge of a particular topic, don’t
know what they are looking for. Then the Ministry of External Affairs has to come up with
ideas, try to guess as to where our interests lie ”.

20
46.1. Speaking on the need for preparedness of meeting the obligations arising out of international
treaties and conventions, he stated that most of the treaties which India concludes, whether they
are bilateral or multilateral, don’t require implementing legislation. As soon as a treaty is ratified, the
country becomes a party and certain obligations arise.  One must be in a position to prosecute and
punish offenders and extend international cooperation to other countries who seek the extradition or
mutual legal assistance in respect of any offences. However, the experience has been that
legislations are slow in coming. He cited several instances such as the case of UN Transnational
Organised Crime, the UN Convention against Corruption, etc. where India went ahead with
ratification of the treaties in May, 2011 without having a law, but the required legislations are still
not made.
46.2. As regards the creation of a Department of International Law, he opined that placing the
Department within the Ministry of Law would forge complications relating to hierarchy and the
Law Secretary can always overrule the Department which would be detrimental to its effective
functioning. Therefore, the Department of International Law should be independent of the Ministry
of Law. He further argued that the source and process of formation of domestic law and
international law are very different which substantiate the need of their independence.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
47. The Committee observes that it has been the experience at international fora or at
the occasion of negotiating bilateral or multilateral treaties, the developed countries are
seen to be represented by large number of legal experts whereas Indian delegation is not
supported by matching number of legal experts. The Committee feels that our delegations
are not adequately equipped to that extent. The Committee wishes that at such occasions,
we should have equally capable negotiating team full of experts in domain and legal
knowledge with a view to instantly interpret provisions of negotiations and providing
alternative formula, if required, in the interest of the country.
48. The Committee observes that there is a need for creating a pool of experts in
various fields of the International Law to be drawn to different Departments/Organisations/
Institutions of the Government of India and the States in the capacity of legal advisors/
consultants, negotiators, experts in reporting in international fora and the multilateral and
bilateral talks. The Committee feels that such an institutional capacity will address the
immediate need of experts in the category of advisors, consultants, negotiators, drafting
experts in reporting in international fora and the multilateral/bilateral talks.
49. It feels that it is the need of the hour to streamline the existing mechanism of
handling all issues relating international co-operation and international legal obligations and
accordingly, recommends that the ‘Department of International Law’ may be created to
work as a nodal body to create a group of legal experts who will be serving the different
Ministries as and when it is required. This Department would be responsible to coordinate
and evolve specialised approach while negotiating any international convention or bilateral
or multilateral treaty. This process eventually would lead to involvement of legal experts as
well as domain experts from concerned Ministries at the fore-front of the negotiation

21
process and also accompanied by the officers of the Ministry of Law and Justice to advise on
the position of domestic law. The Department of International Law would have dual role i.e.,
ensuring the effective negotiations of treaties and its actual implementations at national
and international level. Finally, that Department would be able to develop a mechanism
providing for a more coherent, holistic and specialised approach among the state
institutions.
50. The Committee hopes that the newly created Department of International Law may
simultaneously develop the desired human resource, competent in matters relating to
international law, who may help the negotiators to develop a consistent approach on
international matters in international fora.
51. The Committee further observes that Department of International Law would be
repository of all the binding international Conventions, Bilateral/Multilateral treaties,
Resolutions and rules relating thereto.  The Department should also publish the same. This
would sensitise about the issues/subject involved to the country’s institutions and also the
people at large. The Department of International Law would further be mandated to bring
to the notice of all courts/tribunals in the country about the new interpretations given by
International Court(s) or Tribunals on any subject.
52. The Committee feels that it is now well settled that international law is no longer
limited to the regulation of diplomatic relations between States.  The gap between the
international courts and the domestic courts has now been substantially narrowed.  It,
therefore, calls for the incorporation of international norms into the national law as the
international law/rules/norms today aim at the matters which were earlier exclusively
belonged to the domestic jurisdiction of States and conversely, the domestic courts also deal
with the issues relating to international law.  The Committee accordingly feels that setting
up of this Department would be a step in filling up of the gap between the two.
53. Hence, the Committee recommends for setting up of a new Department of
International Law similar to the existing Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative
Department and Department of Justice.  The Ministry can be renamed as Ministry of
International Law, Domestic Law and Justice.
54. The Committee notes that as per existing practice, the Ministries/Departments have
the responsibility to implement India’s obligations in respect of the subjects pertaining to
them as per Government of India (Allocation of the Business) Rules, 1961. The Committee,
however, feels that it would certainly be in fitness of things that there is a need for creation
of a new ‘Department of International Obligations & Implementations’ under the direct
supervision of Prime Minister in the line of Department of Space, etc. The Committee feels
such a Department will provide for a monitoring mechanism at apex level and will further
strengthen the existing system. This would enhance the status of India in the community of
Nations as India aspires to be a Member of United Nations Security Council and also claims
to be an Economic Power.
55. It is further recommended that these two new Departments should be headed by
international law professionals and experts for a fixed term in the rank of Secretary aided

22
by Joint Secretary level officers from Indian Foreign Service, Indian Administrative Service,
other Central services and if needed, by the experts in the relevant fields who will co-
ordinate with various Departments and Ministry of External Affairs and Embassies/High
commissions.
56. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of External Affairs,  Ministry of Law
and Justice (to be rechristened as Ministry of International Law, Domestic Law and Justice)
and the concerned nodal Ministry designated for such negotiations should work as ‘Trinity’
in all negotiations of any bilateral/multilateral Treaties/International Conventions etc. The
Department of International Obligation & Implementation which may be under the direct
supervision of Prime Minister’s Office (PMO), as suggested above, is to work as overall
overseeing the working of the Trinity towards the implementation of  post-Treaty
obligations.
57. Through this Report, the Committee seeks to bring about structural changes and
capacity building in the present Ministry of Law and Justice by creating one more
Department in this Ministry, namely, Department of International Law as a part of legal
and judicial reforms. The Committee accordingly proposes that the Ministry should be
rechristened as Ministry of International Law, Domestic Law and Justice. The Committee
also suggests the following roadmap for strengthening the present Departments of Ministry
of Law and Justice:
(A) Department of Legal Affair: The appointment of Law Officers from the
Attorney General down to Prosecutors, and Government Advocates, Notary
Public should be looked through the prism of International Law for their
knowledge on International Law and practice. Some specialised Lawyers/legal
advisors are to be infused at various level in addition to refreshing the
existing nominees and appointees to get International Law exposure and
application in their day to day working. The Indian Law Institute (deemed
University) should have special courses in international law focussing on the
contemporary international law.  It is also suggested that Indian Society of
International Law (ISIL) Academy may be evolved into “Centre of Excellence”
in the field of International Law, as a pioneer institute in this field, if
necessary, through a Parliamentary enactment. The Committee wishes that
ISIL may be mandated for developing the human resources in the field of
ever growing Contemporary International law– –  by making, drafting,
interpreting, implementing and enforcing through sovereign State and the
three pillars of the Constitution of India, viz., the Parliament, the Executive
and the Judiciary.
(B) Legislative Department: The Legislative Department may strengthen the
existing Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary studies (ICPS) by
shifting to allotted land in Chanakyapuri and remodel its syllabus and
curriculum of Legislative drafting in International Law and Domestic and
State Laws.

23
(C) Department of Justice: The Judiciary from Supreme Court down to the level
of Subordinate judiciary, Quasi Judicial Tribunals and adjudicative mechanism
are to be equipped with International Laws through National Judicial Academy
and State Judicial Academies. Sufficient financial support should be provided
by Union Government.

24
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS – –  AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee observes that it has been the experience at international fora or at
the occasion of negotiating bilateral or multilateral treaties, the developed countries are
seen to be represented by large number of legal experts whereas Indian delegation is not
supported by matching number of legal experts.  The Committee feels that our delegations
are not adequately equipped to that extent.  The Committee wishes that at such occasions,
we should have equally capable negotiating team full of experts in domain and legal
knowledge with a view to instantly interpret provisions of negotiations and providing
alternative formula, if required, in the interest of the country. (Para 47)
2. The Committee observes that there is a need for creating a pool of experts in
various fields of the International Law to be drawn to different Departments/ Organisations/
Institutions of the Government of India and the States in the capacity of legal advisors/
consultants, negotiators, experts in reporting in international fora and the multilateral and
bilateral talks. The Committee feels that such an institutional capacity will address the
immediate need of experts in the category of advisors, consultants, negotiators, drafting
experts in reporting in international fora and the multilateral/ bilateral talks. (Para 48)
3. It feels that it is the need of the hour to streamline the existing mechanism of
handling all issues relating international co-operation and international legal obligations and
accordingly, recommends that the ‘Department of International Law’ may be created to
work as a nodal body to create a group of legal experts who will be serving the different
Ministries as and when it is required. This Department would be responsible to coordinate
and evolve specialised approach while negotiating any international convention or bilateral
or multilateral treaty. This process eventually would lead to involvement of legal experts as
well as domain experts from concerned Ministries at the fore-front of the negotiation
process and also accompanied by the officers of the Ministry of Law and Justice to advise on
the position of domestic law. The Department of International Law would have dual role i.e.,
ensuring the effective negotiations of treaties and its actual implementations at national
and international level. Finally, that Department would be able to develop a mechanism
providing for a more coherent, holistic and specialised approach among the state
institutions. (Para 49)
4.  The Committee hopes that the newly created Department of International Law may
simultaneously develop the desired human resource, competent in matters relating to
international law, who may help the negotiators to develop a consistent approach on
international matters in international fora. (Para 50)
5. The Committee further observes that Department of International Law would be
repository of all the binding international Conventions, Bilateral/ Multilateral treaties,
Resolutions and rules relating thereto.  The Department should also publish the same. This
would sensitise about the issues/ subject involved to the country’s institutions and also the
24

25
people at large. The Department of International Law would further be mandated to bring
to the notice of all courts/ tribunals in the country about the new interpretations given by
International Court(s) or Tribunals on any subject. (Para 51)
6.  The Committee feels that it is now well settled that international law is no longer
limited to the regulation of diplomatic relations between States.  The gap between the
international courts and the domestic courts has now been substantially narrowed.  It,
therefore, calls for the incorporation of international norms into the national law as the
international law/ rules/ norms today aim at the matters which were earlier exclusively
belonged to the domestic jurisdiction of States and conversely, the domestic courts also deal
with the issues relating to international law.  The Committee accordingly feels that setting
up of this Department would be a step in filling up of the gap between the two. (Para 52)
7. Hence, the Committee recommends for setting up of a new Department of
International Law similar to the existing Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative
Department and Department of Justice.  The Ministry can be renamed as Ministry of
International Law, Domestic Law and Justice. (Para 53)
8. The Committee notes that as per existing practice, the Ministries/ Departments have
the responsibility to implement India’s obligations in respect of the subjects pertaining to
them as per Government of India (Allocation of the Business) Rules, 1961. The Committee,
however, feels that it would certainly be in fitness of things that there is a need for creation
of a new ‘Department of International Obligations and Implementations’ under the direct
supervision of Prime Minister in the line of Department of Space, etc. The Committee feels
such a Department will provide for a monitoring mechanism at apex level and will further
strengthen the existing system. This would enhance the status of India in the community of
Nations as India aspires to be a Member of United Nations Security Council and also claims
to be an Economic Power. (Para 54)
9.  It is further recommended that these two new Departments should be headed by
international law professionals and experts for a fixed term in the rank of Secretary aided
by Joint Secretary level officers from Indian Foreign Service, Indian Administrative Service,
other Central services and if needed, by the experts in the relevant fields who will co-
ordinate with various Departments and Ministry of External Affairs and Embassies/ High
commissions. (Para 55)
10. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of External Affairs,  Ministry of Law
& Justice (to be rechristened as Ministry of International Law, Domestic Law and Justice)
and the concerned nodal Ministry designated for such negotiations should work as “Trinity’
in all negotiations of any bilateral/ multilateral Treaties/International Conventions etc. The
Department of International Obligation and Implementation which may be under the direct
supervision of Prime Minister’s Office (PMO), as suggested above, is to work as overall
overseeing the working of the Trinity towards the implementation of  post-Treaty
obligations. (Para 56)
12.   Through this Report, the Committee seeks to bring about structural changes and
capacity building in the present Ministry of Law and Justice by creating one more

26
Department in this Ministry, namely, Department of International Law as a part of legal
and judicial reforms. The Committee accordingly proposes that the Ministry should be
rechristened as Ministry of International Law, Domestic Law and Justice. The Committee
also suggests the following roadmap for strengthening the present Departments of Ministry
of Law and Justice: (Para 57)
(A) Department of Legal Affair: The appointment of Law officers from the
Attorney General down to Prosecutors, and Government Advocates, Notary
Public should be looked through the prism of International Law for their
knowledge on International Law and practice. Some specialised Lawyers / legal
advisors are to be infused at various level in addition to refreshing the
existing nominees and appointees to get International Law exposure and
application in their day to day working. The Indian Law Institute (Deemed
University) should have special courses in international law focussing on the
contemporary international law.  It is also suggested that Indian Society of
International Law (ISIL) Academy may be evolved into “Centre of Excellence”
in the field of International Law, as a pioneer institute in this field, if
necessary, through a Parliamentary enactment. The Committee wishes that
ISIL may be mandated for developing the human resources in the field of
ever growing Contemporary International law- by making, drafting,
interpreting, implementing and enforcing through sovereign State and the
three pillars of the Constitution of India, viz., the Parliament, the Executive
and the Judiciary.
(B) Legislative Department: The Legislative Department may strengthen the
existing Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies (ICPS) by
shifting to allotted land in Chanakyapuri and remodel its syllabus and
curriculum of Legislative drafting in International Law and Domestic and
State Laws.
(C) Department of Justice: The Judiciary from Supreme Court down to the level
of Subordinate judiciary, Quasi Judicial Tribunals and adjudicative mechanism
are to be equipped with International Laws through National Judicial Academy
and State Judicial Academies. Sufficient financial support should be provided
by Union Government.

27
MINUTES

RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 28th September, 2015 in Committee Room 'C',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Adv. Joice George
5. Dr. A. Sampath
6. Shri Bharat Singh
7. Shri M. Udhayakumar
8. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Secretary
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok Kumar. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
I. Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs
1. Ms. Mukta D. Tomar, Additional Secretary;
2. Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawat, Joint Secretary;
3. Dr. Neeru Chadha, Legal Consultant;
4. Dr. V .D. Sharma, Director;
5. Shri B. Vanlalawma, Director;
6. Dr. A.S. Reddy, Director.
II. Representatives Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri Suresh Chandra, Joint Secretary
29

30
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. He apprised the Members that the
Committee had invited the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and Department of
Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice to hear their views on the subject “Role of Ministry of
Law and Justice in Framing of Provisions of International Treaties, Conventions and Agreements”.
(After the arrival of the witnesses)
3. The Chairman welcomed the Ms. Mukta D. Tomar, Additional Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs and Shri Suresh Chandra, Joint Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of
Law and Justice and other officers present in the meeting. He then requested them to apprise the
Committee of the role of Ministry of External Affairs in international treaties and conventions signed
by India and the role Ministry of Law and Justice could play in this regard.
4. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs apprised the Committee that under the
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the Ministry of External Affairs has been
entrusted with the responsibility to negotiate political treaties, agreements and conventions with
foreign and Commonwealth countries in various subjects. She added that the Legal and Treaties
Division of the Ministry of External Affairs which was created in 1957 and composed of legal
experts act as a major source of expertise and provide advice to the concerned divisions of
Ministries/Departments engaged in negotiations and conclusion of various multilateral and bilateral
treaties and agreements. She added that the Legal and Treaties Division has been involved in
settlement of disputes with neighboring countries and actively associated with the negotiations of
the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, Convention against Corruption (UNCAC), Convention
on Transnational  Organised Crime (UNCTOC), and various Conventions to combat International
Terrorism. She further added that the Ministry of External Affairs consults the Ministry of Law and
Justice, whenever their assistance is required in implementing or interpreting International law. She
also added that the Ministry of External Affairs coordinates with the concerned Ministries of the
Government of India and an inter-Ministerial coordination process undertaken to fulfill United
Nations obligations arising out of conventions and treaties.
5. Joint Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs submitted that Department of Legal Affairs is
allocated the business of interpretation of the Constitution, all laws and legal issues arising out of
International treaties in civil matters, agreements or conventions etc. and added that before the
creation of Legal and Treaties Division of Ministry of External Affairs the business was allocated to
Department of Legal Affairs. He submitted that sometimes times legal experts of the Department are
not included in the Government of India’s delegations to international arenas leading to problems at
various stages. He was therefore, of the view that the Legal and Treaties Divison of the Ministry of
Legal Affairs should be brought under the Ministry of Law and Justice.
6. Members took note of the points made by the witnesses and sought various clarifications,
including the role of State Governments, civil society and other stakeholders in the framing and
implementations of international treaties. The Chairman requested the witnesses to send written
replies to the questions which could not be answered during the meeting.
 (The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 12.07 Noon.

31
II
SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th October, 2015 in Room No. G-074,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shrimati Rajani  Patil
5. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
8. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhary
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Shri Bhagwant Mann
11. Shri Vincent H. Pala
12. Dr. A. Sampath
13. Shri Bharat Singh
14. Shri M Udhayakumar
15. Dr. Anshul V erma
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
1. Shri Arvind Mehta, Additional Secretary;
2. Shri Dammu Ravi, Joint Secretary
31

32
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
1. Shri Dinesh Sharma, Additional Secretary;
2. Shri S. Selvakumar, Joint Secretary; and
3. Shri Surabh Garg, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Home Affairs
           Shri K.K. Pathak, Joint Secretary (International Cooperation)
Department Of Legal Affairs Ministry of Law And Justice
Shri Suresh Chandra, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. He then apprised the
Committee that the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry
of Finance and the Ministry of Home Affairs have been invited today to present their views on the
Subject ‘Role of Ministry of Law and Justice in Framing/Approving the Provisions of International
Covenants/Multilateral/Bilateral Treaties or Agreements’.
(After the arrival of the witnesses)
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministries and requested them to dwell
on the fact that whether there was a need to have more involvement of the nodal Ministry while
negotiating international treaties / agreements and what monitoring mechanisms are available within
the Ministry to ensure that India’s treaty obligations are met through its domestic legislative and
executive framework.
4. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Commerce & Industry stated that  Indian teams
deputed for international treaty negotiations consisted of a few domain specialists while other
nations depute many experts in various fields for the purpose. He stated that inclusion of Ministry
of Law and Justice officials along with experts from the Legal and Treaties Division of Ministry of
External Affairs would be advantageous in the negotiation process. He further stated that the
Ministry should take the help of Ministry of Law and Justice in dealing with State-to-State
international arbitration cases. He also submitted that the Ministry should hold extensive interactions
with relevant stakeholders before making commitments in the international fora.
5. The Additional Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs highlighted the treaties/
agreements dealt with by the Ministry and the subsequent legislations passed by the Parliament for
giving effect to the agreements. He further stated that the Ministry also formulated model Bilateral
Investment Protection Agreements (BIPA) for which, extensive consultation was carried out with
stakeholder by the Ministry. He stated that the new model law had introduced several provisions
which reduced chances of dragging India into international arbitration.
6. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs supported the idea of closer interaction
between the administrative Ministry, i.e., the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministry of
External Affairs while negotiating international treaties / agreements. He then added that the Ministry
happened to be the administrative Ministry for Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLAT), Security
Cooperation Agreements, drug trafficking and transfer of prisoners related treaties. That Ministry

33
used to elicit the opinion of various stakeholders including the Ministry of Law and Justice,
Ministry of External Affairs, Intelligence Bureau (IB), Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW)
Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) and the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) National
Investigative Agency (NIA) while entering into any international treaty / agreement. On the issue of
implementation of the agreement obligations, he stated that a Joint Working Group and a nodal
officer/ agency was notified for the purpose for each agreement and that agencies used to
cooperate with their foreign counterparts on a case-to-case basis.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 4.44 
P.M.

34
RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27th October, 2015 in Room No. '63', Parliament
House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
5. Dr. A. Sampath
6. Shri M. Udhayakumar
7. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
8. Dr. Anshul V erma
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Joint Director
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
A. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. Shri Vijay Chhibber, Secretary;
2. Shri Niraj Verma, Joint Secretary; and
3. Shri A.D. James, Deputy Secretary.
B. Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri Rajive Kumar, Secretary;
2. Shri Amitabh Verma, Chairman, IWAI;
3. Shri Alok Srivastava, Additional Secretary;
4. Shri Deepak Shetty, Director General of Shipping; and
5. Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan, Director.
34

35
C. Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri R.N. Choubey, Secretary;
2. Smt. M. Sathiyavathy, Director General, DGCA;
3. Shri Arun Kumar, Joint Secretary;
4. Dr. Shefali Juneja, Director;
5. Shri Lalit Gupta, Jt. DGCA; and
6. Shri Sunil Kumar, Director, DGCA.
D. Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Electronics and Information Technology)
1. Shri J.S. Deepak, Secretary;
2. Dr. Ajay Kumar, Additional Secretary;
3. Dr. M.R. Anand, Senior Advisor;
4. Shri Rajiv Kmar, Joint Secretary; and
5. Shri O.P. Sharma, Director.
E. Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
1. Shri Ashok Kumar Angurana, Secretary;
2. Ms. Rajni Sekhri Sibal, Joint Secretary;
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoosreddy, Joint Secretary; and
4. Shri Rajbir Singh Rana, Joint Secretary.
F. Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
1. Shri A.K. Srivastava Special Secretary; and
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary.
G. Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Suresh Chandra, Joint Secretary & LA
2. Dr. R.J.R. Kasibhatla, D.L.A.
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. He apprised the Members that the
Committee had invited the representatives of the Ministries of Road Transport and Highways,
Shipping, Civil Aviation, Department of Electronics and Information Technology, Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’
Welfare to hear their views on the subject “Role of Ministry of Law and Justice in Framing of
Provisions of International Treaties, Conventions and Agreements”.
(After the arrival of the witnesses)
3. The Chairman welcomed the Secretaries of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Communications and Information

36
Technology (Department of Electronics and Information Technology), Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), representatives of Department of Legal Affairs and other
officers present in the meeting.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways submitted that there are no
international conventions governing the transport sector. He added that international cooperation and
facilitation relating to transport and highways are made under bilateral agreements and motor
vehicles agreement amongst countries. The Bilateral agreements are used mainly for information and
technology transfer whereas the motor vehicle agreements are purely temporary transit measures
among various neighbouring countries like Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal   (BBIN) Agreement
which facilitates movements of goods and people across borders. He added that all these
agreements and protocols respect local laws of the land and the Ministry of Transport and Highway
provides only a legal framework. He submitted that the Ministry has also prepared Do’s and Don’ts
list to spread awareness about the permissible and non-permissible activities in the countries to the
stakeholders. He added that the Legal and Treaty (L&T) Division, Ministry of External Affair is
consulted in these matters.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping submitted that the procedure and practice followed
presently in the country is reasonable as all the stakeholders are consulted, including L&T Division,
Ministry of External Affairs. However, he added that the expertise of think-tanks and research
organisations should be utilised during the negotiations for agreements and treaties. He submitted
that the conventions of International Maritime Organisations, despite being optional, have bearing on
the Ministry of Shipping, which are adopted from time to time for the general welfare of the
countries.
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation apprising the Committee of the overarching
framework under which the Ministry undertakes treaties, conventions and bilateral agreements,
submitted that overarching framework is provided by the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), Montreal in Canada under the Chicago Convention of 1944 which is the international body
that regulates all international flying and travel.  He submitted that the Ministry had executed 109
bilateral agreements, which are called Air Service Agreements, (ASAs) under which bilateral flying
rights are decided by India and another country.  He added that as on date they have ASAs with
109 countries.  He submitted that before Agreements are concluded the Ministry of Law and
Justice, Ministry of External Affairs and also domestic airlines are consulted. He submitted that the
present mechanism of consulting Law Ministry and Ministry of External Affairs during treaties and
agreements are working well and opined that for concluding treaties and agreements legal advisors
from the Law Ministry would be helpful.
7. The Secretary, Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Electronics and Information Technology) submitted that the Department is not covered under any
international treaty or covenants. However, he added that a large number of MoUs relating mostly
to Foreign Direct Investment, Promoting IT and IT enabled services, cyber security and sharing
expert knowledge in best practices on e-governance have been signed. He also added that the
Ministry of External Affairs often request the Department to showcase the strength of Indian IT
industry in various fora including in bilateral, trilateral and multilateral meetings. He submitted that

37
the MoU signing process involved identifying the country’s need, drafting of MoU, consultation
with different Ministries, primarily, the Department of Commerce, the Ministry of External Affairs
etc. and vetting of Draft Agreement of the Treaty by the Legal and Treaty Division of the Ministry
of External Affairs.  He also submitted that the present system is working satisfactorily however,
added that the Department often felt the need of legal advice, especially relating to security and
cyber laws.
8. The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries) submitted that the Department had entered into 14 MoUs and agreements with various
countries out of which 11 MoUs and agreements are operational.  He added that these agreements
relates to phytosanitary issues concerning animals and animal products, fisheries, aquaculture,
technology sharing and transfer, capacity building and training.  He opined that before entering into
agreements or MoUs, consultative processes with all stakeholders are undertaken. He added that
these MoUs are tested whether they are in conformity with the domestic laws and regulations.
9. The Special Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) submitted that the Ministry is concerned with uutual
cooperation involving cooperation in terms of exchange of knowhow, visits, collaborations, etc. and
International agreements by Food and Agriculture Organisation. He submitted that the Department is
presently handling International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, which
is essentially a sub-part of  the Convention on Biodiversity dealing with cross-border movement of
plant and genetic resources.
10. Members took note of the points made by the witnesses and sought various clarifications.
The Chairman asked the witnesses to send written replies to the questions which could not be
answered during the meeting.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
12. The meeting adjourned at 5.05 
P.M.

38
RECORD OF DISCUSSION
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 28 th October, 2015 in  Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Majeed Memon
3. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
LOK SABHA
4. Adv. Sharad Bansode
5. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
6. Shri Varaprasad Rao Velagapalli
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
A. Representatives of Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance
1. Shri Najib Shah, Chairman (CBEC);
2. Smt. Anita Kapur, Chairperson (CBDT);
3. Shri Atulesh Jindal, Member (IT);
4. Shri Ram Tirath, Member (CBEC);
5. Shri Udai Singh Kumawat, Joint Secretary (Rev.);
6. Shri Akhilesh Ranjan, Joint Secretary (FT & TR-I);
7. Shri L. Satya Srinivas, Joint Secretary (Cus.);
8. Shri Ajay Kumar Nema, Director (Admn.); and
9. Shri Manish Mani Tiwari, Director (NC).
B. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
Representatives of Department of Social Justice and Empowerment
Shri Shyam Kapoor, Joint Secretary.
38

39
C. Representatives of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Diasbilities
Shri Awanish K. Awasthi, Joint Secretary.
D. Representatives of Ministry of Women and Child Development
1. Shrimati Sarada Ali Khan, Joint Secretary;
2. Shri Virendra Mishra, Secretary CARA.
E. Representatives of Ministry of Labour & Employment
1. Shri Manish Kumar Gupta, Joint Secretary; and
2. Shrimati Anuja Bapat, Director.
F. Representatives of Indian Institute of Foreign Trade
1. Dr. Surajit Mitra, Director; and
2. Dr. Abhijit Das, Head, Centre for WTO Studies.
G. Representatives of Indian Society of International Law
1. Prof. S.K. Verma, Executive President;
2. Shri Vinai Kumar Singh, Dy. Director and Assistant Professor (Sr.); and
3. Dr. Anwar Sadat, Assistant Professor (Senior).
H. Representatives of Foreign Service Institute, MEA
Ms. Nengcha Lhouvum
I. Representatives of UN International Law Commission
Shri Narinder Singh, Chairman.
J. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Suresh Chandra, Joint Secretary and LA.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses to
the meeting of the Committee. He then gave an overview of the treaty making process in the
country and the role that the Ministry of Law and Justice plays in the formulation and
implementation of international treaties.
3. The Chairman, CBEC listed out the international treaties for which the Department is
responsible like conventions regarding movement of goods, Kyoto Convention under the World
Customs Organisation, Conventions regarding privileged persons like Diplomats which come under
the United Nations, Customs Mutual Assistance Agreements, Mutual Recognition Agreements, etc.
He further stated that the Ministry consults regularly with the Legal and Treaties Division of
Ministry of External Affairs before signing of treaty.
4. The Chairperson, CBDT gave details of the treaties which are administered by the
Department which include Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements and Multilateral Tax Agreements.

40
She elaborated on the functioning of the treaties. She then submitted that the Department negotiates
the treaties in close coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs and also take the views of
the Ministry of Law and Justice and other concerned Ministries before finalizing the treaties.
(Some witnesses then withdrew)
5. The Joint Secretary, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment informed the
Committee that the Department has not entered into bilateral and multilateral treaties but the MoUs
have been signed with Afghanistan and Mauritius. The Chairman directed the Department to submit
its views on the treaty making and implementation process in the Government of India within ten
days.
6. The Joint Secretary, Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities stated that
the Department administers the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (UNCRPD).He submitted that since the existing legislative framework is not in
consonance with the Convention, the Ministry has already introduced a Bill to make the domestic
framework compliant with the provisions of the Convention. He stated that the Bill is currently
pending with the Parliament. He further submitted that the Department had, in consultation with the
Ministry of External Affairs, already submitted the Country Report mandated by the Convention and
the same shall be submitted to the UNCRPD Committee.  Apart from this Convention, he stated that
the Department has some multilateral and bilateral conventions related to cross border movement of
relief material. He also stated that the Government had recently come up with a proposal of posting
a law officer in every Ministry and the Department had welcomed the idea so that legal advice is
readily available within the Department.
7. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development stated that the Ministry
administers the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination Against Women
(CEDAW), Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and the Hague Convention. She submitted
that the Ministry has been submitting the mandated reports uncer the Conventions regularly and
does this only after consulting several stakeholders including NGOs. She stated that the
Government has agreed to most of the provisions of the Convention. However, regarding the
provisions relating to the registration of marriage under CEDAW, the Ministry had submitted that
the implementation of the Clause shall be in a phased manner.
(Some witnesses then withdrew)
8. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment gave a brief overview of the
International Labour Organisation (ILO) and its functioning. He stated that India has ratified forty
three Conventions of the ILO out of the total 189 adopted by that Organisation. He stated that
although India is a signatory to more Conventions, the limited ratification is because the Ministry
tries to first align the domestic legal framework to the Convention before ratifying the same.
(Some witnesses then withdrew)
9. The Director, Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT) advocated the creation of a separate
legal body which can guide the formulation of India’s position with respect to international treaties
and conventions. However, he submitted that another Ministry for this purpose should not be
created as it would just add to the bureaucratic layers. He further stated that in order to ensure that

41
views of multiple stakeholders are adequately incorporated in the country’s approach during
negotiations, an overview committee may be created at the highest level to monitor the same.
10. The Executive Professor, Indian Society of International Law (ISIL) stated that there is a
lack of awareness regarding the provisions of international treaties and conventions even amongst
legal luminaries and judges. Thus, there is a need for creating awareness. He further submitted that
the Ministry of External Affairs must hold extensive consultations with the stakeholders before
going for negotiations. He suggested that there is a need for the creation of a separate agency
which might be made responsible for implementation of treaties.
11. The Dean, Foreign Services Institute (FSI) stated that the Institute is not involved in the
process of international treaty formulation or implementation. She stated that the Institute has a
module on law which is drafted in consultation with the L&T division of MEA which gives the
probationers an exposure on the legal aspects of treaty making.
12. The Chairman, United Nations International Law Commission stated that the MEA consults
the nodal Ministries before entering into negotiations. However, he stated that many a times, the
nodal Ministries are not clear on the position to be taken by the country during those negotiations.
He further submitted that the Ministries push for early ratification of treaties but they are unable to
provide the requisite domestic legal framework after ratification. He further submitted that
whenever there is a difference of opinion between Ministry of Law and Justice and L&T Division
of MEA, the view of Attorney General for India is solicited and adopted as the final view. This,
according to him, is not advisable and leads to delays. He submitted that this can be avoided if
International Law Department is created independently of the Ministry of Law and Justice.
13. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
14. The meeting adjourned at 2.04 
P.M.

42
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 1 st March, 2016 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Majeed Memon
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Adv. Sharad Bansode
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
8. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
9. Shri  Santosh Kumar
10. Shri Bharat Singh
11. Shri M. Udhayakumar
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
A. Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs,
1. Shri P.K. Malhotra, Secretary;
2. Shri D. Bhardwaj, Additional Secretary; and
3. Dr. RJR Kasibhatla, Deputy Legal Advisor
B. Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Shri G. Naryana Raju, Secretary;
2. Ms. Reeta V asistha, Additional Secretary;
42

43
3. Shri K.V . Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel; and
4. Shri B.N.S.V .S.K. Bangarraju, Assistant Legislative Counsel.
C. The Indian Law Insitute
1. Prof. (Dr.) Manoj Kumar Sinha, Director; and
2. Shri Sreenibas Chandra Prusty, Registrar.
D. Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Justice
1. Ms. Kusumjit Sidhu, Secretary.
2. Shri Anil Kumar Gulati, Joint Secretary;
3. Shri Atul Kaushik, Joint Secretary;
4. Shri Y . M. Pande, Director
E. National Judicial Academy
Shrimati Geeta Oberio, Director;
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the meeting of the Committee.
He then requested the Departments to highlight their roles in the process of drafting and negotiation
of international treaties. He stressed on the need of training the law officers of the Government in
the nuances of international laws and also for the creation of another Department of International
Law which would function in tandem with the Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of
External Affairs. He further stated that a new Department may be created under the Prime Minister
which would look after implementation of treaty obligations. He requested the Departments to
express their opinions on the above suggestions.
3. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs highlighted the current process of treaty making
in the country which primarily involves the administrative Ministry. He stated that the Ministry of
Law and Justice is also consulted in the process and based on the recommendations of other
stakeholders, India’s position regarding a treaty is finalized. He submitted that according to a ruling
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, whenever there is a conflict between a domestic law and
international conventions, the domestic law prevails. In circumstances where a domestic law does
not exist, international laws are given due respect. He further submitted that when a situation arises
when the country flouts international laws, the country could always approach the international
bodies for a review of the treaty obligations. He stated that in case a country, before signing a
treaty, feels that it would not be able to implement some provisions of the treaty, the provisions of
the Vienna Convention allow the country to specify its reservations before acceding to it. He
supported the idea of creation of a separate Department which would have officers well versed
with international laws as well as domestic laws. This would reduce conflicts between national and
international  laws. He however, expressed reservations on the creation of an overarching

44
Department of International Laws as it would disturb the Allocation of Business Rules of the
Government of India. Further, he stated that it would be too cumbersome for one Department to
look after the implementation of the myriad of treaties.
4. The Director, Indian Law Institute gave an overview of the functioning of the Institute . On
the issue of conflict between domestic laws and international laws, he submitted that once a
country signs an international treaty, it is bound to adhere to its provisions and violation of treaty
by domestic legislation cannot be justified. However, he stated that some treaties like the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights have some provisions which allow parties to
create reservations on implementation of some provisions of the treaty in accordance with their
domestic legislative framework.
5. The Secretary, Department of Justice stated that the Department administers only three
MoUs mainly concerned with exchange of judges. She stated that even these are not being
implemented adequately. She stated that the Department consults and follows the advice of the
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) on international treaties. The Joint Secretary, Department of
Justice stated that the primary responsibility in international treaty negotiations rest with the
administrative Ministry. He stated that although the Ministry of Law and Justice assists the officials
of the administrative Ministries, their exposure to international laws is limited. He suggested that
more support needs to come from both the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Legal & Treaties
(L&T) Division of MEA.
6. The Secretary, Legislative Department stated that the Department has no role to play in the
preparation and finalization of international treaties. He stated that the Department comes into
picture only once the draft legislation for implementation of treaties comes to the Department for
vetting.
7. The Director, National Judicial Academy suggested the need to create a central repository of
international treaties so that they can become easily accessible. This, according to her, would help
in spreading awareness about the international legal obligations. She also suggested that curriculum
in colleges need to be changed in order to incorporate contemporary issues in the curriculum. She
also suggested that a course for judges also needs to be started to make them aware of
international treaties.
8. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 4.36 
P.M.

45
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 14 th March, 2016 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Rajani Patil
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
5. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Tariq Anwar
8. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
9. Adv. Joice George
10. Dr. A. Sampath
11. Shri M. Udhayakumar
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. The Committee then took up the
consideration and adoption of the draft 81
st, * *  * Report of the Committee on (i) the  Role of
Ministry of Law and Justice in Framing/Approving the Provisions of International Covenants/
Multilateral/ Bilateral Treaties or Agreements, (ii) *  *  *  *   and (iii) *  * *  *, respectively.
Hon’ble Members deliberated on the Reports, and thereafter, the Reports were adopted with minor
editorial amendments.
3. The Committee decided to present the 81
st Report to both Houses of Parliament on the 15 th
March, 2016. It authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Bhupender Yadav to present the
45
*** Relate to other matters.

46
Report to Rajya Sabha and Shri P.P. Chaudhary and in his absence, Adv. Joice George to lay the
same in Lok Sabha. The Committee also decided to present the 82 nd and 83 rd Reports to both
Houses of Parliament on the 16 th March, 2016. It authorized Shri K.T.S. Tulsi and in his absence,
Smt. Rajani  Patil to present the Report to Rajya Sabha and Dr. A. Sampath and in his absence,
Shri M. Udhayakumar to lay the same in Lok Sabha.
4. Verbatim record of meeting of the Committee was kept.
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.