PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                          9 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
AUGUST, 2005/SRAVANA, 1927 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in 

 
CS (P&L) – 17 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
  
NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2005) 
(LAID ON TO THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
AUGUST, 2005/SRAVANA, 1927 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv) 
3. R EPORT ......................................................................................................................... 1-10 
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ..................................................... 11-31 
5. A NNEXURES ................................................................................................................... 33-105 
 [The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill,] 2003.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05) 
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan       –––      Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind  
 5. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 6. Dr. P. C. Alexander 
 7. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 8. Shri Raashid Alvi 
 9. Vacant 
 10. Vacant 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq  
 12. Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran  
 13. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar  
 14. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa  
 15. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 16. Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel  
 17. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 18. Shri Harin Pathak 
 19. Shri V. Radhakrishnan 
 20. Shri Vishwendra Singh  
 21. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 22. Prof. Vijaya Kumar Malhotra  
 23. Kumari Mamata Banerjee  
 24. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
 25. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
 26. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 27. Shri Ramchandra Paswan 
 28. Vacant  
 29. Vacant  
 30. Vacant 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee, present its Ninth Report relating to the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill*, 2003. The Bill seeks to amend the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996. 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee, the 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill, as in troduced in the Rajya Sabh a on the 22nd December, 
2003 and pending therein, to the Committee, for examination and report. Earlier when this Committee was not 
in existence, the Bill was referred to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs on the 8th January, 2004. Consequent upon the dissolution of the 13th Lok Sabha on the 6th February, 
2004, the Committee was dissolved. The present Committ ee came into existence after bifurcation of the 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on 20th July, 2004. 
3.  Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee in its meeting held on the 23rd August 2004, 
decided to issue Press Communique to solicit views/suggestions from interested 
individuals/organisations/institutions on various provisions of the Bill. 
4.  In response to the Press Communique, 59 memora nda containing the suggestions were received by the 
Committee. 
5.  The Committee considered the Bi ll and heard a presentation by the S ecretary, Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law and Justice on the 10th September, 2004. 
6.  The Committee heard oral evidence of 36 individu als/organisations/institutions/ experts including some 
Government Offices and PSUs, viz. MTNL, Railways Board, CPWD, HPCL, ONGC etc. who had been 
handling major arbitration cases. Th e Committee also heard the views of many eminent legal luminaries in 
Chennai and Hyderabad to have a better appreciation of the subject. Dr. Robert Briner, Chairman, International 
Court of Arbitration, International Chamber of Commerce, Paris also deposed before the Committee. 
7.  Contacts were established with the major international arbitration centres, namely the Singapore 
International Arbitration Centre, Hongkong International Arbitration Centre, the London Court of International 
Arbitration and International Court of Arbitration, Paris so as to collect information about the functioning of 
these Centres in the context of the idea mooted in the Committee on setting up institutionalized arbitration of 
world class standard. A proposal was also initiated to hold video conferencing between the Members of the 
Committee and the authorities of major international arbitration centres to exchange views and ideas on the 
subject and also to have first hand information about functioning of institutionalized arbitration. Although the 
proposed video conferencing did not materialise due to constraints of time, SIAC, HKIAC, LCIA responded to 
the queries of the Committee. The Committee also sought Legislative Department’s response on the 
suggestions made by the witnesses before the Committee. 
 
 
* Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated the 22nd December, 2003.  
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, (No. 41562) dated the 17th August, 2004. 

8. During the course of consideration of the Bill, the Committee was informed on 20th January, 2005 that 
the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice had set up an in-house Committee, under the 
Chairmanship of Justice B.P. Saraf,  retired Chief Justice of J & K High Court and a renowned expert in the 
field of arbitration, with representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative Department and the 
International Centre for Al ternate Dispute Resolution, New Delhi (ICADR ) as Members, to make an in-depth 
in-house study in order to examine fully the provisions of the existing Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
and the implications of the recommendations of the Law Commission made in its 179th Report on the said 
Act. Taking into account the sudden development in the Government’s stand, the Committee decided to wait 
for submission of the Report of the Justice Saraf Committee on Arbitration which was expected by 31st 
January, 2005. 
9. After submission of the said Report the Committee asked for comments of the Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law and Justice on the recommendations contained in the Report of the Justice Saraf Committee. 
10.  While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information placed 
before it:  
(i) Background note on the Bill; 
(ii)  Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (UNCITRAL);  
(iii)  176th Report of the Law Commission of India; 
(iv)  Report of Justice Sa raf Committee on Arbitration; 
(v)  Comments of the Legislative Department on the recommendations contained in the Report of 
Justice Saraf Committee; 
(vi) Legislative Department’s comments on the views/suggestions contained in the written memoranda 
received from various Organizations/institutions/indiv iduals/experts on the pr ovisions of the Bill; 
and 
(vii) Comments of the Legislative Department on the views/suggestions tendered before the Committee. 
11.  The Committee held 11 meetings to examine the Bill. 
12.  The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 28th July, 2005.  
13.  For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
July 28, 2005 Committee on Personnel, 
   Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
A BRIEF NOTE ON ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
1.0 Dispute resolution mechanism consists of resolution  i) through courts and ii) through mechanisms other 
than Courts. High litigation costs, time-consuming and complicated nature of lawsuits etc. discourage parties 
from approaching the Courts of law. This has led to the widespread acceptance of alternative dispute resolution 
mechanisms. Arbitration, conciliation and negotiation are the important ingredients of such a mechanism. 
1.1 Arbitration means a process of dispute resolution in which a neutral third party (arbitrator) renders a 
decision after a hearing at which both parties have an opportunity to be heard
1. Conciliation means the 
adjustment and settlement of a dispute in a friendly, unantagonistic manner2. 
1.2 In the present context of market economy and the world emerging as a global village, the expeditious 
settlement and resolution of disputes between the part ies has become necessary. Pa rties to a dispute opt for 
arbitration because of commercial prudence. 
ADVANTAGES OF ARBITRATION 
2.0 In the language of Lord Mustill, “The great advantage of arbitration is that it combines strength with 
flexibility. Strength because it yields enforceable decisions, and is backed by a judicial framework which, in 
the last resort, can call upon the coercive powers of th e State. Flexible because it allows the contestants to 
choose procedures which fit the nature of the dispute and the business context in which it occurs3. 
2.1 The common experience is that alternative dispute re solution processes preserve or enhance personal and 
business relationships that might otherwise be damaged by the adversarial process. 
2.2 The main advantages of arbitration are: 
(i) Final, binding decisions  
  A final and enforceable decision can generally be obtained only by recourse to the Courts or by 
arbitration. In arbitration, since both the parties agree to the terms and conditions, they are bound by 
the decisions. It depends ultimately on the goodwill and cooperation of the parties. 
(ii)  International recognition of arbitral awards  
  Over 134 countries have signed the 1958 United Nations Convention on the Recognition and 
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, known as the New York Convention. The Convention 
facilitates enforcement of awards in all contracting States. 
 
 
 
1Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th edn. (1990), West Publishing Co., p. 105.  
2 supra n. l at p. 289. 
3
 O.P. Malhotra, The Law and Practice of Arbitration and Conciliation, 1stedn. (2002), p.80. 
 

(iii)  Neutrality  
  In arbitral proceedings, parties can place them selves on an equal footing in five key respects viz. 
place of arbitration, language used, procedures  or rules of law applied, nationality and legal 
representation. Arbitration may take place in any country, in any language and with arbitrators of 
any nationality. With this flexibility, it is generally possible to structure a neutral procedure offering 
no undue advantage to any party. 
 
(iv)  Specialized competence of arbitrators 
  Judicial systems do not allow the parties to a dispute to choose their own judges. But arbitration 
offers the parties the unique opportunity to designat e persons of their choice as arbitrators, provided 
they are independent. This enables the parties to have their disputes resolved by people who have 
specialized competence in the relevant field. 
(v)  Speed and economy 
  Arbitration is faster and less expensive than litigation in the Courts. Although a complex 
international dispute may sometimes take a great deal of time and money to resolve even by 
arbitration, the limited scope for challenge agai nst arbitral awards, as  compared with Court 
judgements, offers a clear advantage. Above all, it helps to ensure that the parties will not 
subsequently be entangled in a prolonged and cos tly series of appeals. Furthermore, arbitration 
offers the parties the flexibility to set up proceedings that can - be conducted as quickly and 
economically as the circumstances allow. 
(vi)  Confidentiality 
  Arbitration hearings are not public,  and only the parties themselves  receive copies of the awards. 
This is of great significance in commercially sensitive disputes. 
Institutional or AD HOC arbitration 
3.0 Parties opting for arbitration have a choice between designating an institution, such as the International 
Chamber of Commerce to administer it, or proceeding ad hoc outside an institutional framework. Institutional 
arbitration can handle large complex cases to small co mmercial and individual cl aims. They are decided by 
former judges, seasoned attorneys and such other professionals belonging to the specific field of dispute in 
question. This offers neutral, efficient and reliable dispute resolution. This offers parties the same quality 
outcomes they would receive in Court, but in less time and with less expense. 
3.1 International arbitration institutions provide ‘model clauses’ so that the parties, while incorporating them 
in their contracts, can aid smooth progress of arbitration. They also provide for a definite fee schedule. They (i) 
determine whether there is a prima faci e agreement to arbitrate; (ii) decide  on the number of arbitrators; (iii) 
appoint arbitrators; (iv) decide challenges against arbitr ators; (v) ensure that arbitrators are conducting the 
arbitration in accordance with their Rules and replace them if necessary; (vi) determine the place of arbitration; 

(vii) fix and extend time-limits; (viii) determine the fees and expenses of the arbitrators; and (ix) scrutinize 
arbitral awards. 
3.2 In ad hoc cases, the arbitration will be administ ered by the arbitrators themselves. However, should 
problems arise in setting the arbitration in motion or in constituting the arbitral tribunal, the parties may have 
to require the assistance of a state court, or that of an independent appointing authority4. 
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY OF LAW OF ARBITRATION IN INDIA 
4.0 Prior to the British rule, the laws in India were not codified. The age-old system prevalent in India was of 
making oral agreement to submit to arbitration and of  making oral awards. In Panchayats, Panchas where 
chosen by virtue of their personal qualities of being fair-minded, impartial and knowledgeable. The panchayats 
were held in great veneration. They proceeded in an informal way, untrammeled by technicalities of procedure 
and laws of evidence. Also, arbitration was governed by social sanctions. But, the simple and informal system 
of arbitration through the Panchayats, though useful, was ineffective to deal with the complexities arising out 
of advancement in social and economic spheres. 
4.1 When the East India Company started taking over ad ministrative control, the Presidency Governments in 
Bengal, Madras and Bombay enacted ‘Regulations’. The Bengal Regulation XVI of 1793 authorised the 
Courts to recommend to parties to a suit to submit the decision on matters in disputes which had already arisen 
to arbitration. Later, the Madras Regulation V of 1816 and the Bombay Regulation IV of 1827 were also made. 
They introduced substantial changes in the Panchayat system in the Presidency towns. 
4.2 It was after the coming into existence of the Legislat ive Council of India in 1834 that the procedure of the 
Courts of Civil Judicature was codified by Act VIII of 1859. Sections 312 to 325 of the Act dealt with 
arbitration between parties to a suit while Sections 326 and 327 dealt with arbitration without the intervention 
of the Court. Section 312 of that Act enabled the parties to a suit to apply to the court, if they so desired, that 
an order be passed on the matters in dispute referred to arbitration. The procedure for arbitration, making and 
filing of awards was also laid down in subsequent sect ion. The provision for filing and enforcement of awards 
on such arbitrations was made in 1882 Act No. XIV. 
4.3 In the Indian Arbitration Act, 1899 provision was made for arbitration of disputes that might arise in 
future. In 1925, the Civil Justice Committee recommended several changes in the arbitration law. On the basis 
of the recommendations by this Committee, the Indian legislature passed the Arbitration Act of 1940. 
4.4 After the end of the Second World War in 1945, particularly after independence in 1947, the trade and 
industry received a great fillip and the commercial community became more and more inclined towards 
arbitration for settlement of their disputes, as agains t litigation in Courts, which involved long delays and 
heavy expenses. With increasing emphasis on arbitration, there was more and more judicial grist exposing the 
infirmities, shortcomings and lacunae in the Act of 1940. 
4.5 One of the problems faced in international arbitrat ion related to the recognition and enforcement of an 
arbitral award made in one country by  the Courts of other countries. This difficulty was sought to be removed 
through various international Conventions such as the Geneva Convention and the New York Convention. 
Since India was signatory to both the Conventions, the Arbitration (Protocol & Convention) Act, 1937 was 
enacted for enforcement of foreign awards made under the Geneva Convention, 1927 and the Foreign Awards  
4 www.iccwbo.org. 

(Recognition & Enforcement) Act, 1961 was enacted for enforcement of foreign awards under the New York 
Convention, 1958. 
4.6 A number of enactments have been amended or repealed  in recent years in India with a view to reforming 
the economy. It was felt that these reforms would remain incomplete if corresponding changes were not made 
in the law dealing with settlement of disputes. After India opened its economy and undertook several measures 
of economic reforms in the early 90’s and after the deve lopment in the international trade and commerce, with 
the increasing role of GATT and later WTO, there was a spurt in trading in goods, services, investments and 
intellectual property. Disputes arose between the trading parties, which were diverse in nature and complex, 
involving huge sums. Such disputes required quick and amicable settlement since the parties could not tolerate 
the prolonged legal process in courts, appeal, review and revision. 
4.7 A number of foreign investors, in particular, had expressed the view that they would not like to invest in 
India unless disputes arising out of their investments are settled abroad. Under the 1940 Act, the parties had to 
go to the Court to make the awards final. Interference by the law Courts at the instance of one party or the 
other and a considerable delay in disposal of matters gave rise to demands to repeal the 1940 Act. 
4.8 Thus it became imperative for India to devise a new legal regime relating to both domestic and 
international commercial arbitration. To attract the confidence of the international mercantile community in the 
context of growing volume of India’s trade and our commercial relationship with the rest of the world after the 
new liberalization policy of the Government, the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1946 was passed. This Act 
is in harmony with the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, 1985. 
4.9  The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 repealed the Arbitration Act, 1940 as well as the other two 
Acts for enforcement of ‘foreign awar ds’. Part II of the Act consolidat es the two Acts for enforcement of 
‘foreign awards’. Part III of the Act provides for conciliation. The basic features  of the 1996 Act are (i) party 
autonomy (ii) minimum judicial intervention and (iii) maximum judicial support. 
BACKGROUND NOTE ON THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2003. 
5.0 Ever since the commencement of the 1996 Act, requests have been voiced for its amendment. 
5.1 The main problem with this Act is that the UNCITRAL Model which was meant as a Model for 
international arbitration was adopted also for domestic arbitration between parties in India. In several 
countries, the laws of arbitration for international and domestic arbitration are governed by different statutes. 
Also, in many cases we have lost the letter and also the spirit, and in some cases, we have kept the letter, but 
lost the spirit of the UNCITRAL Model Law. 
5.2 Since various anomalies were pointed out, the Law Commission of India undertook a comprehensive 
review of the Act and made recommendations in its 176th Report. The Report also contains a draft Arbitration 
and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2001. The Government, after inviting comments of the State Governments 
and certain commercial organisations on the Report and the draft Bill, has decided to accept almost all the 
recommendations. In addition, some suggestions made in a special seminar organized by the Law Ministry by 
the leading senior lawyers, Justices and representatives of commercial organisations have also been accepted. 
On 22nd July, 2004 the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice constituted a Committee to 
make in-depth study of the implications of the recommendations of the Law Commission of India contained in 

its 176th Report and all aspects relating to the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and make 
suggestions to the Government. The Committee, known as “Justice Saraf Committee on Arbitration” submitted 
its Report on 29th January, 2005. 
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003 
6.0 The Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice received valuable comments and 
suggestions from eminent organizations and individuals in the country and abroad. The Committee also heard 
prominent arbitrators, both legal and non-legal, pr ominent lawyers and representatives of public sector 
corporations. 
6.1 The Committee, during its deliberations, expressed reservations on the following provisions in the Bill. 
6.1.0  Clause 8 of the Bill provides that any wr itten communication by one party to another and accepted 
expressly or by implication by the other party will also be treated as an arbitration agreement. 
6.1.1 The Committee is of the considered  view that this provision may have serious implications. The 
Committee agrees to the observations  of Justice Saraf Committee in this regard that an arbitration 
agreement has the important effect of contracting out the right to go to the Court.  it deprives the parties 
of that basic right. Such an agree ment should be/only in some wri tten form. It cannot be inferred by 
implication. 
6.2.0  Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend section 8 of the Act. 
6.2.1 The Committee is of the opinion th at the proposed amendments enab ling the judicial authority to 
decide on preliminary issues like the non-existence of any dispute, arbitration agreement being null and 
void, arbitration agreement being incapable of perfor mance will give rise to prolonged litigation in 
Courts. This concern was also voiced by Dr. Robert Briner , Chairman, International Court of 
Arbitration, ICC, Paris, while de posing before the Committee. It will also effectively introduce court 
intervention at pre-arbitration st age and retard the arbitration proce ss. This would defeat the main 
purpose of the 1996 Act which is minimisation of court intervention. 
6.3 With respect to Clause 12 of the Bill, the Commi ttee feels that to confer the power of appointment 
of arbitrator, in default of the parties or the agreed  procedure, on the Court, for determination of the 
issues arising in that connection on the judicial side  is not a welcome step. In  the present scenario of 
huge pendency of cases in the Courts, it may take years to get the arbitrator appointed. 
6.3.1 The Committee is of the op inion that if the parties are unable to  appoint an arbitrator within the 
stipulated time, the power of appo intment should not automatically de volve on the Courts. But, if the 
parties apply for the appointment of an arbitrator, then the Court can do so. 
6.3.2 The Committee is of the view that thirty days time stipulated in the Act is more than sufficient for 
appointment of an arbitrator by the parties and that there is no need to extend the same. 
6.4 In respect of Clause 13 of the Bill, the Committee is in agreement with the view of Justice Saraf 
Committee that any attempt to eluc idate the ‘circumstances’ is lik ely to provoke unnecessary time 
consuming challenge to the impartiality of the arbitrator on the ground that he had some relation of the 

type set out in the illustration, with the parties or their lawyers. There is a high  chance of abuse of such 
a provision by a party who wants to delay or derail the arbitration proceeding. 
6.5 Clause 17 of the Bill provides that if the parties to arbitration are Indian nationals or Companies, 
then the arbitration venue has to be in India. This proposed amendment is squarely against the principle 
of ‘comity of nations’ and ‘curial law’. Also, its effect  is to ignore the common law principle that parties 
are free to contract as they deem fit provided no provision is against public policy or in violation of any 
applicable law or procures a breach of any applicab le law. Also, the argument that arbitration between 
domestic parties should be conducte d only in India is diametricall y opposite to the rationale for 
adopting the New York Convention. If arbitration ou tside India was acceptable at  the time of adoption 
of the New York Convention, then it should be all the more acceptable now, given that India has come so 
far in the international arena. 
6.6 The Committee opines that clause 18(IA) which states that the arbi tral tribunal shall endeavor to 
expedite the arbitral process subject to such rules as may be made by the High Court in this behalf, is 
against the principle of party autonomy which is th e pillar on which consensual arbitration rests. The 
Committee strongly feels that this provision enables Court intervention which has to be minimised as far 
as possible. 
6.7 Precedents prove that fixation of statutory time limit for completion of arbitral proceedings as 
proposed by clause 29 A (1) has seldom worked in India. The Committee feels that this provision will 
yield results only if consequences of non-compliance of such a time limit are provided for. 
6.8 The Committee has noted that no reason is given in the Statement of Re asons for omission of 
Section 28. 
6.9 Regarding the proposal for an Arbitration Division  of the High Court in Part IX-A, the criticism 
put forward was that the Chief Justice has never even  once appointed any person  or any institution as 
arbitrator. He, as a routine, appoints a sitting J udge of his own Court. Th is places professional 
arbitrators at a disadvantage. Entrusting a High Cour t Chief Justice or Chief Justice of India with the 
power to appoint arbitrator may lead to delay in  the appointment. Though  the Committee appreciates 
the concept of Fast Track Arbitration, it is of the view that it would not help in reducing delay. 
7.0 In nutshell, the Committee is of the considered view that:  
(a) The Bill, would: 
(i) lead not only to greater interference by Cour ts in the process of arbitration but also end 
up having arbitration being conducted under the supervision of the Courts; 
(ii) have the Courts sitting in judgement over the arbitrators before arbitration, during 
arbitration and after arbitration. 
This was also the voice which resounded in the memoranda submitted to the Committee. 
(b)  There was a broad consensus that the provision s analysed above, if accepted, will make the 
arbitral tribunal an organ of the Court rath er than a party-structu red dispute resolution 
mechanism. Also, many amending  provisions are likely to cre ate confusion and unnecessary 

litigation. Bringing back Court control and supervision in arbi tration and the choice of the 
arbitrator subject to High Court rules and superv ision and control of the Court, is neither in 
the interest of growth of arbitration in India nor in tune with the best international practices. 
It was felt that they are contrary  to the best international practi ces in the field of arbitration. 
Hence the Committee is of the view that the adoption of this Bill may hamper further 
development of international trade relations a nd diminish the confiden ce of the international 
community in the Indian system of arbitration. 
 The necessity of institutio nalised arbitration in India 
8.0 As far as domestic arbitration in India is concerned,  there are a large variety of tribunals created by the 
State under different statutes as alternative to the traditional court litigation, for settling various types of 
disputes such as labour disputes, service matters, antitrust matters, consumer protection, taxation, excise etc. In 
addition, there are Lok Adal ats acting under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, to deal with subjects 
like disputes arising out. of the use of electricity, telecommunications, insurance etc. So, the need of the hour is 
a system to deal with international arbitration. 
8.1 The Committee feels that institut ionalised arbitration in Indi a can ensure that parties to 
international arbitration opt for India as the venue for arbitration.  This was also advocated by the 
witnesses who deposed before the Committee, prominent among them being Shri. K. K. Venugopal, Senior 
Advocate, Supreme Court and Shri. A.K. Ganguly, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court. 
8.2 The growing tendency to take undue advantage of Court procedure to gain time and delay arbitration or 
implementation of award is certainly undesirable. If the Court procedure is used in such a manner for the 
promotion of unfair objective, the remedy seems to be worse than the evil and the parties who entered into an 
arbitration agreement with a view to avoid the lengthy and expensive Court procedure find themselves fighting 
a battle on both the fronts-in arbitration proceedings and in  the Court of law. This is indeed the fate of several 
arbitration proceedings in India today
6
. 
8.3 This situation has been best described in the word s of Hon’ble Mr. Justice Desai of the Supreme Court of 
India: 
“Interminable, time consuming, complex and expensive Court procedures impelled jurists to search for an 
alternative forum, less formal, more effective and speedy for resolution of disputes avoiding procedural 
claptrap and this led them to the Arbitration Act...  however, the way in which the proceedings under the 
Act are conducted and without an exception challenged in Courts, has made lawyers laugh and legal 
philosophers weep. Experience shows and law reports bear ample testimony that the proceedings under 
the Act have become highly technical accompanied by unending prolixity, at every stage providing a 
legal trap to the unwary. Informal forum chosen by the parties for expeditious disposal of their disputes 
has by the decision of the Courts been clothed with ‘legalese’ of unforeseeable complexity
 7
.” 
8.4 The Committee notes that Non-resident Indians and Foreign Institutional Investors are entering the Indian 
market in a big way. The Indian law relating to international commercial arbitration has to be made responsive 
to these changes in the Indian econom ic scene. There is a need to harmoni se the Indian law with the concepts 
on arbitration and conciliation of the legal systems of the world. 
6
 B.S. Patil, The Law of Arbitration, 3rd edn., 1996, p.3. 
7
 M/s Guru Nanak Foundation v. M/s Rattan Singh & Sons, A.l.R. 1981 S.C.2075 (2076). 

8.5 Arbitration is one of the services being paid handsomely at the global level. An arbitral institution with 
conscious office bearers can ensure that the proceedings ar e conducted in the interest of the parties. We have a 
number of small arbitration institutions all over the country,  but none of them have the stature or the ability to 
attract or manage large arbitrations in India. At present, commercial disputes involving huge amounts of 
money are not arbitrated in India. They go out of Indi a because of which we are losing huge amount of time, 
money, human resources and expertise. 
8.6 Therefore, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need for an institution in India which would match 
international standards. Shri D.M. Popat, Member, International Court of Arbitration, while deposing before 
the Committee, spoke in favour of institutionalised arbitration without the intervention of Courts. The 
Committee is of the view that we have got the tremendous advantage of having English as a working language 
throughout the country which can attract foreign parties. Moreover, we have a well versed Judiciary and an 
intelligent Bar. The setting up of an institution would not only save foreign exchange on arbitration taking 
place outside India but also earn foreign exchange by undertaking international arbitration on behalf of Asian 
and Middle Eastern countries and other underdeveloped or developing countries. 
8.7 The Committee appreciates the infrastructure raised by the International Centre for Alternative Dispute 
Resolution which is funded by the Government of India. The Committee feels that this institution can be 
treated as a model institution of arbitration of international excellence. 
9.0 The Committee feels that following are the pertinen t issues which need urgent consideration. Also 
given are the recommendations of the Committee in respect of those issues: 
9.1 The major issues in the arena of arbitration in In dia are the absence of account ability of arbitrators and 
huge pendency of cases. Ther e are no rules as to who can be appointed as  arbitrators, the fees to be paid to 
them, the action to be taken in case of their resorting to unethical practices, time limit for the making of an 
award, consequences of not making the award within the stip ulated time limit etc. This has resulted in chaos in 
the field of arbitration in India. 
9.1.0 Many international parties are willing to choose Asian countries like India as the venue of arbitration 
because of lesser expenditure, especially in the context of foreign companies willing to invest in India and 
setting up of Special Economic Zones. But they are dissuaded from doing so because of the current situation in 
the arbitration field in, India. Theref ore, they opt for arbitration in co untries like Singapore where there are 
prescribed rules’ and adequate infrastructure for institu tionalised arbitration. This was stressed by Shri S.K. 
Dholakia, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court, while deposing before the Committee. If such a conducive 
atmosphere is created in India, international parties will opt for India as the venue for arbitration and India 
shall become a major player in the field of international arbitration. 
9.1.1  In this scenario, the Committee recommends that the following provisions may be incorporated in 
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996:  
Addition of Schedules. 
 A Schedule which would provide for sole arbitration and B Schedule which would provide for 
institutionalised arbitration may be incorporated in the 1996 Act. 
 The A Schedule shall deal with sole arbitratio n which will be governed by Part I of the Act. 

9.1.2  Since the Committee feels that th e accountability of arbitrators has to be ensured, the Committee 
recommends that persons who would like to render their services as arbi trators should be registered as 
members of a professional institutio n or association such as the Bar Co uncil of India, the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants, the Engineers’ Association etc. The arbitrators shall be governed by the rules of 
the institution.. This will ensure accountability of the arbitrators. 
9.1.3   In order to avoid pendency of cases, the Committee is of the considered opinion that the following 
consequences may be provide d for not disposing of the case within the stipulated time limit: the fees of 
the arbitrator should be withdrawn, or he should be blacklisted and no further case should be allotted to 
him. The institution may be given the powers to take stipulated action against a defaulting arbitrator. If 
the arbitrator is of the opinion that  the delay is caused due to the faul t of the parties, he should inform 
the same to the institution. 
9.1.4  Part IA may be added in the Act which shall provide for a statutory autonomous permanent 
institution known as the Indian Arbitration Commissi on. It shall be presided over by the Chief Justice 
of India. Its members shall be on e representative each of the Minist ry of Law and Justice; and the 
Ministry of Commerce and two representatives of rec ognised professional bodies such as the Bar 
Council of India, the Institute of  Chartered Accountants, the Engi neers’ Association etc. This 
Commission shall be vested with the powers to gran t accreditation to professi onal institutions which 
come forward to render their services  in the field of institutionalised  arbitration. Accreditation will 
ensure that the institution is equipped with proper infrastructure such as buildings, modern information 
technology and communication systems, library for la w books and books on oth er professional subjects, 
for reference by arbitrators. The guidelines for granting  accreditation shall be made public. This will 
ensure transparency of the accreditation process. 
9.1.5  The B Schedule shall be governed by Part IA of the Act.  
  This Schedule may provide that any professional institution which is a candidate for accreditation 
under Part IA should meet the st andards laid down by the Indian  Arbitration Commission. Such an 
institution shall be an internationa l centre of excellence. It shall fram e its own rules that will govern the 
appointments, preparation of panel, fixing of fees , the conduct of arbitrators as well as that of the 
arbitration proceedings, the penaltie s in case of delay in settling dis putes etc. Such rules shall be made 
public. This would provide not only familiarity to th e international commercial community who have to 
look out for a proper arbitral venue for resolution but  would also instil confidence in the minds of the 
public that this is a transparent and reliable in stitution. This will also  ensure accountability of 
arbitrators. 
9.1.6  A panel consisting of appropriate persons, co mpetent and qualified to serve as arbitrators, 
conciliators and mediators or willing to serve in any other specialist capacity su ch as experts, surveyors 
and investigators shall be maintained  by the institution. This list sha ll be made available to the public. 
The enrolment of arbitrators as members of this in stitution shall be made ma ndatory in order to be 
included in the list. The awards made by the arbitrat ors shall be scrutinized by its in-house Apex Body. 
They shall be final and made public if agreed to by the parties to the arbitration. 
9.1.7 The Committee is of the considered view that the advantage of providing for these in the Schedules 
is that the parties to arbitration, conciliation or mediation will be free to choose either of the fora. Under 
this scheme, the parties will be at the liberty to eith er opt for institutionalised arbitration which shall be 
governed by its own rules or opt for arbitration under the supervision of the Court. 

9.2 Another issue which was highlighted was that in various Public Sector Undertakings and Government 
Departments, the arbitration and conciliation proceeding s are not properly regulated . There are no fixed rules 
for the conduct of arbitration proceedings. Also, the arbitrators are not properly  equipped in terms of 
infrastructure like library and also in terms of knowledge of latest legal position. It is alleged that in some 
cases, the departmental officers work as arbitrators, to gi ve an award against the same department or in favour 
of the Government without proper appreciation of facts and law. It is further alleged that they even cause delay 
by colluding with the opposite parties. This discourages the stakeholders from opting for arbitration. 
9.2.1 The Committee is of the view that the benefits  of institutionalised arbitration shall be made 
available to Public Sector Undert akings and Government Departments also. This will put an end to the 
alleged unethical practices followed in such institutions at present. This can be ensured by incorporating 
necessary clauses in the contracts entered into by them with the stakeholders, which would bind them to 
go for institutionalised arbitration. This shall be  to the advantage of th e public and the public 
institutions in terms of cost and expertise. 
10. At the meeting of the Committee held on 8th June, 2005 there was a consensus (which has already been 
stated elsewhere in the Report) that the present Bill tend s to allow greater interventi on by the Courts than the 
1996 Act. The Committee is of the opinion that since many provisions of the Bill are contentious, a fresh 
legislation may be brought. The Secretary, Legislative Department, had made a presentation before the 
Committee. The crux of his presentation was that this Bill leaves room for more judicial interference. He 
informed the Committee that since it might be difficult to move so many amendments, the Legislative 
Department would consider to withdraw this Bill and on the basis of the recommendations of this Committee, 
bring a fresh Bill. Therefore, the Committee did not take up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. 
10.1 In view of the above, the Committee is of the cons idered view that the present Bill may not suffice in 
achieving the desired objectives. It recommends th at Government may consider bringing in a fresh 
comprehensive legislation on the subject before Parliament, as expeditiously as possible. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF  

THE DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
V 
FIFTH  MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 10th September, 2004, in  Room No. G 074, Ground Floor, K Block, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      –––      Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
 5. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
 6. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 7. Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK  SABHA 
 8.  Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 9.  Shri Chhatter Singh Darbar 
 10.  Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa  
 11.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 12.  Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari 
 13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 14.  Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 15. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary  
  Ms. S. Pankajavalli, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES  
  Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary  
  2. Shri Z.S. Negi, Joint Secretary 
2. * * * 
3. * * * 

4. The Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice made a presentation on the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003 with the help of slides. He opined that the Bill would go 
a long way in reducing delays in the conduct of arbitration proceedings. 
5. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised certain issues and queries for clarification from the 
Secretary. The Secretary was asked to send written replies to the points raised by the Members. 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7. The Committee adjourned at 1.10 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VI  
SIXTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 20th September, 2004, in Room No.‘63’, First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      –––      Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Ram Nath Kovind  
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar  
 4. Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK  SABHA 
 5.  Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 6.  Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa  
 7.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 8.  Smt. Kiran Maheshwari 
 9.  Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 10.  Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 11. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary 
  Ms. S. Pankajavalli, Committee Officer  
 I. WITNESSES  
  Shri O.P. Malhotra, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court 
 II. Representatives of Confedera tion of Indian Industry (CII) 
  1. Smt. Vijaya Sampath, Corporate Director  
  2.  Kumari Pallavi  S. Shroff, Partner 
  3.  Shri Vikram Badshah, Senior Consultant  
  4.  Shri Sanjeev Bharadwaj, Director 
  5.  Shri N.B. Mathur, Adviser 
 III. Shri S.K. Dholakiya, Sr. Advocate Supreme Court  
 IV. Representatives of the Associated Cham bers of Commerce and Industry of India  
  (ASSOCHAM)  
  1. Shri Ashish Kochhar, Assistant Director  
  2. Shri Krit S. Javal, Sr. Advocate 

  3. Shri Manish Lamba, Sr. Advocate 
 V. Representatives of the Legislative De partment, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1. Shri Z.S. Negi, Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri N.K. Ambastha, Deputy Legislative Counsel  
  3. Smt. Sudha Rani Retangi, Assistant Legislative Counsel 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the above  witnesses to the Committ ee for discussion on the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003. 
2.1. Shri O.P. Malhotra, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India was of the opinion that the delays in 
appointment of arbitrators, in giving arbitral awards and judicial interventi on at different stages of arbitration, 
were the main problems in the Indian arbitration scene. He was of the view that the unsatisfactory conduct of 
international arbitration in India was the main reason for parties opting for better alternative venue for 
arbitration. 
2.2. He welcomed the provisions of the Bill. However, he opined that the provisions for enforcement of 
foreign awards in India need more consideration. He stressed the need for a time limit for giving arbitral 
awards. He favoured the setting up of an Arbitration Division in High Courts. 
3.1  The representatives of Confedera tion of Indian Industry (CII) were of, the opinion that the Bill amending 
the Arbitration Act, 1996 was the need of the hour, in the wake of globalization. They welcomed the 
provisions of the Bill, which provided that the Act should  apply to International arbitration, even if the venue 
of arbitration was outside India. They opined that this would do away with certain anomalies which were 
sought to be resolved by the Courts, through judgments. They were of the view that clause 7 of the Bill, which 
provided for existence of an arbitration agreement even by implication, would lead to more litigation. 
3.2. Their considered opinion was that there was no need  to increase the prescribed time limit to appoint an 
arbitrator, from thirty to sixty days. They welcomed the amendment to the effect that appeal from an arbitral 
award should be preferred to a High Court, and not the District Court. They supported the provision requiring 
depositing money by the appellant. They also stressed  the need to set up institutions of excellence for 
arbitration, or to strengthen the existing institutions, such as International Centre for Alternative Dispute 
Resolution (ICADR), which would help create confidence in the parties that they could opt for arbitration in 
India and could also transform India into a hub of inte rnational arbitration. The Ch airman requested them to 
send further feedback, if they had any, on the Bill. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew). 
4.  Shri S.K. Dholakiya, Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court,  gave a brief narration of the evolution of arbitration 
law in India. He deposed that persons who have in-depth knowledge in the respective fields, should be 
appointed as arbitrators, depending on the subject matter of  arbitration. He suggested that the Bill should have 
two distinct parts-one Part dealing with domestic arbitration and the other Part dealing with international 
arbitration. There was a need for India to be better equipped, in terms of infrast ructure, for international 
arbitration. He favoured the provision in the Bill for the deposit of money as a pre-condition for preferring 
appeal. He cited the ratio decedendi of various case laws and pointed out the inconsistencies of the Indian 
arbitration law with the International arbitration law. He responded to the queries raised by the members. 

 (The witness then withdrew). 
5.  The representatives of Associated Chambe rs of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) 
suggested that there should be two different statutes for domestic and international arbitrations. They 
welcomed the provisions of the Bill, making disclosure of  any relationship of the parties with the arbitrator, 
mandatory. They were of the view that the provision for penalty for non-disclosure should also be incorporated 
in the Bill. The arbitral awards shou ld be made public to ensure transp arency, unless there is any specific 
objection in writing. They stressed the need for reduction of arbitration fees. They also favoured blacklisting of 
the arbitrators who indulged in unfair practices. They replied to the queries of the Members. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew). 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7. The Committee adjourned at 4.43 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VIII  
EIGHTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 22 nd November, 2004, in Room No. ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      –––      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak  
 3. Shri Balavant  alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind  
 5. Dr. P.C. Alexander  
 6. Shri Tariq Anwar  
 7. Shri Raashid Alvi  
  LOK SABHA 
 8.  Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel 
 9.  Shri Brajesh Pathak 
 10.  Shri Harin Pathak 
 11.  Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary  
  Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Under Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer  
  WITNESSES  
  1.  Shri A.K. Ganguli, Sr. Advocate 
  2.  Shri P.H. Parekh, Sr. Advocate and President of Bar Association of 
   Supreme Court of India  
  Representatives of the Legislative De partment, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary  
  2. Shri Z.S. Negi, Additional Secretary 
2. The Chairman welcomed the above mentioned witnesses to the Committee for discussion on the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003. 
2.1.  At the very outset, Shri Ganguly, an expert in the field of arbitration, gave a lucid narration of the history 
of the arbitration law in India. He stressed upon the need for separate enactments for domestic and 
International arbitrations. He substantiated his submission by stating that the ground realities of International 
arbitration were very different from those of domestic arbitration. He supported the mechanism wherein the 

parties can approach the Courts for domestic arbitratio n and the arbitration institutions for International 
arbitration. 
2.2. He appraised the Committee of the advantages of ins titutionalised arbitration. He was of the opinion that 
very few International arbitrations we re ad hoc and that if India could provide for an excellent physical and 
legal regime to facilitate institutionalised arbitration, India would be able to attract International arbitrations 
from across the globe. He suggested that Government should lay down standards to be complied with by the 
institutions such as International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution (ICADR). He responded to the 
points raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. 
3.1. Shri P.H. Parekh, President of Bar Association of  Supreme Court drew the attention of the Committee to 
the prevailing situation in the Indian arbitration field. He was of the view that the delays in giving arbitral 
awards and in the execution of arbitr al awards were the main drawbacks of  the arbitration law in India due to 
which foreign parties did not opt for India as the venue of arbitration. He welcomed the provisions in the Bill 
regarding fast track Courts. He was of the considered opinion that all international arbitrations should be ipso 
facto referred to fast track Courts. He endorsed the automatic  enforceability of arbitral awards after a period of 
ninety ‘days as provided in clause 9 of the Bill. He replied to the queries put forward by the Committee. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
5. The Committee adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XII  
TWELFTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 5th January 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      –––      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak  
 3. Shri Balavant  alias Bal Apte  
 4. Dr. P.C. Alexander  
 5. Shri Raashid Alvi  
  LOK SABHA 
 6.  Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 7.  Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa  
 8.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 9.  Shri Harin Pathak 
 10.  Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 11. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
 12.  Shri Ramchandra Paswan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  I.  Representatives of Ministry of Ur ban Development and the Central Public Works 
   Department (CPWD)  
   1. Shri Anil Baijal, Secretary 
   2.  Shri B.S. Lalli, Additional Secretary 
   3.  Shri B. Majumdar , Director General (CPWD) 
  II.  Representative of Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. (MTNL) 
   Shri R.S.P. Sinha, Chairman and Managing Director 
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4. The Committee heard oral evidence of representati ves of the Ministry of Urban Development and the 
C.P.W.D on the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003. They narrated the problems faced by 
them during the conduct of arbitration proceedings in their respective departments. They were of the opinion 
that the provisions of the Bill regarding time bound dis posal of arbitration cases, arbitration division in High 

Courts and fast track arbitral awards were progressive. They responded to the querie s raised by the Chairman 
and Members of the Committee. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew). 
 (The Committee then adjourned for tea and reassembled after tea-break)  
5. While deposing on the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003, the representatives of 
M.T.N.L. gave a brief narration of the arbitration mechanism in their department. They opined that the power 
to lay down rules for arbitration should be given to the arbitrator and not the courts. They suggested that the 
place of execution of the contract may be treated as the venue for arbitration. They were in favour of fixing a 
limit for arbitrators’ fees. They clarified the points raised by the Committee. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew). 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7. The Committee adjourned at 1.12 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 6th January 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan     –––      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak  
 3. Shri Ram Jethmalani  
 4. Dr. P.C. Alexander  
 5. Shri Raashid Alvi  
  LOK  SABHA 
 6.  Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 7.  Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa  
 8.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 9.  Shri Harin Pathak 
 10.  Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 11.  Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 12.  Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra 
 13.  Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
 I.  Representatives of National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC)  
  1. Shri S. Trivedi, Executive Director (CP)  
  2. Shri M.S. Umesh, Chief Law Officer 
 II.  Dr. P.K. Aditya, Advocate, Chandigarh. 
2.  The representative of the NTPC made a presentation on the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Bill, 2003. He was of the opinion that India was not chosen as the venue for arbitration by parties because 
there was no time bound redressal in the system here . He deposed that the problem of arbitrators fixing 
exorbitant fees had to be addressed and that institutional arbitration would be better since it would put an end 
to the malpractices which existed in the present arbitration scenario. 
 (The Committee adjourned for tea at 12.01 
P.M. and reassembled at 12.30 P.M.)  
3.  Dr. P.K. Aditya, Advocate narrated the delaying tactics adopted by the arbitrators and parties to 
arbitration. He stressed on the need to ensure impartiality of the arbitrator and to make the Arbitration Act 
identical to United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) as far as possible. 

4.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 1.04 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XIV  
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 7th January, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan     –––      Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. P.C. Alexander  
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar  
 4. Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK  SABHA 
 5.  Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 6.  Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa  
 7.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 8.  Shri Harin Pathak 
 9.  Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
 10.  Prof. Vijaya Kumar Malhotra 
 11.  Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer  
  WITNESSES 
 I. Representatives of Railway Board, Ministry of Railways  
  1.  Shri S.P.S. Jain, Member Engineering & Ex-officio Secretary 
  2.  Shri R.N. Poddar, Legal Adviser 
 II.  Representatives of Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL)  
  1.  Dr. U.D. Chowby, Director 
  2.  Shri A.K. Rudra, General Manager 
 III. Representatives of the Department of Le gal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1. Shri R.L. Meena, Law Secretary 
  2. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary 
  3. Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
2. The representatives of the Railway Board, while deposing on the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 informed the Committee that whenever they entered into a contract, a General 
Condition of Contract was included in which certain items were identified. Such items could be challenged or 
referred to arbitration. They opined that it might be specifically provided in the Bill that such items are not 

open to arbitration. They stressed on the need to provide that the arbitrator should not award more than what 
had been claimed. They also suggested that a provision should be included that on default of the claimant, the 
proceedings may be terminated and the proceedings could be restored only on grounds as prescribed in the 
Act. 
3. They were of the view that a specific clause might be incorporated in the Bill which would lay down the 
consequences of the failure of the claimant to produc e relevant documents. They appreciated the time-limit 
provided in the Bill for disposal of cases. They appr ised the Committee that they had a standing panel of 
officers as arbitrators in their Department, because only persons in the Department could comprehend the 
technical intricacies of the cases. They informed th e Committee that the Department had appointed a one man 
Commission to suggest remedies for the inadequacies in the conduct of arbitration proceedings. 
4. The witnesses clarified points raised by the Committee. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew). 
 (The Committee re-assembled after tea break).  
5.  Shri A.K. Rudra, General Manager (Law), Gas Authority of India Ltd. narrated the arbitration mechanism 
in the Department. He supported the provisions for fast track arbitration and time-limit for disposal of cases in 
the Bill. He deposed that there had been delays in disposal of cases because arbitrators did not give awards 
even after many hearings. He opined that a limit should be fixed regarding the arbitrator's fees. He was of the 
view that their success rate in arbitration was not very hi gh since the absence of court fees resulted in inflated 
claims. 
6.  The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Committee. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew). 
 (The meeting adjourned at 12.45 
P.M. and reassembled after lunch). 
7. * * * 
 (The witnesses then withdrew). 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9. The Committee adjourned at 1.15 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XV  
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 10.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19th January, 2005, in Room No. ‘53’, First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      –––      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak  
 3. Shri Balavant  alias Bal Apte  
 4. Dr. P.C. Alexander  
 5. Shri Tariq Anwar  
 6. Shri Raashid Alvi  
  LOK  SABHA  
 7.  Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran  
 8.  Shri Shailendra Kumar  
 9.  Shri Harin Pathak 
 10.  Shri V. Radhakrishnan  
 11. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil  
 12. Shri Ramchandra Paswan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer  
  WITNESSES 
 I. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary  
  2. Shri Z.S. Negi, Additional Secretary 
 II. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1. Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary 
  2. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary 
  3. Shri B.L. Nishad, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser 
 III. Representatives of Hindustan Pe troleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) 
  1. Shri G. Hariharan, Deputy General Manager  
  2. Shri Iyer Narayanan H., Senior Legal Advisor 
 IV. Representatives of Steal Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
  1. Shri V.S. Jain, Chairman 
  2. Shri A.K. Shahi, Executive Director 

2. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Legislative Department and requested him to make a presentation 
on the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003 at the juncture wherein the Committee had heard 
the views of various witnesses on the Bill. The Secretary stated that the Bill was a sequel of the I76th Report of 
the Law Commission. While examining the provisions of the Bill, he opined that the provision for time limit 
for disposal of cases would help in reducing pendency of cases. He clarified that arbitration cases related to 
public utilities only were referred to the National Legal Services Authority. He was of the view that clause 6 of 
the Bill proposed to curtail judicial intervention and that clause 11 provided for Indian Courts to have the 
power to grant interim measures even if one of the parties was a foreign entity. 
3. He suggested that the arbitrators should be appointed by courts. He requested for the guidance of the 
Committee in provisions regarding venue of arbitration a nd choice of law of arbitration. However, he opined 
that clauses 18 and 19 of the Bill eroded party autonomy. He was not in favour of clause 29(a) because of the 
criticism raised against it. He welcomed Arbitration Divisions in High Courts and stressed on the need for 
Arbitration Centres in India which prescribed to international standards. He also highlighted the dilemma 
about fixing the fees of arbitrators i.e., whether a limit had to be fixed or whether it had to be left to the parties. 
4. He responded to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. 
 (The witness then withdrew). 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
6. The Committee adjourned at 1.15 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXXVIII 
THIRTY EIGHTH MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 11.00 A.M. to 12.10 P.M. and again at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8th June, 2005, in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      –––      Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
 5. Dr. P. C. Alexander 
 6. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 7. Shri Raashid Alvi 
  LOK  SABHA 
 8.  Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
 9.  Shrimati Bhavani Rajenthiran 
 10.  Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
 11.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 12.  Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel 
 13.  Shri Harin Pathak 
 14.  Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan 
 15.  Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 I.  Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1.  Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary 
  2.  Shri Z.S. Negi, Additional Secretary 
 II. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1.  Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary 
  2.  Shri D.R. Meena, Joint Secretary 
  3.  Shri A.P. Aggarwal, Joint Secretary 
 III.  Representatives of the Instit ute of Company Secretaries of India 
  1.  Shri R. Ravi, President; 
  2.  Shri Nesar Ahmad, Council Member;  
  3.  Shri P.K. Mittal, Council Member; 
  4.  Shri V.K. Agga rwal, Principal Director. 

 IV. Representative of the Institute of Cost  and Works Accountants of India, New Delhi 
  Shri Rakesh Singh, President 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members of the Committee to the meeting and referred to 
the points raised in the previous meeting on the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The 
Chairman further requested the Members to formulate their views and suggestions on the various clauses of the 
Bill. 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. * * * 
7. * * * 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4.31 
P.M.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XLII 
FORTY SECOND MEETING 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 28th July, 2005, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan      –––      Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak  
 3. Shri Balavant  alias Bal Apte  
 4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind  
 5. Shri Ram Jethmalani  
 6. Dr. P.C. Alexander  
 7. Shri Tariq Anwar  
 8. Shri Raashid Alvi  
  LOKSABHA 
 9.  Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq  
 10.  Smt. Bhavani Rajenthiran  
 11.  Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa  
 12.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 13.  Shri Varkala. Radhakrishnan  
 14.  Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki  
 15.  Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES  
 I. Representatives of the Department of  Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1. Shri V. K. Duggal, Secretary (Justice) and Home Secretary; 
  2.  Smt. Gargi Mukerjee, Joint Secretary; and  
  3.  Dr. P.K. Seth, Joint Secretary 
 II. Representatives of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1.  Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary; 
  2.  Shri B.A. Agarawal, Additional Secretary; 
  3.  Shri V.K. Bhasin, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel; and  
  4.  Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel. 
 III.  Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
  1.  Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary; and 
  2.  Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary. 

2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5.  Thereafter, the Committee cons idered its draft Ninth Report on the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2003. After some discussion the Committee adopted the Report. 
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.35 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 

INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 22ND DECEMBER, 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. LXXV of 2003
 
 
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
           B E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as  
     follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 of 1996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2003. 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, 
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of 
this Act, and any’ reference in any provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of that provision. 
 2. In the long title to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the words 
“domestic arbitration”, the words “international arbitration,” shall 
be inserted. 
 3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
long title. 
 
 
Amendment of section 1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proviso, before the words “international commercial arbitration”, 
the words “international arbitration,” shall be inserted.  
 4. In section 2 of the principal Act,–– 
(a) in sub-section (1), –– 
 (i) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely: –– 
 ‘(ba) “Arbitration Division” means an Arbitration Division of 
a High Court constituted under sub-section (1) of section 37A;’; 
 (ii) for clauses (e) and (f), the followi ng clauses shall be 
substituted, namely: –– 
 ‘(e) “Court”, in relation to –– 
 (i) sections other than sections specified in sub-clause (ii), 
means –– 
 (a) the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a 
district; or 
 (b) the Court of principal judge of the City Civil Court of 
original jurisdiction in a city; or 
 (c) any Court of coordinate jurisdiction to which the  Court 
referred to in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) transfers a matter 
brought before it,  
and includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original 
civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions 
forming the subject-matter of the arbitration if the same had been 
the subject- matter of a suit, but does not include any Civil Court 
of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court or Court of 
principal judge of the City Civil Court, or any Court of Small 
Causes; and  
 (ii) sections 34, 34A and 36, means the Arbitration Division; 
 (ea) “domestic arbitration” means an arbitration relating to 
disputes arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or 
not, where none of the parties is –– 
 (i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, 
any country other than India; or 
 (ii) a body corporate which is incorporated in any country 
other than India; or 
 (iii) an association or a body of individuals whose central 
management and control is exercised in any country other than 
India; or 
 (iv) the Government of a foreign country; place of arbitration 
is in India and shall be deemed to include international arbitration 
 
 
Amendment of section 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and international commercial arbitration where the place of 
arbitration is in India; 
 (eb) “international arbitration” means an arbitration relating 
to disputes arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual 
or not, where at least one of the parties is– 
 (i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, 
any country other than India; or 
 (ii) a body corporate which is incorporated in any country 
other than India; or 
 (iii) an association or a body of individuals whose central 
management and .control is exercised in any country other than 
India; or 
 (iv) the Government of a foreign country; 
 (f) “international commercial arbitration” means an 
international arbitration consider ed as commercial under the law 
in force in India; 
 (fa) “judicial authority” includes any quasi-judicial statutory 
authority;’ ; 
 (b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely: 
 “(2) (a) Save as otherwise provided in clause (b), this Part 
shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India. 
 (b) Sections 8, 9 and 27 of this Part shall apply to 
international arbitration (whether  commercial or not) where the 
place of arbitration is outside In dia or where such place is not 
specified in the arbitration agreement.”. 
 5. After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely: 
 “2A. The principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a 
district or the Court of principal judge of the City Civil Court of 
original jurisdiction in a city, as the case may be, may, from time 
to time, transfer any matter relating to any proceedings under this 
Act which is pending before it, to any Court of coordinate 
jurisdiction in the district or the city, as the case may be, for 
decision.”. 
 6. In section 5 of the principal Act, the following Explanation 
shall be inserted at the end, namely:- 
 ‘Explanation.- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 2A. 
 
Power of principal Civil 
Court, etc., to transfer 
matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 5. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
declared that the expression “any  other law for the time being in 
force” shall be deemed to include– 
 (a) the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 
 (b) any law which provides for internal appeals within the 
High Court; 
 (c) any enactment which provides for intervention by a 
judicial authority in respect of orders passed by any other judicial 
authority.’  
 7. In section 6 of the principal Act, the words, “, or the 
arbitral tribunal with the consent of the parties,” shall be omitted. 
 8. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), in 
clause (b), for the words “an exchange of letters”, the words “any 
written communication by one party to another and accepted 
expressly or by implication by the other party, exchange of 
letters” shall be substituted. 
 9. In section 8 of the principal Act, –– 
 (a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be. 
substituted, namely:– 
 “( 1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5), a 
judicial authority before which an action is brought in a matter 
which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party so 
applies not later than when submitting his first statement on the 
substance of the dispute unless such judicial authority has to 
decide any question referred to in sub-section (4) as a preliminary 
issue, refer the parties to arbitration. 
 (1A) The judicial authority before which an action is brought 
shall stay the action before it for the purpose of deciding any 
question raised before it under sub-section (4) and such stay shall 
be subject to the outcome of the order that may be made under 
sub-section (4) or sub-section (5).”; 
 (b) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted 
at the end, namely: 
 “Provided that the arbitration proceeding so commenced shall 
stand terminated if the judicial  authority, after hearing all the 
parties, makes an order under sub-section (4) to the effect that– 
 ( i) a reference to arbitration cannot be made by virtue of its 
finding on any question referred to in clauses (a) to ( d) of that 
sub-section; or 
 (ii) though a reference to arbitration has to be made, the 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 6. 
 
 
Amendment of section 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 8. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proceedings are required to be conducted by a different arbitral 
tribunal.”;  
 (c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 “(4) Where an application is ma de to the judicial authority by 
a party raising any question that- 
 (a) there is no dispute in existence; or 
 (b) the arbitration agreement or an y clause thereof is null and 
void or inoperative; or 
 (c) the arbitration agreement is incapable of being performed; 
or  
 (d) the arbitration agreement is not in existence, the judicial 
authority may, subject to the provis ions of sub-section (5), decide 
the same and pass appropriate orders thereon.  
 (5) Where the judicial authority finds that any question 
specified in sub-section (4) cannot be decided for the reason that-  
 (a) the relevant facts or documents and the question are in 
dispute; or  
 (b) there is a need for adducing oral evidence from the 
question; or  
 (c) the inquiry into any such question is likely to delay 
reference to arbitration; or 
 (d) the request for deciding the question was unduly delayed; 
or 
 (e) the decision on the question is not likely to produce 
substantial savings in the costs of arbitration; or  
 ( f) there is no good reason for deciding the question at that 
stage, it shall refuse to decide the question and refer the same to 
the arbitral tribunal for decision. 
 (6) If the judicial authority holds that though the arbitration 
agreement is in existence but it is null and void or inoperative or 
incapable of being performed and refuses to stay the legal 
proceedings, any provision in the arbitration agreement which 
provides that the award is a condition precedent for the initiation 
of legal proceedings in respect of any matter, shall be of no effect 
in relation to the proceedings.”. 
 10. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 8A 

 
 
 
5 of 1908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shall be inserted, namely: 
 8A. Without prejudice to the pr ovisions of section 89 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, where, at any stage of a legal 
proceeding in the Supreme C ourt or the High Court or the 
principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district or the 
Court of principal judge of the City Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction in a city or any Court of coordinate jurisdiction or 
inferior in grade to the aforesai d Courts, as the case may be, all 
the parties to such proceeding ente r into an arbitration agreement 
to resolve their disputes, then the Court in which the said legal 
proceeding is pending shall, on an application made by any party 
to the arbitration agreement, refer the dispute in relation to the 
subject-matter of the legal proceeding, to arbitration. 
 Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, “legal 
proceeding” means any proceeding involving civil rights of 
parties pending in any of the aforesaid Courts whether at the stage 
of institution or appeal or revision and includes proceeding 
involving civil rights instituted in a High Court under article 226 
or article 227 of the Constitution or on further appeal to the 
Supreme Court.’. 
 11. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely: 
  “ 9. (1) A party may, before or during arbitral proceedings 
or at any time after the making of  the arbitral award but before 
application is filed for its enforcement in accordance with section 
36, apply to a Court for interim measures. 
  (2) The Court shall have the same power for making 
orders under sub-section (1) as it has for the purpose of, and in 
relation to, any proceedings before it. 
  (3) In particular and without prejudice to sub-section (1), 
a party may apply to a Court 
 (a) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of 
unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral proceedings; or 
 (b) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of 
the following matters, namely: 
 (i) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods 
which are the subject-matter of the arbitration agreement; 
 (ii) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration; 
 (iii) the detention, preservation or  inspection of any property 
 
 
Parties in pending legal 
proceedings may agree to 
seek arbitration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new section 
for section 9. 
 
 
Interim measures, etc., by 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or thing which is the subject-matter or the dispute in arbitration, 
or as to which any question may arise therein and authorising for 
any of the aforesaid purposes an y person to enter upon any land 
or building in the possession of any party or authorising any 
samples to be taken or any observation to be made, or experiment 
to be tried, which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose 
of obtaining full information or evidence; 
 (iv) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver; or 
 (v) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to 
the Court to be just and convenient. 
 (4) Where a party makes an application under sub-section (1) 
for the grant of interim measur es before the commencement of 
arbitration, the Court shall direct the party in whose favour the 
interim measure is granted, to  take effective steps for the 
appointment of the arbitral trib unal in accordance with the 
procedure specified in section 11, within a period of thirty days 
from the date of such direction. 
 (5) The Court may direct that if the steps referred to in sub-
section (I) are nN taken within the period specified in sub-section 
(4), the interim measure granted under sub-section (2), shall stand 
vacated on the expiry of the said period: 
 Provided that the Court may, on sufficient cause being shown 
for the delay in taking such steps, extend the said period. 
 (6) Where an interim measure gr anted stands vacated under 
sub-section (5), the Court may pass such further direction as to 
restitution as it may deem fit against the part in whose favour the 
interim measure was granted under this section.”. 
 12. In section II of the principal Act, 
 (a) in sub-section (4), –– 
 (i) in clauses (a) and (b), for the words “thirty days”, the 
words “sixty days” shall be substituted; 
 (ii) for the words “the appointment shall be made, upon 
request of a party by the Chief Justice or any person or institution 
designated by him”, the words “the right to make such 
appointment shall be deemed to have been waived, and the 
appointment shall be made, upon request of a party by the High 
Court or any person or institution designated by it” shall be 
substituted; 
 (b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substituted, namely: 
 “ (5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in 
an arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if he parties fail to agree on 
the arbitrator within sixty days from receipt of a request by one 
party from the other party to so agree, then the right to make such 
appointment shall be deemed to have been waived if such 
appointment is not made within the said period and, the 
appointment shall be made by the High Court or any person or 
institution designated by it.”; 
 (c) in sub-section (6), for the words “par ty may request the 
Chief Justice or any person or institution designated by him”, the 
words “and where no measures ar e taken for appointment of an 
arbitrator in accordance with th e appointment procedure agreed 
upon by the parties, the right to take such measures shall be 
deemed to have been waived and a party may request the High 
Court or any person or institution designated by it” shall be 
substituted;  
 (d) in sub-section (7), for the wo rds “the Chief Justice or the 
person or institution designated by him”, the words “the High 
Court or any person or institution designated by it” shall be 
substituted; 
 (e) in sub-section (8), for the words “The Chief Justice or the 
person or institution designated by him”, the words “The High 
Court or any person or institution designated by it” shall be 
substituted; 
 ( f) in sub-section (9), for the words “international commercial 
arbitration, the Chief Justice of India or the person or institution 
designated by him”, the words and brackets “international 
arbitration (whether commercial or not), the Supreme Court or 
any person or institution designated by it” shall be substituted;  
 (g) in sub-section (10), for the words “The Chief Justice may 
make such scheme as he may deem appropriate”, the words “The 
High Court may make such scheme as it may deem appropriate” 
shall be substituted; 
 (h) in sub-section (11), for the words “the Chief Justice of 
different High Courts or their designates, the Chief Justice or his 
designate to whom the request  has been first made under the 
relevant sub-section shall alone be”, the words “different High 
Courts or their designates, the High Court or its designate to 
which the request has been first made under the relevant sub-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section shall alone be” shall be substituted: 
 ( i) for sub-section ( 12), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:– 
 ‘( 12) (a) Where the matters referred to  in sub-sections (4), 
(5), (6), (7), (8) and (10) arise in an international arbitration 
(whether commercial or not) the reference to “High Court” in 
those sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the 
“Supreme Court”. 
 (b) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), 
(7), (8) and (10) arise in any other arbitration, the reference to 
“High Court” in those subsections shall be construed as a 
reference to the “High Court” within whose local limits the 
principal Civil Court or the Court of principal judge of the City 
Civil Court, as the case may be, referred in sub-clause (i) of 
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2, is situate and, where the 
High Court itself is the Court referred to in that sub-clause, to that 
High Court. 
 (13) ‘Where an application under this section is made to the 
Supreme Court or the High Court by a party raising any, question 
specified to in subsection (4) of section 8, the Supreme Court or 
the High Court, as the case may be, may, subject to the provisions 
of sub-section (14), decide the same. 
 (14) If the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case may 
be, considers that the questions referred to in sub-section (13) 
cannot be decided having regard to the reasons specified in sub-
section (5) of section 8, it shall refuse to decide the said question 
and refer the same to the arbitral tribunal. 
 (15) The Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India, prescribe by rules made under this Act the 
manner in which fee of members of an arbitral tribunal be fixed 
and the procedure to be followed in relation to fixation of such 
fee.’. 
 13. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for 
the words “any circumstances likely”, the words “the existence of 
any past or present relationship, either direct or indirect, with any 
of the parties or any of their counsel, whether financial, business, 
professional, social or other kind or in relation to the subject-
matter in dispute, which is likely” shall be substituted. 
 14. In section 14 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 14. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “ (4) Where the mandate of the arbitrator is terminated, the 
Court may decide the quantum of fee payable to such arbitrator.”. 
 15. In section 15 of the principal Act, 
 (a) in sub-section (2), for the words “a substitute arbitrator 
shall be appointed”, the words “a substitute arbitrator shall be 
appointed within a period of thirty days” shall be substituted; 
 (b ) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: 
 “ (5) Where the mandate of an ar bitrator is terminated, the 
Court may decide the quantum of fee payable to such arbitrator.”. 
 16. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely: 
  17. The arbitral tribunal may, pending arbitral 
proceedings,– 
 (a) direct the other party, at the request of a party, to take 
steps for the protection of the subj ect-matter of the dispute in the 
manner considered necessary by it; or 
 (b) direct a party to provide appropriate security in 
connection with the directions issued under clause (a); or 
 (c) direct a party, making any cl aim, to furnish security for 
the costs of the arbitration; or  
 (d) give directions in relation to any property which is the 
subject-matter of the arbitral proceedings and which is owned by 
or is in possession of a party to the proceedings - 
 ( i) for the inspection, photographing, preservation, custody or 
detention of the property by the arbitral tribunal, by an expert or 
by a party; or 
 (ii) for samples to be taken from, or any observation to be 
made of, or experiment conducted upon, the property; or 
 (e) direct that a party or witness shall be examined on oath or 
affirmation, and may for that purpose administer any necessary 
oath or take any necessary affirmation; or 
 (f) give directions to a party for the preservation of any 
evidence in his custody or control for the purposes of the 
proceedings.”. 
 17. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely: 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new section 
for section 17. 
 
Directions. by arbitral 
tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new section 
for section 20. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “20. Where the arbitration is one under this Part, the place of 
arbitration shall be within India and in other cases the parties are 
free to agree on the place of arbitration: 
 Provided that where the parties fail to agree, the place of 
arbitration shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal having 
regard to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience 
of the parties: 
 Provided further that the arbitral tribunal may, unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties, meet at any place it considers 
appropriate for consultation among its members, for hearing 
witnesses, experts or the parties, or for inspection of documents, 
goods or other property.”. 
 18. In section 23 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the 
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: 
 “( 1) Within the period of time that may be determined by the 
arbitral tribunal, the claimant shall state the facts supporting his 
claim, the points at issue and the relief or remedy sought, and the 
respondent shall state his defence in respect of these particulars 
and the claimant may file his rejoinder, if any, and the parties 
shall abide by the time schedule so determined by the arbitral 
tribunal, unless the tribunal extends such time schedule. 
 (1A) The arbitral tribunal shall endeavour to expedite the 
arbitral process subject to such rules as may be made by the High 
Court in this behalf.”.  
 19. In section 24 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the 
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: 
 “( 1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the High Court 
in this behalf, the arbitral tribunal shall decide whether to hold 
oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral 
arguments, or whether the proceedings shall be conducted on the 
basis of documents and other materials, or to receive affidavit in 
lieu of oral evidence subject to the witness being examined orally: 
 Provided that the arbitral tribun al may, at an appropriate stage 
of the proceedings, hold oral hearings for the purpose of calling 
for such oral evidence as it may deem  necessary. 
 (1A) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the arbitral 
tribunal shall pass orders regarding following the procedure 
before it. 
 (1B) Without prejudice to the pr ovisions of sub-section (1A), 
Place of arbitration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 23. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 24. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the power of the arbitral tribunal to pass orders shall include –– 
 (a) the fixing of the time schedule for the parties to adduce 
oral evidence if any; 
 (b) the fixing of the time schedule for oral arguments:  
 (c) the manner in which oral evidence is to be adduced: 
 (d) the decision as to whether the proceedings shal1 be 
conducted only on the basis of documents and other materials, or 
in any other manner. 
 (1C ) The procedure determined by the arbitral tribunal under 
sub-section (1A) and the time schedule fixed under sub-section 
(1B) shall be binding on the parties.”. 
 20. After section 24 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely: 
 “24A. (1) If a party fails, without showing sufficient cause, to 
comply with a directions made under section 17, or time schedule 
determined under section 23 or orders passed under section 24, as 
the case may be, the arbitral tribunal may make a peremptory 
order to the same effect, prescrib ing such time for compliance as 
it considers appropriate. 
 (2) If a claimant fails to comply with a peremptory order 
made under sub-section (1) in relation to a direction specified in 
clause (c) of section 17, the arbitral tribunal may dismiss his 
claim and make an award accordingly. 
 (3) If a party fails to comply with any peremptory order made 
under sub-section (1), other than the peremptory order in relation 
to a direction specified in clause (c) of section 17, then the arbitral 
tribunal may –– 
 (a) make such order as it thinks fit as to payment of costs of 
the arbitral proceedings incurred in consequence of the non-
compliance; 
 (b) direct that the party in default shall not be entitled to rely 
upon any allegations in his pleadings or upon any material which 
was the subject-matter of the order;  
 ( c) draw such adverse inference from the act of non-
compliance as the circumstances may justify; 
 (d) proceed to make an award on the basis of such materials 
as have been provided to it, without prejudice to any action that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new sections 24A 
and 24B. 
 
 
Power of arbitral 
tribunal to enforce its 
directions made under section 
17 or time schedules 
determined under section 23 
or orders passed under section 
24. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may be taken under section 25. 
 24 B. (1) Without prejudice to the power of the Court under 
section 9, the Court may, on an application made to it by a party, 
make an order requiring the party to whom the order of the 
arbitral tribunal was directed, to comply with the peremptory 
orders of the arbitral tribunal made under sub-section (1) of 
section 24A. 
 (2)  An application under sub-section (/) may be made by –– 
 (a) the arbitral tribunal, after giving notice to the parties; or 
 (b) a party to the arbitral proceedings with the permission of 
the arbitral tribunal, after giving notice to the other parties. 
 (3) No order shall be made by the Court under sub-section 
(1), unless it is satisfied that the party to whom the order of the 
arbitral tribunal was directed, has failed to comply with it within 
the time fixed in the order of the arbitral tribunal or, if no time 
was fixed, within a reasonable time. 
 (4) Any order made by the Court under sub-section (1) shall 
be subject to such orders, if any, as may be made by the Court on 
appeal under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 37.”. 
 21. In section 28 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the 
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:- 
 “( 1) In an arbitration other than international arbitration 
(whether commercial or not), the arbitral tribunal shall decide the 
dispute” submitted to arbitration in accordance with the 
substantive law for the time being in force in India. 
 (1A) In an international arbitration (whether commercial or 
not), where the place of arbitration is situate in India,-  
 ( i) the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance 
with the rules of law designated by the parties as applicable to the 
substance of the dispute; 
 (ii) any designation by the parties of the law or legal system 
of a given country shall be construed, unless otherwise expressed, 
as directly referring to the substantive law of that country and not 
to its conflict of laws rules; 
 (iii) failing any designation of the law under clause (i) by the 
parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the rules of law it 
considers to be appropriate given all the circumstances 
surrounding the dispute.”. 
 
 
 
Power of Court for 8 
enforcement of peremptory 
orders of arbitral tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 28. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 22. In section 29 of the principal Act, 
 (a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely: 
 “( 1) Any decision of the arbitral tribunal in arbitral 
proceedings with more than one arbitrator shall be made by a 
majority of all its members: 
 Provided that where there is no majority, the award shall be 
made by the Presiding arbitrator of the arbitral tribunal.”; 
 (b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: 
 “ (3) The minority decision shall, if made available within 
thirty days of the receipt of the decision of the majority, be 
appended to the award.”. 
 23.  After section 29 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “29A.  (1) The arbitral tribunal sha ll make its award within a 
period of one year from th e commencement of arbitral 
proceedings, or within such extended period specified in sub-
sections (2) to (4). 
 (2) The parties may, by consent extend the period, specified 
in sub-section (1) for making aw ard, for a further period not 
exceeding one year. 
 (3) If the award is not made, within the period specified in 
sub-section (1) or the extended period under sub-section (2), the 
arbitral proceedings shall, subj ect to the provisions of sub-
sections (4) to (6), stand suspended until an application for 
extension or further extension of the period is made to the Court 
by any party to the arbitration, or where none of the parties makes 
an application as aforesaid, until such an application is made by 
the arbitral tribunal. 
 (4) Upon filing of the application for extension or further 
extension of the period under sub-section (3), the suspension of 
the arbitral proceedings shall stand revoked and pending 
consideration of the application by the Court under sub-section 
(5), the arbitral proceedings shall continue before the arbitral 
tribunal and the Court shall not grant any stay of the arbitral 
proceedings. 
 (5) The Court shall, upon application for extension of the 
period being made under sub-section (3), whether the time for 
Amendment of section 29. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 29A.  
 
 
 
Speeding up of proceedings 
and time limit for making 
awards. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
making the award as aforesaid has expired or not and whether the 
award has been made or not, extend the period for making the 
award beyond the period referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2). 
 (6) The Court shall, while extending the time under sub-
section (5), after taking into account, 
 (a) the extent of work already completed; 
 (b) the reasons for delay; 
 ( c) the conduct of the parties or of any person representing 
the parties; 
 (d) the manner in which proceedings were conducted by the 
arbitral tribunal; 
 (e) the further work involved; 
 ( f) the amount of money already spent by the parties towards 
fee and expenses of arbitration; 
 (g) any other relevant circumstances which the Court may 
consider necessary, 
make such order as to costs and as to the future procedure to be 
followed by the arbitral tribunal with a view to speed up the 
arbitral process till the award is made: 
 Provided that any order made by the Court as to the future 
arbitral proceedings shall be subject to such rules as may be made 
by the High Court for expediting the arbitral proceedings. 
 (7) The parties shall not by consent extend the period for 
making award beyond the period specified in sub-section (2) and 
save as otherwise provided in that sub- ‘ section, any provision in 
an arbitration agreement whereby the arbitral tribunal may further 
extend the time for making the award, shall be void and be of no 
effect. 
 (8) The first of the orders of extension under sub-section (5) 
together with directions if any, under sub-section (6), shall be 
made by the Court, within a period of thirty days from the date of 
service of notice on the opposite party.”. 
 24. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), for 
clause (b), the following’ clause shall be substituted, namely:–  
 “(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall 
carry interest at such rate as the arbitral tribunal deems reasonable 
from the date of award to the date of payment.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 31. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 25. After section 33 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely: 
 ‘ 33A. (1) A photocopy of the arbitral award duly signed on 
each page by the members of the ar bitral tribunal together with 
the original arbitral records shall be filed by the arbitral tribunal 
in the Court within sixty days of the making of the award along 
with a list of the papers comprising the arbitral record: 
 Provided that where the High Court is the Court within the 
meaning of subclause (i) of clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 
2, then the award shall be filed in the principal Civil Court of 
original jurisdiction in a district or in the Court of principal judge 
of the City Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a city within 
whose local jurisdiction the subject- matter of arbitration is situate 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the said Court). 
 Explanation 1.- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that for the purposes of this section, “arbitral award” 
means the arbitral award whether passed pursuant to a reference 
made by a judicial authority under section 8, or by any of the 
Courts referred to in section 8A, or by the parties or by the High 
Court or by the Supreme Court under section 11, or by the parties 
to a Fast Track Arbitration under section 43C. 
 Explanation 2-  For the purposes of this section, “arbitral 
records” shall include the pleadings in the claim filed by the 
parties. documentary evidence, oral evidence if recorded, 
pleadings in interlocutory applications, pleadings and orders on 
interlocutory applications, proceedings of the arbitral tribunal and 
all other papers relating to the arbitral proceedings. 
 (2) Where the arbitral tribunal fails to file photocopy of the 
arbitral award and the arbitr al records under sub-section (1). any 
of the parties may give notice to the arbitral tribunal to do so 
within a period of sixty days from the Gate of receipt of the award 
failing which. the party may request the said Court to direct the 
arbitral tribunal to file photoc opy of the arbitral award and the 
arbitral records in the said Court. 
 (3) Upon filing of photocopy of the arbitral award and the 
arbitral records under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the 
presiding officer of the said Cour t or a ministerial officer of the 
said Court designated by such presiding officer, shall affix his 
signature with date and seal of the said Court on each page af the 
photocopy of the arbitral award and shall acknowledge receipt of 
the arbitral award and the arbitral records, after verification with 
Insertion of new section 33A. 
 
 
Filing of a copy of award and 
original arbitral records in 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the list referred to in sub-section (1), 
 (4) The said Court shall maintain a register containing –– 
 (a) the names and addresses of the parties to the award; 
 (b) the date of the award; 
 (c) the names and addresses of the arbitrators; 
 (d) the relief granted; 
 (e) the date of filing of the award into the said Court; and 
 ( f) such other particulars as may be prescribed by rules made 
by the Central Government in this behalf.  
 (5) If any party makes an application for a copy, the Court 
may grant a certified copy of phot ocopy of the arbitral award or 
of the arbitral records or of-the arbitral proceedings, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the rules of the Court, 
 (6) The Court may transmit the arbitral records for use in any 
proceedings for setting aside the arbitral award or for enforcement 
thereof. 
 (7) The procedure for return of original documents or for 
preservation of the arbitral record s so filed shall be subject to 
such rules as may be applicable to the said Court from time to 
time. 
 (8) The filing of photocopy of the award under this section 
shall be only for the purposes of record.’ 
 26. In section 34 of the principal Act, 
  (a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall 
be substituted, namely:-  
 “( 1) Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award may be 
made only by an application for setting aside such award – 
 (a) in accordance with sub-sections (2) and (3); and 
 (b) in the case of an award made in an arbitration other than 
an international arbitration (whether commercial or not) in 
accordance with sub-sections (2) and (3), and section 34A. 
 (1A) An application for setting aside an award under sub-
section (1) shall be accompanied by the original award: 
 Provided that where the parties have not been given the 
original award, they may file a photocopy of the award signed by 
the arbitrators.”; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 34. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (b) in sub-section (2),– 
 ( i) in clause (b), after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “(iii) the arbitral award is such  which does not state the 
reasons as required under sub-section (3) of section 31.”; 
 (ii) The Explanation shall be renumbered as Explanation 1 
and after Explanation 1 as so renumbered, the following 
Explanation shall be inserted, namely: 
 “Explanation 2.- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that while seeking to se t aside an arbitral award under 
sub-section ( 1), the applicant may include the pleas questioning 
the decision of the arbitral tribunal rejecting –– 
 ( i) a challenge made under sub-section (2) of section 13; 
 (ii) a plea made under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of 
section 16.”; 
 (c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely: 
 ‘ (5) Where the Court adjourns the proceedings under sub-
section (4) granting the arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume 
its proceedings or take such other action and eliminate the 
grounds referred to in this section or in section 34A for setting 
aside the award, the arbitral trib unal shall pass appropriate orders 
within sixty days from the receipt of the request made under sub-
section (4) by the Court and send the same to the Court for its 
consideration. 
 (6) Any party aggrieved by the orders of the arbitral tribunal 
under subsection (5), shall be entitled to file its objections thereto 
within thirty days from the receipt of the said order from the 
arbitral tribunal and the application made under sub-section (1) to 
set aside the award shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections  
(2) and (3) of section 37C, be disposed of by the Court, after 
taking into account the orders of the arbitral tribunal made under 
sub-section (5) and the objections filed under that sub-section. 
 Explanation 1. - Subject to clause (i) of sub-section (4) of 
section 42, for the purposes of this section and sections 34A and 
36, the word “Court” means the Arbitration Division. 
 Explanation 2. - For the purposes of this section, clause (b) of 
subsection (2) of section 48 and clause (e) of sub-section (1) of 
section 57, “public policy of India” or “Contrary to public policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of India” means contrary to (i) fundamental policy of India, or (ii) 
interests of India, or (iii) justice or morality.’. 
 27. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely: 
 “34A. (1) In the case of an arbitral award made in an 
arbitration other than an international arbitration (whether 
commercial or not), recourse to a court against an arbitral award 
on the additional ground that there is an error which is apparent 
on the face of the arb itral award giving rise to a substantial 
question of law can be had in an application for setting aside an 
award referred to in sub-section (1) of section 34. 
 (2) Where the ground referred to in sub-section (1) is invoked 
in an application filed under sub-section (1) of section 34, the 
applicant shall file a separate application seeking leave of the 
Court to raise the said ground: 
 Provided that the Court shall not grant leave unless it is prima 
facie of the opinion that all the following conditions are satisfied, 
namely:–– 
 (a) that the determination of the question will substantially 
affect the rights of one or more parties; 
 (b) that the substantial question of law was one which the 
arbitral tribunal was asked to decide or has decided on its own; 
and 
 (c) that the application made for leave identifies the 
substantial question of law to be decided and states relevant 
grounds on which leave is sought. 
 (3) Where a specific question of law has been referred to the 
arbitral tribunal, an award shall not be set aside on the ground 
referred to in sub-section (1).”. 
 28. For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
 “36. (1) Where the time for making an application to set aside 
the arbitral award under sub-section (1) of section 34 has expired, 
then, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (4), the award 
shall be enforced under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the 
same manner as if it were a decree of the Court. 
 (2) Where an application is filed in the Court under sub-
section (1) of section 34 to set aside an arbitral award, the filing 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 34A. 
 
 
Additional ground of 
challenge in case of certain 
awards. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new section 
for section 36. 
 
Stay of operation  
of awards or its enforcement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of such an application shall not by itself operate as a stay of the 
award unless, upon a separate application made for that purpose, 
the Court grants stay of the opera tion of the award in accordance 
with the provisions of sub-section (3). 
 (3) Upon filing of the separate application under sub-section 
(2) for stay of the operation of th e award, the Court may, without 
prejudice to any action it may take under sub-section (1) of 
section 37C and subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to 
impose, grant stay of the opera tion of the arbitral award for 
reasons in brief to be recorded in writing: 
 Provided that the Court shall, while considering the grant of 
stay, keep the grounds for setting aside the award in mind. 
 (4) The power to impose conditions referred to in sub-section 
(3) includes the power to grant interim measures not only against 
the parties to the award or in resp ect of the property which is the 
subject-matter of the award but also to issue ad interim measures 
against third parties or in respect of property which is not the 
subject- matter of the award, in so far as it is necessary to protect 
the interests of the party in whose favour the award is passed. 
 (5) The ad interim measures granted under sub-section (4) 
may be confirmed, modified or vacated, as the case may be, by 
the Court subject to such conditi ons, if any, as it may, after 
hearing the affected parties, deem fit.”. 
 29. In section 37 of the principal Act,–– 
 (i) in sub-section (1), clause (b) shall be omitted; 
 (ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
 “ (4) The procedure specified in sections 37C, 37D, 37E and 
37F shall, in so far as may be, apply to appeals under sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2).”. 
 30.  After Chapter IX of the principal Act, the following 
Chapter shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“CHAPTER IX A 
A
RBITRATION DIVISION, JURISDICTION AND SPECIAL PROCEDURE 
 37 A. (1) Every High Court shall, as soon as may be after the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003, constitute an Arbitration Division within the High 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 37. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new Chapter IXA 
in  Part I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arbitration  
Division and its jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 of 1940. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (2)  The Judges of the Arbitration Division shall be such of the 
Judges of the High Court as the Chief Justice of that High Court 
may, from time to time, nominate. 
 Explanation. –– For the purposes of this sub-section, “Judges” 
shall include Judges appointed under article 224A of the 
Constitution. 
 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 37F, the 
Arbitration Division shall consist of one or more Division 
Benches of the High Court, as may be constituted by the Chief 
Justice of the High Court and such Bench or Benches shall 
dispose of every application, appeal or proceeding allocated to it. 
 (4) Every application under sections 34, 34A and 36 shall, on 
and from the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2003, irrespective of the value of the subject-
matter, be filed in the High Court having original jurisdiction to 
decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitration 
if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit on its original 
civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the High Court having 
jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of Courts subordinate to 
such High Court and the said applications shall thereafter be 
allocated to the Arbitration Division of that High Court for 
disposal. 
 (5) Any appeal under clause (i), or clause (ii), or clause (iii) 
or clause (vi) of sub-section (1) of section 39 of the Arbitration 
Act, 1940 and any proceeding for execution of a decree based on 
an arbitral award under that Act shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in that Act, irrespect ive of the value of the subject-
matter, be filed, on and from the commencement of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2003 in the High 
Court referred to in sub-section (4) and shall thereafter be 
allocated to the Arbitration Division of that High Court, for 
disposal in accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 
1940. 
 37B. (1) Any application under section 34 or section 36 filed 
and pending in any Court subordinate to the High Court 
immediately before the commencement of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2003 shall, on such 
commencement, stand transferred to the High Court having 
jurisdiction over such subordinate Courts and shall thereafter be 
allocated to the Arbitration Division of that High Court for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pending matters to be 
transferred to Arbitration 
Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 of 1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disposal. 
 (2) Any application under section 34 or section 36 or appeal 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 37 filed immediately 
before the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 and pending in the High Court shall, on 
and from such commencement, be allocated to the Arbitration 
Division of that High Court for disposal. 
 (3) Any appeal or proceeding referred to in sub-section (5) of 
section 37A pending in any Court subordinate to the High Court 
shall, on the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2003, stand transferred to the High Court 
having jurisdiction over such subordinate Court and shall 
thereafter be allocated to the Arbitration Division of that High 
Court for disposal in accordance with the provisions of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940. 
 (4) Any appeal or proceeding referred to in sub-section (5) of 
section 37A, pending in the High Court shall, on the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003, be allocated to the Arbitration Division of that High 
Court for disposal in accordance with the provisions of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940. 
 37C. (1) The Arbitration Division, while dealing with an 
application under sub-section (1) of section 34, or any appeal 
referred to in sub-section (5) of section 37 A, filed on and from 
the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2003, may, if it thinks fit so to do, and after 
fixing a date for hearing the applicant or his counsel and hearing 
him accordingly if he appears on that day, dismiss the application 
or appeal, as the case may be , without giving notice to the 
respondent, for reasons in brief to be recorded in writing, if there 
are no merits in the application or appeal. 
 (2) No award passed by the arbitral tribunal shall be set aside, 
on an application under sub-section (1) of section 34 or an appeal 
filed under sub-section (5) of section 37A unless substantial 
prejudice is shown.  
 (3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall also apply 
to applications under sub-section (1) of section 34, any appeal 
under section 37 or any appeal referred to in sub-section (5) of 
section 37A, pending on the commencement of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2003, if no notice has been 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substantial prejudice to be 
shown for intervention 
in applications under section 
34 and appeals under section 
37A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issued by the Court before such commencement.  
 37D. (1) Every application referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 34 or section 36 shall be disposed of by the Arbitration 
Division within one year from the date of service of notice on the 
opposite party: 
 Provided that in case the Arbitration Division adjourns the 
proceedings under sub-section (5) of section 34, the period of one 
year shall be reckoned from the da te of receipt of the order from 
the arbitral tribunal under that sub-section. 
 (2) Every appeal or proceeding for execution of decrees 
referred to in sub-section (5) of section 37 A shall be disposed of 
within one year from the date of service of notice on the opposite 
party. 
 (3) Every application, appeal or proceeding referred to in sub-
sections. (1) to (4) of section 37B, pending on the commencement 
of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2003, shall 
be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of 
service of notice on the opposite party or from such 
commencement, whichever is later. 
 37E. (1) The applicants or appellants in matters referred to in 
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 37D shall, within sixty days 
from the date of service of notice on the opposite party, file paper 
books containing relevant documents including copies of oral 
evidence recorded, if any, and the opposite party shall likewise 
file a paper book within sixty days from the date of service of 
notice on such party. 
 (2) The applicants or appellants, in matters referred to in sub-
section (3) of section 37D, and the opposite parties shall file paper 
books within sixty days from the date of service of notice on such 
parties or from the commencement of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2003, whichever is later. 
 (3) Within thirty days from the date of filing of the paper 
books, all parties to the proceedings shall file brief written 
submissions after exchanging copies of the same. 
 (4) Where any party fails to comply with the time limits 
referred to in sub-sections (1) to (3), the Arbitration Division 
may, if reasonable cause is show n, extend the time for a further 
period not exceeding thirty days, subject, however, to such order 
as to costs as it may deem fit. 
 (5) In all matters coming up before the Arbitration Division, 
 
 
 
Time limit for disposal by 
Arbitration Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Time limit for filing paper 
books, written submissions 
and oral arguments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time limit for arguments shall be fixed by the Arbitration Division 
in advance at the case management conference referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 37F. 
 37F. ( 1) Save, where conditional orders are passed which 
may lead to disposal of the matter for default or ex parte, a single 
Judge sitting in the Arbitration Division shall deal with the 
fixation of time schedules and dates for the purposes of section 
37E. 
 (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), case management 
conferences may be held by the Judge referred to in that sub-
section.”. 
 31. For section 42 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be substituted, namely :–– 
 ‘42. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Part or in any other law for the time being in force, where with 
respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this Part 
is made in any of the Courts referred to in sub-sections (2) to (7) 
or in the Court referred to in section 43E, then all subsequent 
applications [other than the applications referred to in sub-section 
(2) of section 33A] arising out of that agreement and the arbitral 
proceedings (hereafter in this section referred to as the subsequent 
application) shall be made in the same Court in which the 
application was made and in no other Court. 
 (2) Where an application is made in a Court within the 
meaning of sub-clause (i) of clause (e) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2, the subsequent applications shall be made in that Court 
and in no other Court. 
 (3) Where, in an action under section 8 pending before a 
judicial authority, an applicati on is made seeking reference to 
arbitration with respect to an agreement, then the subsequent 
applications shall be made in the following manner, namely:–– 
 (i) if the judicial authority is a Court within the meaning of 
sub-clause (i) of clause (e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2, the 
subsequent application shall be made in the Court in which the 
application is made and in no other Court; 
 (ii) if the judicial authority is a Court which is inferior in 
grade to the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a 
district or the Court of principal judge of the City Civil Court 
exercising original jurisdiction in a city (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Courts), as the case may be, the subsequent 
 
 
 
 
Case management procedures 
before single Judge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new section 
for section 42. 
 
Proper Court for filing 
subsequent applications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application shall be made in the said principal Court to which the 
Court where the application is made is subordinate and in no 
other Court; 
 (iii) if the judicial authority is a quasi-judicial statutory 
authority, the subsequent application shall be made in the 
principal Court within whose local limits the judicial authority is 
situate and in no other Court. 
 (4) Where, in a legal proceeding under section 8A before any 
of the Courts referred to in that section, an application is made 
seeking reference to arbitration with respect to an agreement, then 
the subsequent application shall be made in the following manner, 
namely:–– 
 ( i) if the application is made in the Supreme Court or in the 
High Court or in the principal Courts referred to in clause (ii) of 
sub-section (3), as the case may be, the subsequent application 
shall be made in the Court which made the reference and in no 
other Court; 
 (ii) if the application is made in a Court of coordinate 
jurisdiction or inferior in grade to the principal Courts referred to 
in clause (ii) of sub-section (3), as the case may be, the 
subsequent application shall be made in the principal Court from 
where the legal proceeding was transferred to such Court of 
coordinate jurisdiction or to which the said Court is subordinate, 
as the case may be, and in no other Court. 
 Explanation  1.–– In this sub-section, the expression “legal 
proceeding” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the 
Explanation to section 8A. 
 Explanation 2 .–– For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that in the case of ar bitral proceedings which have 
commenced pursuant to a reference made by the Supreme Court 
or the High Court under section 8A and award passed pursuant 
thereto, the reference to “Court” in this Part shall, except in 
sections 27 and 33A, be construed as reference to the Supreme 
Court or the High Court, as the cast may be. 
 (5) Where an application, seeking a reference to arbitration 
with. respect to an agreement is made under section 11 in the 
Supreme Court or in the High Court, as the case may be, the 
subsequent application shall be made in the Court within the 
meaning of sub-clause (i) of clause (e) or sub-section (1) of 
section 2 and in no other Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 of 1963 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (6) Where an application is made to the High Court in 
accordance with section 34, section 34A, section 36 or sub-section 
(4) of section 37 A or where an ap peal is preferred in the High 
Court in accordance with sub-section (5) of section 37 A, the 
subsequent application shall be made in that High Court and in no 
other Court. 
 (7) Where application or appeal transferred to the High Court 
pursuant to section 37B, all subsequent applications shall be made 
in that High Court and in no other Court. 
 42A. The Chief Justice of India may prepare a scheme, for 
constituting a panel of arbitrators to enable either the parties, or 
the Supreme Court or the High Court under section 11, or the 
judicial authority under section 8, or the Court referred to in 
section 8A, or the parties under section 43A, as the case may be, 
to appoint arbitrators from such panel and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified by the Chief Justice of India in 
that scheme. 
 42B. Not withstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, it shall be permissible to initiate any 
proceedings under this Act, for the purpose of enforcement of any 
right under sub-section (3) of section 69 of the Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932 to seek.––  
 (a) the dissolution of a firm; 
 (b) the settlement of the accounts of a dissolved firm; or 
 (c) the realisation of the property of a dissolved firm.’.  
 32. In section 43 of the principal Act,–– 
 (a) sub-section (3) shall be omitted; 
 (b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
 “ (5) In computing the time specified in the Limitation Act, 
1963 for the commencement of proceedings in relation to any 
dispute, the period between the commencement of the arbitration 
and the date of the orders mentioned below, shall be excluded, 
namely:–– 
 (a) an order of the arbitral tribunal accepting a plea referred 
to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 16; 
 (b) an order under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 37 
by the Court affirming an order under clause (a) or an order of the 
Supreme Court on further appeal, if any, affirming the last 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scheme for panel  
of arbitrators. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special provision relating to 
unregistered partnerships. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 43. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned order; 
 (c) an order declaring an arbitration agreement as null and 
void or inoperative or incapable of being performed or as not in 
existence, passed by –– 
 (i) the High Court under sub-section (13) of section 11 in the 
case of an arbitration, other than an international arbitration 
(whether commercial or not) or by the Supreme Court on further 
appeal; 
 (ii) the Supreme Court under sub-section (13) of section 11 in 
the case of international arbitration (whether commercial or 
not).”. 
 33. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely: –– 
 ‘43A. (1) The arbitral proceedings pending on the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003 before an arbitral tribunal –– 
 (a) if such proceedings are pending for more than three years 
from the date of commencement of such proceedings, shall be 
completed within a further period of six months from the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003 or within such extended period specified in sub-
sections (2) and (3); 
 (b) if such proceedings have not been pending for three years 
from the date of commencement of the proceedings, the 
proceedings shall be completed within a further period of one 
year reckoned from the date of expiry of three years of the 
commencement of the arbitral proceedings or within such 
extended period specified in sub-sections (2) and (3). 
 (2) If the award is not made with in the further period of six 
months or one year, as the case may be, specified in sub-section 
(1), the arbitral proceedings shall, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (3), stand suspended until an application for extension of 
time is made to the Court by any party to the arbitration or where 
none of the parties has made an application as aforesaid until such 
application is made by the arbitral tribunal. 
 (3) The provisions of sub-sections (4) to (8) of section 29A 
shall, so far as may be, apply for the disposal of application 
referred to in sub-section (2), with a view to speed up the arbitral 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new sections 43A 
to 43F. 
 
Speeding up of pending 
proceedings and time limit for 
passing awards. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
10 of 1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 of 1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 of 1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 of 1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proceedings, till the award is passed. 
 43B. (1) The provisions of sections 6, 23 and 24 shall, so far 
as may be, apply to arbitral proceedings under the Arbitration 
Act, 1940, pending on the commencement of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2003 and shall override any 
provisions of the Arbitration Ac t, 1940 which are inconsistent 
with the said sections. 
 (2) In the case of non-compliance with any order passed by 
the sole arbitrator or arbitrat ors under the provisions of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 or of orders passed under sub-section (1), 
the sole arbitrator or arbitrator s, as the case may be, appointed 
under the Arbitration Act, 1940 may pass orders under section 
24A. 
 (3) In the case of non-compliance with any peremptory order 
passed by the sole arbitrator or arbitrators, as the case may be, 
under sub-section (2), the Court, within the meaning of clause (c) 
of section 2 or section 21 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, as the case 
may be, may pass orders under section 24B. 
 (4) Where arbitral proceedin gs are pending on the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003, before the sole arbitrator or arbitrators appointed under 
the Arbitration Act, 1940, the proceedings shall be completed 
within a further period of six months from such commencement 
or within such extended peri od specified in sub-sections (5) and 
(6):  
 Provided that where the arbitr al proceedings are stayed by 
order of a Court, the period during which the proceedings are so 
stayed shall be excluded while co mputing the said period of one 
year. 
 (5) If the award is not made within the further period 
specified in sub-section (4) the arbitral proceedings shall, subject 
to the provisions of sub-section (6), stand suspended until an 
application for extension of time is made by any party to the 
arbitration to the Court referred to in sub-section (3), by any party 
to the arbitration, or where none of the parties has made an 
application as aforesaid, until such an application is made by the 
sole arbitrator or arbitrators, as the case may be. 
 (6) The provisions of sub-sections (4) to (8) of section 29A 
shall, so far as may be apply for the disposal of the application 
referred to in sub-section (5). 
 (7) The provisions of this section shall have effect 
 
 
 
Speeding up of all pending 
proceedings and time limit for 
passing awards under the 
Arbitration Act, 1940. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in sub-
section (2) of section 85. 
CHAPTER XI 
SINGLE MEMBERS FAST TRACK ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL  
AND FAST TRACK ARBITRATION 
 43C.  (1) The parties to an action before a judicial authority 
referred to in section 8, or a legal proceeding before any of the 
Courts referred to in section 8A, or to an arbitration agreement or 
to an application before the Supreme Court or the High Court 
under section 11, as the case may be, may, at any stage either 
before or at the time of appointment of the arbitral tribunal, agree 
in writing to have their disputes resolved by arbitration in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the procedure 
specified in the First Schedule (hereinafter referred to as the Fast 
Track Arbitration). 
 (2) If the parties referred to in sub-section (1) agree to have 
the disputes resolved , through Fast Track Arbitration, then the 
arbitral tribunal agreed to between such parties shall be called the 
Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal.  
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the arbitration 
agreement –– 
 (i) the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of a sole 
arbitrator; 
 (ii) the sole arbitrator shall be chosen by parties unanimously; 
 (iii) the fee payable to the arbi trator and the manner of 
payment of the fee shall be such as may be agreed between the 
sole arbitrator and the parties;  
 (iv) the procedure set out in the First Schedule (hereinafter 
referred to as the Fast Track Procedure) shall apply. 
 43D. The other provisions of this Part, in so far as they are 
matters not provided in the First Schedule, shall apply to the Fast 
Track Arbitration as they apply to other arbitrations subject to the 
following modifications, namely:––  
  (a) the references to–– 
 (i) “arbitral tribunal” shall, unless the context otherwise 
requires, be deemed to include the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal; 
and 
 (ii) “Court” shall be deemed to be the High Court, except in 
sections 27and 33A; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resolution of disputes 
through Fast Track 
Arbitration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other provisions of the Act to 
apply subject to modifica-
tions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 (b) in section 33, in sub-sections (1) to (4), for the words 
“thirty days”, wherever they occu r, the words “fifteen days” shall 
be substituted; 
 (c) in section 34,–– 
 (i) in the proviso to sub-section (3), for the words “three 
months” and “thirty days”, the words “thirty days” and “fifteen 
days” shall respectively be substituted; 
 (ii) in sub-section (5), for the words “sixty days”, the words 
“thirty days” shall be substituted; 
 (iii) in sub-section (6), for the words “thirt y days”, the words 
“fifteen days” shall be substituted; 
 (d) in section 37, in sub-section ( 1), the provision for appeal 
shall not apply to orders  referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 37; 
 (e) in sub-section (1) of section 37D, fo r the words “one 
year”, the words “six months” shall be substituted. 
 43E. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part or in 
any other law for the time being in force but subject to sub-clause 
(ii) of clause (a) of section 43D, where with respect to an 
arbitration agreement, any application is made or is required to be 
made before a “Court” in the manner mentioned in this Part, such 
an application shall be made to the “High Court” and all 
subsequent applications arising out of that agreement and the 
arbitral proceedings shall be made in that High Court and in no 
other High Court and shall be allocated to the Arbitration 
Division: 
 Provided that where reference under section 8A has been 
made for resolution of disputes under this Chapter by the 
Supreme Court, the subsequent applications shall be filed in the 
Supreme Court. 
 43F. The references to High Court in sections 43D and 43E 
shall be construed as a reference to the High Court within whose 
local limits, the principal Civil Court or the Court of principal 
judge of the City Civil Court referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause 
(e) of sub-section  (1)  of section 2, as the case may be, is 
situated.’. 
 34. In section 44 of the principal Act, in clause (a), for the 
words “First Schedule”, the wo rds “Second Schedule” shall be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proper court for filing 
subsequent applications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High Court for purposes of 
this Chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 44. 
 
 
 

substituted. 
 35. In section 47 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the 
following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:––  
 ‘Explanation. –– In this section and in all the following 
sections of this Chapter, “Court” means the Arbitration 
Division.’. 
 36. In section 50 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–– 
 “ (1) An appeal shall lie from th e order refusing  to refer the 
parties to arbitration under section 45 to the High Court referred 
to in sub-section (4) of section 37 A, and the said appeal shall 
thereafter be allocated to the Arbitration Division for disposal.”.  
 37. In section 53 of the principal Act,–– 
 (i) in clause (a), for the words “Second Schedule”, the words 
“Third Schedule” shall be substituted; 
 (ii) in clause (b), for the words “Third Schedule”, the words 
“Fourth Schedule” shall be substituted. 
 38. In section 56 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the 
following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:–– 
 ‘Explanation. –– In this section and the following sections of 
this Chapter, “Court” means the Arbitration Division.’. 
 39. In section 59 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–– 
 “( 1) An appeal shall lie from th e order refusing  to refer the 
parties to arbitration under section 54 to the High Court referred 
to in sub-section (4) of section 37A and the said appeal shall 
thereafter be allocated to the Arbitration Division for disposal.”.  
 40. After section 60 of the principal. Act, the following 
Chapter shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“CHAPTER IIA 
JURISDICTION OF ARBITRATION DIVISION OF HIGH COURT AND 
SPECIAL PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT OF FOREIGN AWARDS 
 60A. (1) Every application for the enforcement of foreign 
awards under Chapters I and II of this Part shall, on the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003, be filed in the High Court as referred to in sub-section 
(4) of section 37A and the said applications shall thereafter be 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 47. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 50. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 53. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 56. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 59. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new Chapter IIA 
in Part II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jurisdiction of Arbitration 
Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

allocated to the Arbitration Division for disposal.  
 (2) The applications for enforcem ent of foreign awards made 
under Chapters I and II of this Part and all appeals under sub-
section (1) of section 50 or sub-section (1) of section 59 pending 
in any Court subordinate to the High Court shall, on the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003, stand transferred to the High Court having jurisdiction 
over such subordinate Court and shall thereafter be allocated to 
the Arbitration Division for disposal.  
 (3) The applications for enforcement of foreign awards under 
Chapters I and II of this Part and appeals under sub-section (1) of 
section 50 and sub-section ( 1) of section 59 and applications 
arising there from, pending in a High Court, shall, on the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003, be allocated to the Arbitration Division for disposal. 
 60B. (1) Every application referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 60A shall be disposed of by the Arbitration Division 
within a period of one year of service of notice on the opposite 
party. 
 (2) Every appeal filed on the commencement of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation  (Amendment) Act, 2003, under sub-
section (1) of section 50 and sub-section (1) of  section 59, on and 
from such commencement shall be disposed off by the Arbitration 
Division within a period of sixty days from the date of notice on 
the opposite party. 
 (3) The applications for enfo rcement of foreign awards 
referred in sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 60A and all appeals 
against orders refusing  to enforce a foreign award under sections 
48 and 57, pending on the commencement of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2003, shall be disposed of by the 
Arbitration Division within a period of six months from the date 
of allocation to the Arbitration Division where notices have been 
served on the opposite parties on the date of such allocation, and 
within a period of six months from the date of service of notice on 
the opposite parties where notices have not been served on the 
opposite party on the date of such allocation. 
 (4) The appeals against orders refu sing to refer the parties to 
arbitration under sections 45 and 54, pending on the 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003, shall be disposed of by the Arbitration Division within 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Time limit for disposal by 
Arbitration Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

a period of thirty days from the date of allocation to the 
Arbitration Division where notices have been served on the 
opposite parties on the date of such allocation and within a period 
of thirty days from the date of service of notices on the opposite 
parties where notices have not been served on the opposite party 
on the date of such allocation. 
 (5) The Arbitration Division while dealing with applications 
and appeals referred in sub-sections (1) and (3) shall, so far as 
may be, follow the same procedure as laid down in sections 37E 
and 37F.”. 
 41. Section 82 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as 
sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, 
the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 “ (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of 
sub-section (1), rules may be made in respect of the following 
matters, namely:–– 
 (a) the manner in which arbitral proceedings shall be 
conducted; 
 (b) the number of days for which the arbitral proceedings 
have to be conducted continuo usly on each occasion when an 
arbitral tribunal meets; 
 (c) the time schedule and the number of hours for which the 
arbitral proceedings have to be conducted on each day; 
 (d) the time schedule for the filing of the pleadings for 
purposes of sub-section (1A) of section 23; 
 ( e) the time schedule in regard to the recording of evidence 
and submission of arguments for purposes of sub-section (1) of 
section 24; 
 (f) the time schedule as to the fu ture procedure to be followed 
by the arbitral tribunal, referred to in sub-section (6) of section 
29A. 
 (3) The Chief Justice of India may issue guidelines to the 
High Courts in relation to the matters referred in sub-section (2) 
and other procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal so that 
uniform rules may be made by all the High Courts.”. 
 42. In section 84 of the principal Act, after sub-section  (1) , 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––  
 “(1A) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of 
sub-section (1), rules may be made in respect of the following, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 82. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 84. 
 
 
 
 
 

namely:– 
 (a) the manner in which fee of the members of an arbitral 
tribunal may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, be 
fixed and the procedure relating thereto under sub-section (15) of 
section 11; 
 (b) the other particulars required to be entered in the register 
under clause (f) of sub-section (4) of section 33A.”. 
 43. The First Schedule, Second Schedule and Third Schedule 
to the principal Act shall be renumbered as the Second Schedule, 
Third Schedule and Fourth Schedule and before the Second 
Schedule as so renumbered, the following Schedule shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
“THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 43C and 43D) 
F
AST TRACK ARBITRATION 
 1. ( 1) For the purposes of Fast Track Arbitration under sub-
section (1) of section 43 C, a Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be constituted on the date on which the parties, after 
obtaining the consent of the sole arbitrator to be appointed, agree 
in writing that the sole arbitrator shall be the Fast Track Arbitral 
Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 43C. 
 (2) The parties shall communicate the said agreement to the 
sole arbitrator on the same day. 
 2. The procedure specified In this Schedule shall on and from 
the day of the constitution of a Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal, apply 
to the Fast Track Arbitration. 
 3. (1) Within fifteen days of the constitution of the Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal, the person who has raised the dispute 
(hereinafter referred to as the cl aimant) shall send simultaneously 
to the Tribunal and the opposite party (hereinafter referred to as 
the respondent)–– 
 (a) a claim statement containing the facts, the points at issue 
and the relief claimed; 
 (b) documentary evidence, if any, in support of his case; 
 (c) a copy of the witness’s affidavit where reliance is placed 
on the testimony of any witness (including that of a party);  
 (d) a copy of the opinion, along with the particulars relating 
to the expert, his qualifications  and experience where reliance is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of First, Second 
and Third Schedules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitution of Fast Track 
Arbitral. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure to apply from date 
of constitution of Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal. 
Procedure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

placed on the opinion of an expert; 
 (e) a list of interrogatories, if any; 
 (f) an application for discovery or production of documents, if 
any, mentioning their relevancy; 
 (g) full address, including e-mail or fax, telephone numbers, 
if any, of all claimants and of all the parties, for the purpose of 
expediting communication and correspondence; 
 (h) any other material considered relevant by the claimant. 
 (2) The respondent shall, within fifteen days from the receipt 
of the claim statement and the documents referred to in sub-
paragraph (1), simultaneously send to the Fast Track Arbitral 
Tribunal as well as to the claimant, his defence statement, 
together with documentary evid ence, witness’s testimony by 
affidavit (including that of a party) and expert opinion, if any, in 
support thereof, together with counter claims, if any, supported by 
documents. 
 (3) The procedure specified in this Schedule shall apply to 
such counter claims as they apply to a claim. 
 (4) Within fifteen days from the receipt of the defence 
statement or the counter claims the claimant shall send to the Fast 
Track Arbitral Tribunal and to the respondent his rejoinder and 
statement of defence to the counter claim. 
 (5) Within fifteen days from the receipt of the defence 
statement or the counter cl aim, the respondent shall 
simultaneously send his rejoinder to the said statement or claim to 
the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal as well as to the claimant. 
 (6) In case discovery or production of documents is allowed, 
the parties shall be permitted to submit their supplementary 
statements, if any, to the Fast Tr ack Arbitral Tribunal within the 
specified period and to simultaneously send copies thereof to each 
other. 
 (7) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall decide the disputes 
on the basis of the pleadings and documents, affidavits of 
evidence, expert opinion, if any, and the written submission filed 
by the parties. 
 (8) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may permit any witness 
to be orally examined and lay down the manner in which 
evidence shall be recorded or fo r receiving affidavits in lieu of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

oral evidence. 
 (9) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may otherwise permit 
oral evidence to be adduced, if it considers that any request for 
oral evidence by any party is justified or where the Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal considers that such oral evidence is necessary. 
 (10) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may, in addition, call 
for any further information or clarification from the parties in 
addition to the pleadings, documents and evidence placed before 
it. 
 4. The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall permit the parties to 
appear and conduct the case personally or through their Counsel 
or by any person duly authorised by the parties to represent them. 
 5. After the conclusion of the evidence, the Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal may direct all the parties to file their written 
notes of argument or may, at its discretion, permit oral arguments 
and shall fix a time schedule therefor and may also restrict the 
length of oral arguments. 
 6. (1) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall conduct its 
proceedings in such manner that the arbitral proceedings are, as 
far as possible, taken up on day-to-day basis at least continuously 
for three days on each occasion. 
 (2) The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall ordinarily fix the 
time schedule in such manner th at the proceedings are conducted 
continuously from 10.30 A.M. to 1 P.M. and 2 P.M. to 4.30 P.M. 
every day. 
 7. The time schedule fixed under paragraphs 3 and 5 and the 
manner of conducting proceedings and fixing the time schedule 
under paragraph 6 by the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal, shall be 
binding on the parties. 
 8. (1) At any time during the course of arbitration and before 
the passing of the award, the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may, at 
its discretion, if need be, consult any expert or technically 
qualified person or a qualified accountant for assistance in 
relation to the subject-matter in  dispute, at the expense of the 
parties, and shall communicate the report of aforesaid person to 
the parties to enable them to file their response. 
 (2) If the Fast Track Arbitral Tr ibunal thereafter considers on 
its own or on the request of parties that any clarification or 
examination of a person referred to in sub-paragraph (1) or 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Representation by Counsel. 
 
 
 
 
 
Written notes of arguments or 
oral arguments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conduct of proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parties to be bound by the 
procedure 
and time schedule. 
 
 
Consultation of experts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

examination of any other person is necessary, it may call upon 
such person to clarify in writing or to call him or such other 
person as a witness for necessary examination. 
 9. ( 1) In case there is default on the part of any party to 
adhere to the time limits specified in this Schedule or as fixed by 
the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal or there is violation of any 
interim orders or directions of the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal 
issued under section 17 or under this Schedule, the Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal may pass peremptory orders against the 
defaulting party giving further time for compliance including 
peremptory orders to provide appropriate security in connection 
with an interim order or direction. 
 (2) In case the Fast Track Arbitral  Tribunal is satisfied that a 
party to the arbitration is unduly or deliberately delaying the 
arbitral proceedings, or the implementation of the peremptory 
orders, the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may impose such costs as 
it may deem fit on the defaulting party or may pass an order 
striking out the pleadings of the party concerned or excluding 
material or draw adverse inference against the said party and in 
case security for costs of arbitration is not furnished as required 
under sub-paragraph (1), the claim may be dismissed. 
 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2), 
the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal may dismiss the claim if the 
claimant does not effectively prosecute the arbitral proceedings or 
file the papers within the time granted or neglects or refuses to 
obey the peremptory orders of the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal or 
to pay the dues or deposits as ordered by the Fast Track Arbitral 
Tribunal: 
 Provided that the failure to file a statement of defence to the 
claim statement or to the counter claim shall not by itself be 
treated as an admission of the allegations in the claim statement 
or in the counter claim, as the case may be. 
 (4) If the opposite party does not file its defence or does not 
effectively prosecute its defence or  file the papers within the time 
granted or refuses to obey the peremptory orders of the Fast Track 
Arbitral Tribunal, such Tribunal may make an ex- parte award.  
 10. (1) The Fast Track Arbitral Tr ibunal shall make an award 
within six months from the date of its constitution or within such 
extended period specified in subparagraphs (2) to (4). 
 (2) The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure in cases of default 
by parties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fast Track award to be passed 
in six months. 
 
 
 
 
 

under sub-paragraph (1), by a further period not exceeding three 
months.  
 (3) If the award is not made within the period specified under 
sub-paragraph ( 1) or the period agreed to by the parties under 
sub-paragraph (2), the arbitration proceedi ng shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub-paragraph  (4) , stand suspended until an 
application for extension of time is made to the High Court by 
any party to the Fast Track Arb itration or where none of the 
parties makes an application as aforesaid, until such an 
application is made by the Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal. 
 (4) The provisions of sub-sections (4) to (8) of section 29A 
shall, so far as may be, apply for disposal of the application 
referred to in sub-paragraph (3), till the award is made. 
 11. The Fast Track Arbitral Tribunal shall make an award and 
give reasons therefor keeping in mind the time limit referred to in 
paragraph 10 unless it is agreed between the parties that no 
reasons need be given or the award is based on settlement of 
disputes.”.  
 44. ( 1) The provisions of the principal Act, as amended by 
this Act, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) to 
(19), be prospective in operation and shall not, in particular, apply 
to– 
 (i) any application made under sub-section (1) of section 8 of 
the principal Act by a party to the arbitration agreement before a 
judicial authority, or any appointment made by the judicial 
authority under that section, before the commencement of this 
Act; or 
 (ii) any request made under section 11 of the principal Act to 
a party, or the Chief Justice of India or his designate, or the Chief 
Justice of a High Court or his designate, before the 
commencement of this Act; or 
 (iii) any appointment of arbitral tribunal made under section 
11 of the principal Act by—  
 (a) the parties to the arbitration agreement; 
 (b) a party who is authorised under the arbitration agreement 
to make such appointment without the consent of the other party 
or parties to the arbitration agreement; or 
 (c) the Chief Justice of India or his designate or the Chief 
Justice of a High Court or his designate, before the 
commencement of this Act; 
 (iv) any award passed under the principal Act, before the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fast Track award to contain 
reasons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transitory provisions 
 
 
 

commencement of this Act. 
 (2) The provisions of this Act shall, subject to the provisions 
of sub-sections (3) to (19), apply to the arbitration agreements 
entered into before the commencement of this Act, where no– 
(i) request for appointment of arbitral tribunal; or  
(ii) application for appointment of arbitral tribunal; or 
(iii) appointment of arbitral tribunal, 
 has been made under the principal Act, before the 
commencement of this Act. 
  (3) The provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section 2, as inserted in the principal Act by clause (b) of section 
4 of this Act, shall apply to the applications made under section 8 
of the principal Act before a judicial authority in a legal 
proceeding, or under section 9 of the principal Act before a Court, 
which are pending on the commencement of this Act in 
connection with the arbitrations of the nature specified in sub-
section (2) of section 2 of the principal Act. 
  (4) The provisions of section 2A, as inserted in the 
principal Act by section 5 of this Act, shall apply to arbitral 
proceedings under the principal Act, pending before the principal 
Courts referred to in that section, on the commencement of this 
Act. 
  (5) The provisions of section 6 of the principal Act, as 
amended by section 7 of this Act, shall apply to arbitral 
proceedings under the principal Act, pending before an arbitral 
tribunal, on the commencement of this Act. 
  (6) The provisions of sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) of 
section 9, as substituted by section 11 of this Act, shall apply to 
all applications under section 9, pending in the Court on the 
commencement of this Act. 
  (7) The provisions of section 17 of the principal Act, as 
substituted by section 16 of this Act, shall apply to arbitral 
proceedings under the principal Act, pending before an arbitral 
tribunal on the commencement of this Act. 
  (8) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 20 of the 
principal Act, as substituted by section 17 of this Act, shall apply 
to arbitration agreements in relation to which requests for 
appointment of arbitral tribunal and applications for appointment 
of arbitral tribunal are pending decision on the commencement of 

this Act, if the arbitral tribunal has not been appointed on or 
before such commencement. 
  (9) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 23 of the 
principal Act, as amended by section 18 of this Act, shall apply to 
arbitral proceedings under the principal Act, pending before an 
arbitral tribunal on the commencement of this Act, where the 
claim, defence or rejoinder statements have not been filed before 
the arbitral tribunal on or before such commencement. 
  (10) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 24 of 
the principal Act, as amended by section 19 of this Act, and sub-
section (1A) of section 24 of the principal Act, as inserted by that 
section, shall apply to arbitral proceedings under the principal 
Act, pending before an arbitral tribunal on the commencement of 
this Act, where oral evidence or  oral arguments, as the case may 
be, have not been completed on or before such commencement. 
  (11) The provisions of section 24A, as inserted in the 
principal Act by section 20 of this Act, shall apply to the 
directions made under section 17, the time schedules determined 
under section 23 or the orders passed under section 24 by the 
arbitral tribunal, the principal Act before the commencement of 
this Act, where such directions, time schedules or orders have not 
been complied with on or before such commencement by the 
party to whom they were directed or ordered. 
  (12) The provisions of section 28 of the principal Act, as 
amended by section 21 of this Act, shall apply to arbitration 
agreements in relation to which requests for appointment of 
arbitral tribunal and applications for appointment of arbitral 
tribunal are pending decision on the commencement of this Act, if 
the arbitral tribunal has not been appointed on or before such 
commencement. 
  (13) The provisions of sub-section (3) of section 29, as 
inserted in the principal Act by section 22 of this Act, shall apply 
to arbitral proceedings under the principal Act pending before the 
arbitral tribunal on the commencement of this Act, if awards have 
not been passed on or before such commencement. 
  ( 14) The provisions of section 29A, as inserted in the 
principal Act by section 23 of this Act shall, subject to – 
 (a) sub-section (3) of section 43A and sub-section (6) of 
section 43B, as inserted in the principal Act by section 33; and 

 (b) sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 10 of the First Schedule, 
as inserted in the principal Act by section 43, 
of this Act, apply to arbitration proceedings commenced on and 
from the commencement of this Act.  
 (15) The provisions of – 
 (i) section 34 of the principal Act, as amended by section 26; 
and 
 (ii) section 34A, as inserted in the principal Act by section 27, 
of this Act, shall apply to arbitration awards passed before the 
commencement of this Act which have not become final, and 
applications seeking leave under sub-section (2) of section 34A 
may be filed within a period of three months from the date of 
such commencement in the Arbitration Division in respect of 
pending applications under sub-section (1) of section 34 of the 
principal Act or in pending appeals in the Supreme Court. 
 (16) The provisions of section 36 of the principal Act, as 
substituted by section 28 of this Act, shall apply to all awards 
made under the principal Act pending enforcement on the 
commencement of this Act. 
 (17) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 
37C, as inserted in the principal Act by section 30 of this Act, 
shall apply to applications under sub-section (1) of section 34 of 
the principal Act and appeals under section 37 of the principal 
Act pending on the commencement of this Act, if no notice has 
been issued by the Court under sub-section (1) of section 34 or 
under section 37 of the principal Act before such commencement: 
 Provided that where the Court in such application or appeal 
has issued notice, the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 37C 
of the principal Act shall not apply. 
 (18) The provisions of section 42 of the principal Act, as 
substituted by section 31 of this Act, shall apply to subsequent 
applications which may be filed after the commencement of this 
Act. 
 ( 19) The provisions of sub-section (5) of section 43, as inserted 
in the principal Act by clause (b) of section 32 of this Act, shall apply to 
the orders referred to in that sub-section, if such orders are passed on or 
from the commencement of this Act, in arbitral proceedings under the 
principal Act, pending before an arbitral tribunal on such 
commencement.
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 The general law relating to arbitration is contained in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(hereinafter referred to as the existing Act) The Act, which is based on the UNCITRAL. Model Law on 
International Commercial Arbitration as adopted in 1985 by the United Nations Commission on International 
Trade Law (UNCITRAL), applies to both international as well as to domestic arbitration. 
 Ever since the commencement of th is Act, resquests have been voiced for its amendment. The main 
problem with the existing Act was that UNCITRAL Model Law which was meant as a Model for International 
Arbitration was adopted also for domestic arbitration betw een Indian parties in India. In several countries the 
laws of arbitration for international and domestic arbitration are governed by different statutes. 
2.  Some of the major shortcomings in the existing Act are as follows: 
 (a)  there is no provision for expediting awards or  the subsequent proceedings in Courts when 
applications are filed for setting aside awards; 
 (b)  for challenging an award an aggrieved party has to start again from the District Court; 
 (c)  there is no provision enabling the Indian parties to obtain interim measures from Indian Courts 
before a foreign arbitration could commence outside India, 
 (d)  the language of sections 20 and 28 is such that multinational company, even if the entire contract 
had to be implemented in India, could stipulate that foreign law could apply or parties could have a 
foreign venue–a procedure which is inconsistent with the sovereignty of the laws of our country. 
3.  The Law Commission of India undertook a comprehensive review of the existing Act and made 
recommendations in its 176th Report. The Report also  contains a draft Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2001: The Government, after inviting comments of the State Governments and certain 
commercial organisations, on the Report and draft Bill has decided to accept almost all the recommendations. 
In addition some suggestions made in a special seminar organized by the Law Ministry by the leading senior 
lawyers, jurists and, representatives of commercial organisations have also been accepted. 
4.  Important features of the Bill are as follows: 
(i)  to enable the judicial authority to decide jurisd ictional issues, subject to strict rules, where an 
application is made before it by a party raising any jurisdictional question; . 
(ii)  to empower the Courts to make reference to arbitr ation in case all the parties to a legal proceeding 
enter into an arbitration agreement to resolve their disputes during the pendency of such proceeding 
before it; 
(iii)  to provide for the appointment of arbitrators by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court or the High 
Court or his nominees to be an appointment made on the judicial side with a view to prevent writ 
petitons being filed on the basis that it is an administrative order of the Chief Justice. 
(iv)  to provide that where the place of arbitration under Part I of the exis ting Act is in India, whether in 
regard to arbitration between Indian parties or an international arbitration in India and arbitration 
between Indian parties Indian law will apply. 

(v)  to provide for completion of arbitrations under the existing Act to be completed within one year 
from commencement of arbitration proceedings, but at  the end of one year the Court will fix up a 
time schedule for completion of the proceedings-until the award is passed. 
(vi)  to empower the arbitral tribunal to pass pere mptory orders for implementation of interlocutory 
orders of the arbitral tribunal and in case they ar e not implemented, to enable the Court to order 
costs or pass other orders in default. 
(vii) to provide for the Arbitration Division in the High Courts, and also for its jurisdiction and special 
procedure under Chapter IXA for the speedy enforcement of awards made under the Arbitration 
Act, 1940, the existing Act including awards made outside India; 
(viii) to provide provisions for speeding up and completing all arbitrations under the existing Act, 
including those arbitrations pending under the repealed Arbitration Act, 1940 within a stipulated 
time. 
(ix) to introduce a new Chapter XI relating to single memb er fast track arbitral tribunal wherein the filing 
of pleadings and evidence will be on fast track basis and award will have to be pronounced within 
six months and to specify procedure therefor in a new Schedule. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
ARUN JAITLEY. 
N
EW DELHI; 
The 19th December, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NOTES ON CLAUSES 
 Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend the long title of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
 Clause 3 seeks to amend the proviso to sub-section (2) of section I. 
 Clause 4 seeks to amend section 2 to re-define some of the expressions used in the Act. The scope of 
some of the definitions have been broaden and some new definitions have been added. 
 Clause 5 seeks to enable the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district or the Court of 
principal judge of the City Civil Court to transfer cases to other Courts of coordinate jurisdiction in the district 
or the city, so that all cases do not stagnate in the principal Courts. 
 Clause 6 seeks to amend section 5 to provide clarification that all other remedies, i.e., remedies under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, remedies of internal appeals within the High Court and under any other special 
law, are barred. 
 Clause 7 seeks to amend section 6 to provide that the arbitral tribunal can arrange administrative 
assistance without consent of parties. 
 Clause 8 seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 7 to provide that, apart from written 
agreements, other written communications accepted expr essly or by implication which also result in an 
arbitration agreement shall come within the scope of an arbitration agreement. 
 Clause 9 seeks to amend section 8 to enable the judicial authority to decide jurisdictional issues subject to 
strict rules, in case they are raised before filing the first statement and also to enable that authority to stay the 
action till a decision is given by the Judicial authority on those authorities, provided the strict rules imposed by 
new sub-sections (4) and (5) are satisfied. The judicial aut hority will not decide jurisdictional issues if it finds 
the reasons specified in sub-section (5) for not decidi ng the issues. Sub-section (6) provides that when the 
arbitration clause is declared void, etc., the principle that if there is an arbi tration clause, no party can file an 
action in Court unless he first obtains an award, shall not apply. 
 Clause 10 seeks to insert a new section 8A to enable to permit reference to arbitration at any stage of a 
civil suit, whether in appeal in Supreme Court or High Court, if all parties enter into an arbitration agreement 
to resolve their disputes, after the action is filed. 
 Clause 11 seeks to substitute section 9 with a reconstructed section to bring to the forefront the larger and 
more general part of the powers which are relegated towards the en d and shift the specified interim measures 
lower down. It also provides to further enlarge the categories of interim measures specified in the substituted 
section. 
 Clause 12 seeks to amend section 11 to provide that after the time limit specified in the sub-section (4), if 
no reply is sent, the privilege under the agreement to appoint arbitrators gets extinguished (this is to resolve 
conflicting judgments in High Court and to adopt the prin ciple laid down by the S upreme Court). Secondly, it 
provides that the appointment of arbitral tribunal by the Supreme C ourt and the High Court will be on the 
judicial side and not on the administrative side as decided by the Supreme Court. 

 Clause 13 seeks to amend section 12 requiring the arbitrator to disclose the existence of any past or 
present relationship, either di rect or indirect, with any of the parties or any of their counsel, whether financial, 
business, professional, social or other kind or in relation to the subject-matter in dispute. 
 Clause 14 seeks to amend section 14 to provide that where the mandate of the arbitrator is terminated, the 
Court may decide the quantum of fee payable to him. 
 Clause 15 seeks to amend section 15 to fix a time limit of thirty days for ..appointing a substitute 
arbitrator and also provides that when the mandate of the arbitrator is terminated, the Court may decide the 
quantum of fee payable to him. 
 Clause 16 seeks to substitute section 17 to provide that powers of the arbitral tribunal to issue interim 
measures and to increase the types of interim measures as contained in the English Arbitration Act that may be 
issued by the arbitral tribunal. 
 Clause 17 seeks to substitute section 20 to bring out the real purport of the section, namely, that the place 
of arbitration under Part I is in India, whether in regard  to arbitration in India between Indian parties or where 
it is an international arbitration in India. It is intended to prevent Indian subsidiaries incorporated by foreign 
companies from stipulating a venue of arbitration outside India. 
 Clause 18 seeks to amend section 23 to provide that the time for filing statements of claim or defence will 
be as per the order of the arbitrators and will no long er be based on agreement of the parties and also to 
empower the High Court to make rules to expedite the arbitral process. 
 Clause 19 seeks to amend section 24 to provide for the manner in which the hearings and written 
proceedings are to be conducted before the arbitral trib unal, without any scope for parties to agree in a manner 
different from the one fixed by the arbitral tribunal. Sub-sections (1B) and ( 1C) provide for the arbitral to 
tribunal control the time schedule of hearing and the time schedule fixed by the arbitral tribunal shall be 
binding on the parties. The arbitral tribunal can also recei ve affidavits in lieu of or al evidence subject to the 
arbitral tribunal’s right to call the witnesses for oral examination. 
 Clause 20 seeks to insert two new sections 24A and 24B. Section 24A empowers the arbitral tribunal to 
pass peremptory orders for implementation of interlocutory orders of the arbitral tribunal and in case they are 
not implemented, to enable the Court to order costs or pass other orders in default. Section 24B enables the 
parties or the arbitral tribunal to approach the Court for implementation of the orders of the arbitral tribunal. 
 Clause 21 seeks to amend section 28 to provide that in the case of an arbitration other than international 
arbitration under Part I in India, the dispute is to be decided in accordance with the substantive law in force in 
India. 
 Clause 22 seeks to amend section 29 to provide that wh ere there is no majority, the award shall be the 
one prepared by the presiding arbitrator of the arbitral tribunal and that the minority decision, if made available 
in thirty days, is appended to the award so that the Court when it considers the validity of the award, it may 
have an idea about the reasons for the dissent. 
 Clause 23 seeks to insert new section 29A to provide for the pronouncement of the award within one year 
after the commencement of the arbitral proceedings unless the time is extended in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-sections (2) to (5). In order to av oid stay of arbitral proceedings by the Court pending 

decision on applications for extension filed in the Court, it is provided that at the end of one year from the date 
of commencement of arbitration proceedings, the proceedings shall stop but would get automatically revived if 
an application is filed in the Court by any party or by the arbitral tribunal, for extension of time. Further, the 
Court will then fix up a time schedule for completion of the proceedings until the award is passed. The Court 
can impose costs to prevent delays before the arbitral tribunal. While fixing time schedule to the arbitrators, the 
Court will bear in mind certain conditions specified in the section. 
 Clause 24 seeks to amend section 31 to empower the arbitr al tribunal to specify such rate of interest, 
which a sum directed to be paid by the arbitral awar d shall carry, from the date of award to the date of 
payment, as it may deem reasonable. 
 Clause 25 seeks to insert a new section to provide that a photo copy of every award together with original 
records of arbitration proceedings to be sent to the C ourt for purposes of record and a register containing the 
specified particulars will be maintained by the Court. The new section also provides that parties can obtain 
copies of award or the arbitral records. 
 Clause 26 seeks to amend section 34 to provide that the party which does not have the original order, can 
file a photocopy of the award along with his application to set aside the award and that in all arbitrations in 
India whether international or not, the award can be set aside on an additional ground, i.e., if the award does 
not contain reasons as required by sub-section (3) of section 31. It is provided to fix time limit for the arbitral 
tribunal to pass orders in case of remittal to it, as to the manner in which the Court should thereafter deal with 
the award and the procedure on remittal to arbitral tribunal. Further, in order to clarify that ‘public policy’ does 
not have the extended meaning as in the recent case of ONGC vs Saw Pipes: 2003 (5) SCC 705 decided by the 
Supreme Court for purposes of Parts I and Part II and to remove doubts, an Explanation to the words ‘contrary 
to public policy’ in sections 34, 48(2)(b) and 57(l)(e) is provided to mean contrary to (i) fundamental policy of 
India or (ii) interests of India or (iii) justice or morality, thus retaining the meaning given by the Supreme 
Court in the Renusagar case both for purposes of Parts I and Part II. 
 Clause 27 seeks to insert a new section 34A to provide that where the award is not an international award 
in India, the parties can challenge the award on the additional ground that there is an error which is apparent on 
the face of the award giving rise to a substantial questi on of law. However, in order to prevent abuse of this 
right, it is provided that a separate application for raising the ground must be independently accepted by the 
Court (Arbitration Division) and that the right is subject to further stringent conditions set out in clauses (a), 
(b) and (c) of sub-section (2). 
 Clause 28 seeks to substitute a new section for section 36 to provide that the award will be enforceable 
after the period fixed for filing applications under section 34 has expired, unless the Court stays its 
enforcement and the Court is being vested with powers to refuse stay or grant stay subject to conditions. While 
granting stay, the Court can impose conditions, keeping the scope of interference in applications under sub-
section (1) of section 34 in mind. The manner of imposing conditions and interim measures are also specified. 
 Clause 29 seeks to amend section 37 to provide that all applications under section 34 are to be filed in the 
High Court to be dealt with by the Arbitration Division irrespective of  pecuniary value and also in the disposal 
of interlocutory appeals, the appellate Court shall, so far as may be, follow the special procedure contained in 
sections 37C to 37F.  

 Clause 30 seeks to insert new sections 37A to 37F under a new Chapter IXA to provide that every High 
Court shall as soon as may be after the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 
2003, constitute an Arbitration Division in the High Court to deal, irrespective of pecuniary value, with 
matters, (a) applications under sub-section (1) of section 34 to set aside awards under the principal Act, new 
and pending, (b) appeals to set aside awards under the Ar bitration Act, 1940, new and pending, (c) 
enforcement of awards under the principal Act, ne w and pending and (d) execution of awards under the 
Arbitration Act, 1940, new and pending, so that the present procedure at two levels, one in the subordinate 
Courts (or original side of High Court) and another by way of appeal to or in the High Court is avoided. For all 
these classes of cases, time limits have also been prov ided. Section 37A is to deal with future matters and 
section 37B to deal with pending matters. Section 37C is similar to Order 41, Rule 11 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and permits dismissal of fresh applications under section 34 and fresh appeals under the 
Arbitration Act, 1940, if no prima facie case made out. Section 37D prescrib es the time limits of one year or 
six months for main matters or six months depending upon the stage of the matter from the date of 
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Ame ndment) Act, 2003 and section 37E prescribes the 
time limits for filing papers books, written submissi ons and oral submissions. Section 37F requires case 
management procedures to be followed before a Single Judge for fixing time schedules in the Arbitration 
Division. 
 Clause 31 seeks to substitute new sections 42, 42A and 42B for section 42. Substituted section 42 
provides as to where subsequent applications have to be filed, that is to say, if a reference to arbitration is made 
by the Supreme Court or the High Court in a pending matter under section 8A, all subsequent applications 
shall respectively be made in those Courts only. Section 42A enables the Chief Justice of India to prepare a 
scheme, empanelling retired Judges or experts in various br anches as arbitrators subject to such conditions as 
may be specified by the Chief Justice of India. Sec tion 42B seeks to nullify the effect of, or remove the 
disability carried by, any amendment made in section. 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, excluding 
arbitration. 
 Clause 32 seeks to amend section 43 by deletion of sub-section (3) in view of the fact that time barred 
clauses have already become void on account of the amendment of section 28 of the Indian Contract Act, 1832 
by the Indian Contract (Amendment) Act, 1996. Further,  new sub-section (5) provides  for the for exclusion of 
the period covered by various other proceedings enumerated in clauses (a), (b) and (c). 
 Clause 33 seeks to insert new sections 43A to 43F to provide speeding up arbitration proceedings on Fast 
Track Arbitration New section 43A provides that if arbitration proceedings under the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 pending before the tribunal, they have to be completed within six months and in other 
cases, within one year, from the date of commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 
2003. Otherwise, the provisions under the new section 29A will apply and the Court will monitor the arbitral 
proceedings till award is passed. Likewise, under propos ed section 43B, if arbitration proceedings under the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 are pending on the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2003 before the arbitrators, they have to be completed within six months from the date of such 
commencement, otherwise the procedure as laid down in section 29A will apply. Sections 43C to 43F to deal 
with fast track arbitration (the proc edure therefor is contained in the su bstituted new First Schedule) providing 
for ‘fast track’ arbitration where bot h parties agree for such fast track arbitration. Notwithstanding the 
agreement for multiplicity of arbitrators, the arbitration will be by a sole arbitrator. The periods specified in 

various sections for the purpose of taking various steps in the arbitration proceedings are to be cut down as 
provided in section 43D. Section 43E provides that all subsequent applications in fast-track arbitration will 
have to be filed in the High Court and will be allocated to the Arbitration Division. Section 43F seeks to define 
the ‘High Court’ for purposes of Chapter XI. 
 Clause 34 seeks to amend section 44 to re-number the First, Second and Third Schedules as Second, 
Third and Fourth Schedules. 
 Clause 35 seeks to amend section 47 by modifying the existing Explanation to provide that ‘Court’ 
means the ‘Arbitration Division’ , so that applications for enforcement of foreign awards both under Chapter I 
and Chapter II of Part II can be filed in the High Court and allocated to the Arbitration Division for 
enforcement. 
 Clause 36 seeks to amend section 50 to provide that an ap peal shall lie to the Arbitration Division, rather 
than to a Court at the district level or to the original side of the High Court. 
 Clause 37 seeks to amend section 53 to relocate the existing Schedules. 
 Clause 38 seeks to amend section 56 by inserting an Explanation on a similar line as in clause 35 above. 
 Clause 39 seeks to amend section 59 on the lines of clause 36 above. 
 Clause 40 seeks to insert new sections 60A and 60B. Section 60A seeks to provide that fresh application 
for enforcement of foreign awards under Part II of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (New York and 
Geneva Conventions) may be filed in the Arbitration Di vision. Further, provision is made for transfer of 
pending applications and also appeals in relation to enforcement of foreign awards, to be dealt with by the 
Arbitration Division. Section 60B prescribes time limits for disposal of these applications for enforcement of 
foreign awards, whether the matters are fresh or pending. 
 Clause 41 seeks to amend section 82 to enumerate in detail some matters on which the High Court may 
make rules. 
 Clause 42 seeks to amend section 84 to enumerate the matters on which the Central Government may 
make rules. 
 Clause 43 seeks to relocate the existing Schedules after insertion of a new First Schedule which deal with 
Fast Track Arbitrations. 
 Clause 44 seeks to provide transitory provision providing that the amendments will be prospective in 
operation except to the extent referred to in sub-sections (1) to (19).
 
 
 
 
 

 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (15) in section 11 empowering the Central 
Government, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, to prescribe the manner in which fee of 
members of an arbitral tribunal be fixed and the procedure to be followed in relation to fixation of such fee. 
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 33A with a view to providing fo r filing of a photocopy of 
the arbitral award together with orig inal arbitral records in the Court and the Central Government is being 
empowered to prescribe other particulars the register may contain. 
2.   The aforesaid matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government are matters of 
detail and it is not practicable to provide for all the matters in the Bill itself. Delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996 
(26 of 1996) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title, extent and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* * * * * 
 An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic 
arbitration, international commerci al arbitration and enforcement of 
foreign arbitral awards as also to define the law relating to 
conciliation and for maters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
PRELIMINARY 
 1. (1) *         *     * * * 
 (2) It extends to the whole of India: 
 Provided that parts I, III and IV  shall extend to the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir only in so far as they relate to international 
commercial arbitration or, as the case may be, international 
commercial conciliation. 
 Explanation.- In this sub-section, the expression “international 
commercial conciliation” shall have the same meaning as the 
expression “international commercial arbitration” in clause (f) of sub-
section (1) of section 2, subject to the modification that for the word 
“arbitration” occurring therein, the word “conciliation” shall be 
substituted. 
PART I  
ARBITRATION 
CHAPTER I  
General provisions 
 2. (1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,– 
* * * * * 
 (e) “Court” means the principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction in a district, and includ es the High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the 
questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitration if the same had 
been the subject-matter of a suit, but does not include any civil court 
of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extent of judicial 
intervention. 
 
 
 
 
Administrative 
assistance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arbitration agreement. 
 
 
Power to refer parties to 
arbitration where there 
is an arbitration 
agreement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interim measures etc. by 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Causes; 
 (f) “international commercial arbitration” means an arbitration 
relating to disputes arising out of legal relationships, whether 
contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in force in 
India and where at least one of the parties is–– 
* * * * * 
 (2) This Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India. 
 5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial 
authority shall intervene except where so provided in this Part. 
 6. In order to facilitate the conduct of the arbitral proceedings, the 
parties, or the arbitral tribunal with the consent of the parties, may 
arrange for administrative assistance by a suitable institution or 
person. 
CHAPTER II 
Arbitration agreement 
 7. (1) *         *     * * * 
 (4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in– 
 8.  (1) A judicial authority before which an action is brought in a 
matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party 
so applies not later than when submitting his first statement on the 
substance of the dispute, refer the parties to arbitration. 
* * * * * 
 (3) Notwithstanding that an application has been made under sub-
section (1) and that the issue is pending before the judicial authority, 
an arbitration may be commenced or continued and an arbitral award 
made. 
 9. A party may, before, or during arbitral proceedings or at any 
time after the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in 
accordance with section 36, apply to a court –– 
 ( i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of 
unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral proceedings; or 
 (ii) for an interim measure or protection in respect of any of the 
following matters, namely:–– 
 (a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which 
are the subject-matter of the arbitration agreement; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment of 
arbitrators. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration; 
 (c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or 
thing which is the subject-matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to 
which any question may arise therein and authorising for any of the 
aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or building in 
the possession of any party or authorising any samples to be taken or 
any observation to be made, or experiment to be tried, which may be 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or 
evidence; 
 (d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver; 
 ( e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the 
Court to be just and convenient,  
and the Court shall have the same power for making orders as it has 
for the purpose of, and in relation to, any proceedings before it. 
* * * * * 
 11. (1) *         *     * * * 
 (4) If the appointment procedure in sub-section (3) applies and 
 (a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days from the 
receipt of a request to do so from the other party; or 
 (b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third 
arbitrator within thirty days from the date of their appointment, the 
appointment shall be made, upon request of a party, by the Chief 
Justice or any person or institution designated by him. 
 (5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an 
arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the parties fail to agree on the 
arbitrator within thirty days from receipt of a request by one party 
from the other party to so agree the appointment shall be made, upon 
request of a party, by the Chief Justice or any person or institution 
designated by him. 
 (6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the 
parties, 
 (a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or 
 (b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an 
agreement expected of them under that procedure; or 
 (c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function 
entrusted to him or it under that procedure,  
a party may request the Chief Justice or any person or institution 
designated by him to take the necessary measure, unless the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grounds for challenge. 
 
 
 
 
 
agreement on the appointment pro cedure provides other means for 
securing the appointment., 
 (7) A decision on a matter entrusted by sub-section (4) or sub-
section (5) or sub section (6) to the Chief Justice or the person or 
institution designated by him is final. 
 (8) The Chief Justice or the person or institution designated by 
him, in appointing an arbitrator, shall have due regard to 
 (a) any qualifications required of th e arbitrator by the agreement 
of the parties and 
 (b) other considerations as are likely to secure the appointment of 
an independent and impartial arbitrator.  
 (9) In the case of appointment of sole or third arbitrator in an 
international commercial arbitration, the Chief Justice of India or the 
person or institution designated by him may appoint an arbitrator of a 
nationality other than the nationalities of the parties where the parties 
belong to different nationalities. 
 (10) The Chief Justice may make such scheme as he may deem 
appropriate for dealing with matters entrusted by sub-section (4) or 
sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) to him. 
 (11) Where more than one request has been made under sub-
section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) to the Chief Justices of 
different High Courts or their designates, the Chief Justice or his 
designate to whom the request has been first made under the relevant 
sub-section shall alone be competent to decide on the request. 
 (12) (a) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), 
(7), (8) and (10) arise in an international commercial arbitration the 
reference to “Chief Justice” in those sub-sections shall be construed as 
a reference to the “Chief Justice of India”. 
 (b) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), 
(8) and (10) arise in any other arbitration, the reference to “Chief 
Justice” in those sub-section shall be  construed as a reference to, the 
Chief Justice of the High Court within whose local limits the principal 
Civil Court referre d to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 is 
situate and, where the High Court itself is the Court referred to in that 
clause, to the Chief Justice of that High Court. 
 12. ( 1) When a person is approached in connection with his 
possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any 
circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his 

 
 
 
 
 
Termination of mandate 
and substitution of 
arbitrator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interim measures 
ordered by arbitral 
tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Place of arbitration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statements of claim and 
defence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hearings and written 
proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independence or impartiality, 
* * * * * 
 15. (1) *         *     * * * 
(2) Where the mandate of an artibrator terminates, a substitute 
arbitrator shall be appointed according to the rules that were 
applicable to the appointment of the arbitrator being replaced, 
* * * * * 
 17. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal 
may, at the request of a party, order a party to take any interim 
measure of protection as  the arbitral tribunal may consider necessary 
in respect of the subject matter of the dispute. 
 (2) The arbitral tribunal may require a party to provide 
appropriate security in connection with a measure ordered under sub-
section (1). 
* * * * * 
 20. (1) The parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration. 
 (2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), the place 
of arbitration shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal having 
regard to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience of 
the parties. 
 (3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the arbitral 
tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, meet at any place 
it considers appropriate for consultation among its members, for 
hearing winners, experts or the parties, or for inspection of 
documents, goods or other property. 
* * * * * 
 23. ( 1) Within the period of time agreed upon by the parties or 
determined by the arbitral tribunal, the claimant shall state the facts 
supporting his claim, the points at issue and the relief or remedy 
sought, and the respondent shall state his defence in respect of these 
particulars, unless the parties have ot herwise agreed as to the required 
elements of those statements. 
* * * * * 
 24. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal 
shall decide whether to hold oral  hearings for the presentation of 
evidence or for oral argument, or whether the proceedings shall be 
conducted on the basis of documents and other materials; 
* * * * * 

Decision making by 
panel of arbitrators. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Form and contents of 
arbitral award. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application for setting 
aside arbitral award. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enforcement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appealable orders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jurisdiction. 
 29. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, in arbitral 
proceedings with more than one arb itrator, any decision of the arbitral 
tribunal shall be made by a majority of all its members. 
* * * * * 
 31. (1) *         *     * * * 
 (7) (a) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in so far 
as an arbitral award is far the paym ent of money, the arbitral tribunal 
may include in the sum for which the award is made interest, at such 
rate as it deems reasonable, on the whole or any part of the money, for 
the whole or any part of the period between the date on which the 
cause of action arose and the date on which the award is made. 
 (b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall, unless 
the award otherwise directs, carry inte rest at the rate of eighteen per 
centum per annum from the date of the award to the date of payment. 
* * * * * 
CHAPTER VII 
Recourse against arbitral award 
 34. (1) Recourse to a Court agains t an arbitral award may be 
made only by an application for setting aside such award in 
accordance with sub-section (2) and sub-section (3). 
 (2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if– 
* * * * * 
 36. Where the time for making an application to set aside the 
arbitral award under awar d shall be endorsed under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 in the same manne r as if it were a decree of the 
Court. 
CHAPTER IX 
Appeals 
 37. (1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders (and from no 
others) to the Court authorised by law to hear appeals from original 
decrees of the Court passing the order, namely: 
* * * * * 
 (b) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under 
section 34. 
* * * * * 
 42. Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limitations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evidence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in any other law for the time being in force, where with respect to an 
arbitration agreement any application under this Part has been made in 
a Court, that Court alone shall have jurisdiction over the arbitral 
proceedings and all subsequent applications arising out of that 
agreement and the arbitral proceedings shall be made in that Court 
and in no other Court. 
 43. (1) The Limitation Act, 1963, shall, apply to arbitrations as it 
applies to proceedings in court. 
* * * * * 
 (3) Where an arbitration agreement to submit further disputes to 
arbitration provides that any claim to which the agreement applies 
shall be barred unless some step to commence arbitral proceedings is 
taken within a time fixed by the agreement, and a dispute arises to 
which the agreement applies the Court, if it is of opinion that in the 
circumstances of the case undue hardship would otherwise be caused, 
and notwithstanding that the time so fixed has expired, may on such 
terms, if any, as the justice of the case may require, extend the time 
for such period as it thinks proper. 
* * * * * 
PART II 
E
NFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS 
CHAPTER I 
New York Convention Awards 
 44. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “foreign 
award” means an arbitral award on differences between persons 
arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or not, 
considered as commercial under the law in force in India, made on or 
after the 11
th day of October, 1960 
 (a) in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration to 
which the Convention set forth in the First Schedule applies, and 
* * * * * 
 47. (1) The party applying for the en forcement of a foreign award 
shall, at the time of the application, produce before the court– 
 (a) the original award or a copy thereof, duly authenticated in the 
manner required by the law of the country in which it was made; 
 (b) the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified copy 
thereof; and 
 (c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the award is a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appealable orders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interpretation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evidence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foreign award. 
 (2) If the award or agreement to be produced under sub-section 
(1) is in a foreign language, the party seeking to enforce the award 
shall produce a translation into En glish certified as correct by a 
diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party 
belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as may be 
sufficient according to the law in force in India. 
 Explanation.-In this section and all the following sections of this 
Chapter, “Court” means the principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction in a district, and includ es the High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction over the subject 
matter of the award if the same had been the subject-maner of a suit, 
but does not include any civil court of a grade inferior no such 
principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes. 
* * * * * 
 50. (1) An appeal shall lie from the order refusing to–– 
* * * * * 
CHAPTER II 
Geneva Convention Awards 
 53.  *         *     * * * 
 (a) in pursuance of an agreement for arbitration to which the 
Protocol set forth in the Second Schedule applies, and 
 (b) between persons of whom one is subject to the jurisdiction of 
some one of such Powers as the Central Government, being satisfied 
that reciprocal provisions have been made, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare to be pa rties to the Convention set forth in 
the Third Schedule, and of whom the other is subject to the 
jurisdiction of some other of the Powers aforesaid, and 
* * * * * 
 56. (1) The party applying for the en forcement of a foreign award 
shall, at the time of application procedure before the Court– 
 (a) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated in the 
manner required by the law of the country in which it was made; 
 (b) evidence proving that the award has become final; and 
 (c) such evidence as may be n ecessary to prove that the 
conditions mentioned in clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 57 are satisfied. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appealable orders. 
 
 
 (2) Where any document requiring to be produced under sub-
section (1) is in a foreign language, the party seeking to enforce the 
award shall produce a translation into  English certified as correct by a 
diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party 
belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as may be 
sufficient according to the 1aw in force in India. 
 Explanation.-In this section and all the following sections of this 
Chapter, “Court” means the principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction in a district, and includ es the High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction over the subject 
matter of the award if the same had been the subject matter of a suit, 
but does not include any civil cour t of a grade inferior to such 
principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes. 
* * * * * 
 59. (1) An appeal shall lie from the order refusing 
* * * * * 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 44) 
C
ONTENTION ON THE RECOGNITION AND EXFORCEMENT OF FOREIGN 
ARBITRAL AWARDS 
ARTICLE I 
 1. This Convention shall apply to the recognition and enforcement 
of arbitral awards made in the territory of a State other than the State 
where the recognition and enforcement of such awards are sought and 
arising out of differences between persons, whether physical or legal. 
It shall also apply to arbitral awards not consid ered as domestic 
awards in the State where their recognition and enforcement are 
sought. 
 2. The term “arbitral awards” sh all include not only awards made 
by arbitrators appointed for each case but also those made by 
permanent arbitral bodies to’ which the parties have submitted. 
 3. When signing, ratifying or acceding to this Convention, or 
notifying extension under article X hereof, and State may on the basis 
of reciprocity declare that it will apply the Convention to the 
recognition and enforcement of awards  made only in the territory of 
another Contracting State. It may also declare that it will apply the 
Convention only to differences arising out of legal relationships, 
whether contractual or not, whic h are considered as commercial 
undertaking national law of the State making such declaration. 

ARTICLE II 
 1. Each Contracting State shall recognise an agreement in writing 
under which the parties undertaking to submit to arbitration all or any 
differences which have arisen or which may arise between them in 
respect of defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not, 
concerning a subject-matter capable of settlement by arbitration. 
 2. The term “agreement in writing” shall include an arbitral clause 
in a contract or an arbitration agreement, signed by the parties or 
contained in an exchange of letters or telegrams. 
 3. The court of a Contracting Stat e, when seized of an action in a 
matter in respect of which the partie s have made an agreement within 
the meaning of this article, shall, at  the request of one of the parties, 
refer the parties to arbitration, unless it finds that the said agreement is 
null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed. 
ARTICLE III 
 Each Contracting State shall reco gnize arbitral awards as binding 
and enforcement them in accordance with the rules of procedure of 
the territory where the award is relie d upon, under the conditions laid 
down in the following articles. There shall not be imposed 
substantially more onerous conditions or higher fees or charges on the 
recognition or enforcement of ar bitral awards to which this 
Convention applies than are im posed on the recognition or 
enforcement of domestic arbitral awards. 
ARTICLE IV 
 1. To obtain the recognition and enforcement mentioned in the 
proceeding article, the party applying for recognition and enforcement 
shall, at the time of the application, supply: 
 (a) the duly authenticated original award or a duly certified copy 
thereof: 
 (b ) the original agreement referred to in article II or a duly 
certified copy thereof. 
 2. If the said award or agreement is not made in an official 
language of the country in which the award is relied upon, the party 
applying for recognition and enforcement of the award shall produce a 
translation of these documents into  such language. The translation 
shall be certified by an official or sworn translator or by a diplomatic 
or consular agent. 
ARTICLE V 

 1. Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused, at 
the request of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party 
furnishes to the competent authority where the recognition and 
enforcement is sought, proof that –– 
 (a) the parties to the agreement re ferred to in article II were, 
under the law applicable to them, under some incapacity, or the said 
agreement in not valid under the law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the 
country where the award was made; or 
 (b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given 
proper notice of the appointment of th e arbitrator or of the arbitration 
proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or 
 (c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not 
falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration, or it contains 
decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to 
arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to 
arbitration can be separated from those not so submitted, that part of 
the award which contains decisions on matters submitted to arbitration 
may be recognised and enforced; or 
 (d) the composition of the arbitral  authority or the arbitral 
procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties, or, 
failing such agreement, was not in accordance With the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or 
 (e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has 
been set aside or suspended by a competent authority of the country in 
which or under the law of which, that award was made. 
 2. Recognition and enforcement of  an arbitral award may also be 
refused if the competent authority in the country where recognition 
and enforcement is sought finds that –– 
 (a) the subject matter of the difference is not capable of 
settlement by arbitration under the law of that country; or 
 (b) the recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary 
to the public policy of that country. 
ARTICLE VI 
 If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award 
has been made to a competent authority referred to in article V (1) (e), 
the authority before which the award is sought to be relied upon may, 
if it considers it proper, adjourn the decision on the enforcement of the 
award and may also, on the application of the party claiming 

enforcement of the award, order the other party to give suitable 
security. 
ARTICLE VII 
 1. The provisions of the present Convention shall not affect the 
validity of multilateral or bilateral agreements concerning the 
recognition and enforcement of arb itral awards entered into by the 
Contracting States nor deprive any interested party of any right he 
may have to avail himself of an arbitral award in the manner and to 
the extent allowed by the law or the treaties of the country where such 
award is sought to be relied upon. 
 2. The Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses of 1923 and the 
Geneva Convention on the Execution of Foreign Arbitral Awards of 
1927 shall cease to have effect between Contracting States on their 
becoming bound and to the extent that they become bound by this 
Convention. 
ARTICLE VIII 
 1. This Convention shall be upon until 31st December, 1958 for 
signature on behalf of any Member of the United Nations and also on 
behalf of any other State which is  or hereafter becomes member of 
any specialised agency of the United Nations, or which is or hereafter 
becomes a party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice, or 
any other State to which an invitation has been addressed by the 
General Assembly of the United Nations. 
 2. This Convention shall be ratified and the instrument of 
ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations. 
ARTICLE IX 
 1. This Convention shall be upon for accession to all States 
referred to in article VII. 
 2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of 
accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
ARTICLE X 
 1. Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or 
accession, declare that this Convention shall extend to an or any of the 
territories for the international. relations of which it is responsible. 
Such a declaration shall take effect when the Convention enters into 
force for the State concerned. 
 2. At any time thereafter any such extension shall be made 

notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations 
and shall take effect as from the ninetieth day after the day of receipt 
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations of this notifications, or 
as from the date of entry into force of the Convention for the State 
concerned, whichever is the later. 
 3. With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not 
extended at the time of signature, ratification or accession, each State 
concerned shall consider the possibility of taking the necessary steps 
in order to extend the application of this Convention to such 
territories, subject, where necessary  for constitutional reasons, to the 
consent of the Governments of such territories. 
ARTICLE XI 
 In the case of a federal or non-unitary State, the following 
provisions shall apply:– 
 (a) with respect of those articles of this Convention that come 
within the legislative jurisdiction of the federal authority, the 
obligations of the federal Government shall to this extent be the same 
as those of Contracting States which are not federal States; 
 (b) with respect to those articles of this Convention that come 
within the legislative jurisdiction of constituent States or provinces 
which are not, under the constitutional system of the federation, bound 
to take legislative action, the federal Government shall bring such 
articles with a favourable recommendation to the notice of the 
appropriate authorities of constituent States or provinces at the earliest 
possible moment; 
 (c) a federal State Party to this Convention shall at the request of 
any other Contracting State transmitted through the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations, supply a statement of the law and practice of 
the federation and its constituent units in regard to any particular 
provision of this Convention, showing the extent to which effect bas 
been given to that provision by legislative or other action. 
 ARTICLE XII  
 1. This Convention shall come into force on the ninetieth day 
following the date of deposit of the third instrument of ratification or 
accession. 
 2. For each State ratifying or acceding to this Convention after the 
deposit of the third instrument of ratification or accession, this 
Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after deposit by 
such State of its instrument of ratification or accession. 

ARTICLE XIII 
 1. Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by a 
written notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
Denunciation shall take effect one year  after the date of receipt of the 
notification by the Secretary-General. 
 2. Any State which has made a declaration or notification under 
article X may, at any time thereafter,  by notification to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, declare that this Convention shall 
cease to extend to the territory concerned one year after the date of the 
receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General. 
 3. This Convention shall continue to be applicable to arbitral 
awards in respect of which recogn ition or enforcem ent proceedings 
have been instituted before the denunciation takes effect. 
ARTICLE XIV 
 A Contracting State shall not be entitled to avail itself of the 
present Convention against other Co ntracting States except to the 
extent that it is itself bound to apply the Convention. 
ARTICLE XV 
 The Secretary General of the United Nations shall notify the 
States contemplated in article VIII of the following:– 
 (a) signatures and ratifications in accordance with article VIII; 
 (b) accessions in accordance with article IX; 
 (c) declarations and notifications under articles I, X and XI; 
 (d) the date upon which this Convention enters into force in 
accordance with article XII; 
 (e) denunciations and notifications  in accordance with article 
XIII. 
ARTICLE XVI 
 1. This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French, 
Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally authentic, shall be 
deposited in the archives of the United Nations. 
 2. The Secretary General of th e United Nations shall transmit a 
certified copy of this Convention to  the State contemplated in article 
XIII. 
–––––––––––––––––– 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 53) 

 P ROTOCOL ON ARBITRATION CLAUSES 
 The undersigned, bein g duly authoris ed, declare that they accept, 
on behalf of the countries which they represent, the following 
provisions: 
 1. Each of the Contracting States  recognises the validity of an 
agreement whether relating to existing or future differences between 
parties subject respectively to the jurisdiction of different Contracting 
States by which the parties to a cont ract agree to submit to arbitration 
all or any differences that may arise in connection with such contract 
relating to commercial matters or to any other matter capable of 
settlement by arbitration, whether or not the arbitration is to take place 
in a country to whose jurisdiction none of the parties is subject. 
 Each Contracting State reserves the right to limit the obligation 
mentioned above to contracts whic h are considered as commercial 
under its national law . Any Contracting State which avails itself of 
this right will notify the Secretary-General of the League of Nations in 
order that the other Contracting States may be so informed. 
 2. The arbitral procedure, including the constitution of the 
Arbitral Tribunal, shall be governed by the will of the parties and by 
the law of the country in whose territory the arbitration takes place. 
 The Contracting States agree to facilitate all steps in the 
procedure which require to be taken in their own territories, in 
accordance with the provisions of  their law governing arbitral 
procedure applicable to existing differences. 
 3. Each Contracting State undertakes to endure the execution by 
its authorities and in accordance with  the provisions of its national 
Law of arbitral awards made in its  own territory under the preceding 
articles. 
 4. The Tribunals of the Contracting Parties, on being seized of a 
dispute regarding a contract made between persons to whom Article I 
applies and including an Arbitration Agreement whether referring to 
present or further differences with is valid in virtue of the said article 
and capable of being carried into effect, shall refer the parties on the 
application of either of them to the decision of the Arbitrators. 
 Such reference shall not prejudice the competence of the judicial 
tribunals in case the Agreement or the arbitration cannot proceed or 
becomes inoperative. 
 5. The present Protocol, which shall remain open for signature by 
all States, shall be ratified. The ratification shall be deposited as soon 
as possible with the Secretary-General of the League of Nations, who 

shall notify such deposit to all the Signatory States. 
 6. The present Protocol will co me into force as soon as two 
ratifications have been deposited. Thereafter it will take effect, in the 
case of each Contracting State, one month after the notification by the 
Secretary-General of the deposit of its ratification. 
 7. The present Protocol may be denounced by any Contracting 
State on giving one year’s notice. Denunciation shall be effected by a 
notification addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the League, who will 
immediately transmit copies of such notification to all the other 
Signatory States and inform them of the date on which it was 
received. The denunciation shall take effect one year after the date on 
which it was notified to the Secretar y-General, and shall operate only 
in respect of the notifying State. 
 8. The Contracting States may declare ‘that their acceptance of 
the present Protocol does not include any or all of the undermentioned 
territories; that is to say, their colonies, overseas possessions or 
territories, protectorates or the terri tories over which they exercise a 
mandate. 
 The said States may subsequently adhere separately on behalf of 
any territory thus excluded. The Secretary-General of the League of 
Nations shall be informed as soon as possible of such adhesions. He 
shall notify such adhesions to all Signatory States.They will  take 
effect on month after the notificatio n by the Secretary-General to all 
Signatory States. 
 The Contracting States may also denounce the Protocol separately 
on behalf of any of the territories referred to above Article 7 applies to 
such denunciation. 
_____________________ 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See sections 53) 
 C
ONVENTION ON THE EXECUTION OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL 
AWARDS 
 Article 1.-( 1) In the territories of an y High Contracting Party to 
which the present Convention applies, an arbitral award made in 
pursuance of an agreement, whethe r relating the existing or future 
differences (hereinafter called “a submission to arbitration”) covered 
by the Protocol on arbitration Clauses opened at Geneva on 
September 24th, 1923, shall be recognised as binding and shall be 
enforced in accordance with the rule s of the procedure of the territory 

where the award is relied upon, provid ed that the said award has been 
made in a territory of one of the High Contracting Parties to which the 
present Convention applies and between persons who are subject to 
the jurisdiction of one of the High Contracting Parties. 
 (2) To obtain such recognition or enforcement, it shall, further, be 
necessary: 
 (a) that the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to 
arbitration which is valid under the law applicable thereto; 
 (b) that the subject-matter of the award is capable of settlement by 
arbitration under the law of the country in which the award is sought 
to be relied upon; 
 (c) that the aware has been made  by the Arbitral Tribunal 
provided for in the submission to arbitration or constituted in the 
manner agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the law 
governing the arbitration procedure; 
 (d) that the award has become final in the country in which it has 
been made, in the sense that it will not be considered as such if it is 
open to opposition, appeal or pourvoi en cassation (in that countries 
where such forms of procedure exis t) or if it is proved that any 
proceedings for the purpose of contesting the validity of the award are 
pending; 
 (e) that the recognition or enforcement of the award is not 
contrary to the public policy or to the principles of the law of the 
country in which it is sought to be relied upon. 
 Article 2,– Even if the conditions laid down in Article Thereof are 
fulfilled, recognition and enforcement of the award shall be refused if 
the Court is satisfied: 
 (a) that the award has been annulled in the country in which it 
was made; 
 (b) that the parry against whom it is sought to use the award was 
not given notice of the arbitration proceedings in sufficient time to 
enable him to present his case; or that, being under a legal incapacity, 
he was not properly represented; 
 (c) that the award does not deal with the differences contemplated 
by or falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration or that it 
contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to 
arbitration. 
 If the award has not covered all the questions submitted to the 
arbitral tribunal, the competent authority of the country where 

recognition or enforcement of the awar d is sought can, if it thinks fit, 
postpone such recognition or enforcement or grant it subject to such 
guarantee as that authority may decide. 
 Article 3.– lf the party against whom the award has been made 
proves that, under the law governing the arbitration procedure, there is 
a ground, other than the grounds referred to in Article lta) and (c), and 
Article 2(b) and (c), entitling him to contest the validity of the award 
in a Court of Law, the Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse 
recognition or enforcement of the award or adjourn the consideration 
thereof, giving such party a reasonable time within which to have the 
award annulled by the competent tribunal. 
 Article 4.- The party relying upon an award or claiming its 
enforcement must supply, in particular: 
 (1) the original award or a c opy thereof duly  authenticated, 
according to the requirements of the law of the country in which it 
was made; 
 (2) documentary or other evidence to prove that the award has 
become final, in the sense defined in Article 1 (d), in the country in 
which it was made; 
 (3) when necessary, documentary or other evidence to prove that 
the conditions laid. down in Article 1, Paragraph (1) and paragraph (1) 
(a) and (C), have been fulfilled, 
 A translation of the award and of the award and of the other 
documents mentioned in this Article into the official language of the 
country where the award is sought to be relied upon may be 
demanded. Such translations must be certified correct by a diplomatic 
or consular agent of the country to  which the party who seeks to rely 
upon the award belongs or by a swor n translator of the country where 
the award is sought to he relied upon. 
 Article 5.- The provisions of the above articles shall not deprive 
any interested party of the right of availing himself of an arbitral 
award in the manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the 
treaties of the country where such award is sought to be relied upon. 
 Article 6.- The present Convention applies only to arbitral awards 
made after the coming into force of the Protocol on Arbitration 
Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923. 
 Article 7.- The present Convention, which will remain open to the 
signature of all the signatories of the Protocol of 1923 on Arbitration 
Clauses, shall be ratified. 
 It may be ratified only on behalf of those Members of the League 

of Nations and Non-member States on whose behalf the Protocol of 
1923 on Arbitration Clauses, shall be ratified. 
 Ratification shall be deposited as soon as possible with the 
Secretary-General of the League of Nations, who will notify such 
deposit to all the signatories. 
 Article 8.- The present Convention shall come into force three 
months after it shall have been ratified on behalf of two High 
Contracting Parties. Thereafter, it sh all take effect, in the case of each 
High Contracting Party, three months after the deposit of the 
ratification on its behalf with the Se cretary-General of the League of 
Nations.  
 Article 9.-The present Convention may be denounced on behalf of 
any Member of the League or Non- Member State. Denunciation shall 
be notified in writing to the Secretary General of the League of 
Nations, who will immediately send a copy thereof, certified to the in 
conformity with the notifications, to all the other Contracting Parties, 
at the same time informing them of the date on which he received it. 
 The denunciation shall come into force only in respect of the 
High Contracting Party which shall have notified it and one year after 
such notification shall have reach ed the Secretary-General of the 
League of Nations. 
 The denunciation of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses shall 
entail, ipso facto, the denunciation of the present Convention. 
 Article 10.- The present Convention does not apply to the 
colonies, protectorates or territories under suzerainty or mandate of 
any High Contracting Party unless they are specially mentioned. 
 The application of this Convention to one or more of such 
colonies, protectorates or territories to which the Protocol on 
Arbitration Clauses opened at Ge neva on September 24th, 1923, 
applies, can be effected at any time by means of a declaration 
addressed to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations by one of 
the High Contracting Parties. 
 Such declaration shall take eff ect three months after the deposit 
thereof. 
 The High Contracting Parties can at any time denounce the 
Convention for all or any of the colonies, protectorates or territories 
referred to above. Article 9 hereof applied to such denunciation. 
 Article 11.-A certified copy of the present Convention shall be 
transmitted by the Secretary-General of the League of Nations of every 
Member of the League of Nations and to every Non-Member State which sign 

the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 