PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 30
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N P E R S O N N E L , PU B L IC G R IE V A N C E S , 
L A W  A N D J U S T IC E
THIR TIETH REPOR T
ON
CONSTRAINTS BEING FACED BY
KENDRIYA BHANDAR
RD 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 23 OCT OBER, 2008)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 23 OCT OBER, 2008)
RD 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 23 OCT OBER, 2008)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 23 OCT OBER, 2008)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
O C TO B E R , 2008/K A R T IK A , 1930 (SA K A )O C TO B E R , 2008/K A R T IK A , 1930 (SA K A )

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

17
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
CONSTRAINTS BEING FACED BY
KENDRIYA BHANDAR
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-59

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—9
4. R ELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 1 1—16

(i)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
(Constituted on 5th August, 2007)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
9. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
15. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
25. Shri Vishvendra Singh
26. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
27. Vacant
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2008)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Shri Ram Jethmalani
10. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
14. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
15. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
23. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
24. Prof. M. Ramadass
25. Adv. P. Sathedevi
26. Shri Vishvendra Singh
27. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
28. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
29. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
30. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee to present its
Report, do hereby present this Thirtieth Report on the subject ‘Constraints being faced by Kendriya
Bhandar’.
2. The Committee heard the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions,
Chairperson and Managing Director, Kendriya Bhandar and Special Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development on the subject on 3rd June, 2008.
3. While considering the subject, the Committee took note of the following documents/
information placed before it:—
(i) Annual Report of Kendriya Bhandar (2007-08);
(ii) Background Note furnished by Kendriya Bhandar; and
(iii) W ritten submission on the constraints being faced by Kendriya Bhandar received from
Kendriya Bhandar.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report on 21st October, 2008.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
DR. E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
21st October, 2008. Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
Central Government Employees Consumer Cooperative Society Ltd., the largest consumer
cooperative society in the country popularly known as Kendriya Bhandar is a welfare project of
Government of India, under the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. It was set
up in 1963 in pursuance of a Union Cabinet decision as a welfare project for the benefit of Central
Government employees and public at large. It is functioning under aegis of Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions, Government of India and was registered with Delhi Registrar of
Cooperative Societies. Subsequently, it was registered with Central Registrar of Cooperative
Societies, Government of India as a Multi State Consumer Cooperative Society in September, 2000.
The objects of the Society are as under:—
(a) to obtain, distribute and market food stuffs, essential commodities and other consumer
goods at reasonable prices primarily for the benefit of Central Government Employees
and employees of subsidiary/autonomous organizations set up by the Government of
India/or Union Territory Administration and other consumers within its area of
operation and to undertake wholesale and retail trade in consumer goods and essential
commodities and to establish departmental stores, super markets and fair price shops;
(b) to supply to the Government Departments/Offices/Subsidiary organizations set up by
the Government and other customers, stationery, office equipments, machines of office
use and other items required by them;
(c) to establish and run manufacturing and processing units for production of consumer
goods for the benefit of members and other bonafide consumers;
(d) to open repairing and servicing facilities and shops to provide such service to members
in respect of articles supplied to them or as may be in common demand amongst them;
(e) to encourage thrift, self help and cooperation amongst members;
(f) to import and export consumer goods; and
(g) to provide any other services to members/consumers.
2. In furtherance of the objects set out above the Society is at liberty to:
(a) receive deposits including trade deposits and loans from members, cooperative
financing agencies and other Banks approved by the Registrar of Cooperative Societies
and from the Government;
(b) accept agency of any person or firm for wholesale and retail business;
(c) acquire land and buildings, vehicles, factory, workshop, machinery and equipment;
(d) import goods directly or through agents;
(e) undertake welfare activities for the members and employees and their children;
(f) become a member of Cooperative Bank or any other cooperative society and purchase
shares of such Societies; and
(g) generally do all such things as are incidental to or conducive to the attainment of any
or all the above objects.

2
3. The following are the business activities of Kendriya Bhandar:-
(a) Retailing and Institutional sales of grocery consumer and household items.
(b) Sales of Stationery items
(c) Sales of Medicines and allied items
(a) Retail and Institutional Sales
The grocery, consumer and household items are sold through Kendriya Bhandar retail outlets
located at convenient locations in Delhi in or around Government Colonies and other towns. Being
a co-operative and Welfare organization, items are reasonably priced by adding nominal margin to
meet administrative and other expenses. A large variety of branded products are available. Quality
standards are normally higher than PFA. Products pass through stringent laboratory testing.
Kendriya Bhandar supplies grocery/consumer items to several hotels, hostels, hospitals,
canteens, guest houses including prestigious institutions such as Rashtrapati Bhawan, PM’s
residence, Parliament House through Institutional Sales Unit (ISU) on regular basis. Laboratory
tested items are supplied at reasonable prices.
(b) Stationery products and Office equipment
Kendriya Bhandar has been supplying stationery and office equipments including furniture,
computers, photocopiers, fax machines, furniture etc. to Central Government Ministries/Department,
public sector undertakings, autonomous bodies etc. from its Stationery Office at R.K. Puram, New
Delhi and various Regional offices since 1981.
Over the period, Kendriya Bhandar has developed expertise in supply of the office stationery
requirements to Central Government organizations at competitive prices. The selling price prevailing
in Kendriya Bhandar is taken as benchmark for procurement of items by Government Departments.
As a unique service Kendriya Bhandar has developed a system of extending credit facility
to its regular customers from the Government by opening of credit accounts under where they can
procure items simply by raising an indent which ensures meeting of their requirements whenever
demand arises.
In purchasing of items from Kendriya Bhandar, the Government departments achieve
savings in terms of invitation, scrutiny and evaluation of tenders, collection of material from
different sources etc. without any time lag between demand and supply. Following products are
supplied from its various counters:
• Paper, Paper Products and Computer continuous paper;
• Desktop Stationery, and Liveries (Winter and summer uniform, towels);
• Luggage-briefcases of reputed brands like VIP, Aristocrat etc.;
• Consumables like floppies, printer ribbons, printer consumables, typewriting ribbons
etc.;
• Electrical Items;
• Office Automation Products;
• Plastic Items;
• Crockery;

3
• Cleaning material;
• Furniture: computer, steel and wood;
• Tyres tubes, batteries, shoes;
• Computers along with peripherals, accessories. Printers and softwares.
(c) Medicine
All kinds of medicines and surgical items for institutional and retail customers are supplied
from Medical Division located at 23, Mahadev Road, New Delhi
NETWORK OF STORES/OFFICES
4. Presently, Kendriya Bhandar operates a network of 114 stores located in Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai, Hyderabad, Banglore, Tiruchi, Cochin, Tirupati, Daman, Goa, Mussoorie, Lucknow,
Ghaziabad, Gwalior, Gurgaon, Faridabad, Kapurthala and Chandigarh. With the objective of providing
better shopping environment to customers, Kendriya Bhandar has modernized some of its existing
grocery and consumer stores like Netaji Nagar, Pandara Road, R.K. Puram-I, R. K. Puram-IV , Sarojini
Nagar–B Block, IARI Pusa, Pushpa Bhawan etc. Concerted steps are being taken for computerization
of godowns and installation of the latest Point of Sales (PoS) Machines at retail stores for ensuring
better supply chain management.
5. Some Milestones pertaining to Kendriya Bhandar :
22.01.63 The Government notified the setting up of Kendriya Bhandar (Central
Government Employees Consumer Cooperative Society Limited).
30.04.63 Kendriya Bhandar was registered under the Cooperative Societies Act.
01.07.63 The first branch of the Kendriya Bhandar was opened at Raisina Road,
New Delhi.
31.03.94 Kendriya Bhandar crosses the annual sales of Rs. 100 crores for the first
time.
19.11.94 Kendriya Bhandar wins the best Consumer Coop. Society Award
announced by the Government of Delhi for the year 1993-94.
12.09.95 Sales of medicines started in Kendriya Bhandar.
24.09.96 K endriya Bhandar opened its 100th retail store at Kochi, Kerala.
31.03.98 Kendriya Bhandar crosses the sale of Rs. 200 crore.
08.08.01 Bye-laws of Kendriya Bhandar under Multi-state Coop. Society Act. 1984
approved by Central Registrar of Coop. Societies.
19.09.02 First modernized store at Netaji Nagar, New Delhi was inaugurated by
Shrimati Vasundhra Raje, Hon’ble Minister of Personnel, PG and Pensions.
09.05.03 New Bye-Laws of the Society were registered under MSCS Act, 2002.
12.07.04 The first Chemist shop was opened at 23, Mahadev Road, New Delhi.
6. Kendriya Bhandar being a cooperative society under the administrative control of Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has drawn the Committee’s attention in the past also.

4
The Committee in its 14th Report on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry considered
the functioning of the Kendriya Bhandar. Showing its concern for the organization, the Committee
had recommended as under:
The Committee fails to understand why the Ministry’ s control in the Governing Body
of Kendriya Bhandar is negligible when it holds 81.43% of shares. Also, it is not clear
whether the Ministry’ s nominees in the Board of Directors hold vital posts or  whether they
do not play an active role. The Committee has no objection to the functional autonomy
granted to Kendriya Bhandar; but is of the opinion that there should be strict and efficient
monitoring by the Ministry on the financial activities of the Kendriya Bhandar. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should look into the functioning of
Kendriya Bhandar so that it may not go the ‘Super Bazar’ way. The Committee also desires
to take up this issue separately after the receipt of action taken reply from the Government
in the matter. (21.5)
The Ministry, in a written reply stated that with the withdrawal of special dispensation of
Kendriya Bhandar from the procedure of inviting tenders/quotations by the Ministry of
Finance, Kendriya Bhandar may become prone to machinations and that there would be
uncertainity about Kendriya Bhandar being able to obtain the supply orders. (21.6)
The Committee is of the considered view that Kendriya Bhandar should upgrade itself to
compete with other players in tenders/quotations rather than being apprehensive of
competition. (21.7)
7. The Committee’s attention was to the problems being faced by the Kendriya Bhandar when
it received some petitions that Kendriya Bhandar has been asked to vacate the possession of those
properties or its retail outlets in the habitations of the Central Government employees. The Kendriya
Bhandar, which was working in different areas, that is, in the habitations of the Central
Government employees has also been asked to vacate the buildings from where they were
functioning. The vacation of these properties will threaten the very existence of Kendriya Bhandar
These properties are under the control of the Ministry of Urban Development and that Ministry is
now pressing for the vacation.
8. Considering the utility of services being provided on the Kendriya Bhandar, the Committee
decided to seek clarifications from the concerned Ministries. The Committee at its meeting held on
3rd June, 2008 heard the representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions, Ministry of Urban Development and the Kendriya Bhandar.
9. The Special Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development while explaining their stand informed
the committee:
“...I do sense the feeling of the Committee where they want to preserve Kendriya Bhandar
and that we have all recognized that the Kendriya Bhandar is giving some very useful
service to the community itself. However, Sir, I am sure you would also like to know why,
when the Kendriya Bhandar is rendering such a service, has such a strange decision been
taken to have them withdraw from the residential units handed by the Directorate of Estates.
Sir, there was a case filed in the Supreme Court, Shiv Sagar Tiwari Case, which laid down
the principle that residential units must be used for residential purposes and since the
Kendriya Bhandar activities are not of a residential nature this decision had to be taken
at the level of the Cabinet Committee on Accommodation in November 2005 the notice, that
is now being discussed, was issued to the Kendriya Bhandar. Having done that, Sir, that was
the easy part of the job, where a decision was taken and action was communicated, and
in compliance with that from about 42 units, which the Kendriya Bhandar was in
occupation of, they have now withdrawn from 16. That is a good number which has

5
happened. Managing Director, told you, this entire process is being done with a certain
amount of care and concern for the Kendriya Bhandar and the thoughts that Committee
Members have harboured are the same thoughts that went in the process of having to have
Kendriya Bhandar step out from occupying the residential units for non-residential purposes.
In the process, we, in the Directorate of Estates, also look after some markets where there
are certain shops and facilities for commercial activities, which is available.
Some of these places have been given to the Kendriya Bhandar where they have had
exemplary reaction on the entire market. It has enhanced the market’ s ambience and
environment. I am sure that the kind of visit on which has taken me to show a modern and
a well-run shop would very well create an exemplary good impression amongst the Members
themselves. Because much of the clientele of Kendriya Bhandar, we understand, are the
people who are living in the Government colonies, we tried to undertake an exercise to find
out whether there are any vacant and open spaces where Kendriya Bhandar can open up
a retail outlet and continue to provide service to those customers who have been used to
purchasing items from the Kendriya Bhandar. We have also tried to extend this exercise to
a further extent by saying, “Alright, Kendriya Bhandar, you seem to be very useful service
provider, can we link up a service between you and CPWD”. That is, if we build one unit
where the Kendriya Bhandar can operate on the ground floor and the CPWD centre can
operate on the first floor, it becomes useful for everybody.....
So, we have also tried to look at this kind of thing. The Master Plan prescriptions allow
a 20 sq. mtr. retail outlet for the kind of work that they are doing. So, the exercise is
underway. The Kendriya Bhandar has also inspected 22 other sites. So, with regard to the
balance amount of places that they require, hopefully, we should be in a position to try and
attain what the Committee is moving towards, and, at the same time, keep within the
bounds of ruling which we are faced with, which has brought about this situation where it
has become necessary for you to consider the requirements of Kendriya Bhandar...”
10. In his deposition before the Committee, the representative of the Department of Personnel
and Training made the following observation:
“...I would like to say that when we receive the decision of the Ministry of Urban
Department, we would go to the Cabinet for looking into this issue. We are taking the case
what the Kendriya Bhandar has suggested...”.
11. As regards the compliance to the order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, a member of the
Committee observed as under:
“...there is one point that ‘user of premises’ is a matter of policy and it is the Government
not the Supreme Court which decides that policy. So the Government can take fresh policy
decision that a certain percentage of residential premises can be used for such activities and
that policy is final. The Supreme Court does not decide policies. Rent Act says something
and within that ambit, something happens where you are converting residential premises into
commercial one. That is not permitted by many Rent Acts. But, otherwise, being a user of
your own premises is a matter of policy. And, fortunately, today, the Supreme Court is not
deciding the matters of policy. Why don’t you take a policy decision at the highest level
and implement it.”
12. In the course of deliberations the Members of the Committee felt very strongly for the
cause of Kendriya Bhandar. The feelings of the Committee was conveyed by the Chairman of the
Committee as under:
“...At a time, when the prices prevailing outside are very high, I think, we need to maintain
them for our Government employees. I hope you have understood the feelings of the hon.

6
Members of this Committee. We would like to maintain this and we are in a mood to say
that its services should be extended to other habitations also. We have to enlarge its
services. We are having PDS throughout India run by the State Governments but the
Central Government also has to protect the interests of their employees. At least, this much
help should be provided by its own Department. We should not ask them to close it. If
these stores get closed, then these employees would be left with no alternative but to go
to the main shops and pay a higher price. Then they would come back and say that their
salary is not suitable for their day-to-day living. Therefore, we want that you try to express
our feeling to them”.
13. Subsequent to the above meeting of the Committee a letter was received from the
Chairperson and Managing Director, Kendriya Bhandar highlighting the grave problem threatening
survival of Kendriya Bhandar’. In his letter addressed to the Chairman of the Committee, the CMD
referred to the issue of eviction orders issued by the Ministry of Urban Development through their
Office Memorandum No. 12035/2/94-Pol.II dated 10th November, 2005. The relevant contents of
the letter are given below:
A. Ministry’s O.M incorporated the following:—
(a) No new unit of residential/office accommodation shall be allotted to Kendriya Bhandar
or to a similar organisation/retail outlet in future.
(b) The residential/office accommodation allotted to Kendriya Bhandar at various places
shall be got vacated in a phased manner over a period of three years. One third
accommodations to be vacated every year w.e.f. 1st November , 2005 onwards.
(c) Market rate of License fee as fixed by the Central Government from time to time
shall be charged from Kendriya Bhandar on all the accommodation w.e.f.
1st November, 2005 (till they are vacated).
B. Adverse impact of the above decision on Kendriya Bhandar
As a result of the above decision, Kendriya Bhandar has already surrendered one third
accommodations to Ministry of Urban Development i.e. out of 42 Nos. accommodations,
Kendriya Bhandar has already surrendered 16 nos. accommodations to the Directorate of
Estates in compliance of the above order (OM). This has resulted/caused great hardships
to the Government employees/their families residing in the above colonies, who have to
commute long distances to purchase their household requirements from other Kendriya
Bhandar stores or from open market. More so market rent of licence fees has also ben
imposed on Kendriya Bhandar retail outlets and also the office accommodation amounting
to Rs. 1.26 crore per year, which is a huge financial burden on Kendriya Bhandar.
C. Note prepared by the Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions for review by CCA:
We would also like to inform you that our Ministry i.e. Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions are in the process of submitting a note before the Cabinet
Committee on Accommodations (CCA) to review its earlier decision dated 10th November, 2005
regarding withdrawal of Government Pool Residential and Office accommodations allotted
to Kendriya Bhandar.
D. Factual position about Kendriya Bhandar:
(a) Kendriya Bhandar is a Welfare Project of the Central Government and is operating
under the aegis of the Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions.

7
(b) It is providing good quality grocery, consumer and household items at reasonable
prices to the Government employees and the lower income segment of the society.
Due to meager profit margins, Kendriya Bhandar actually incurs a loss in grocery/
consumer retail business every year.
(c) The residential and office accommodations being utilized by Kendriya Bhandar have
been progressively allotted to Kendriya Bhandar over the last thirty years, consequent
to a decision of the Union Cabinet (in 1963).
(d) It is not a case of fresh/new allotment – but it is only a case retention of existing retail
stores and two office accommodations. A majority of the 28 accommodations allotted
to Kendriya Bhandar are in its possession for over 30 years.
(e) Kendriya Bhandar is constantly playing a major role in supporting the Government’s
efforts to contain rising inflation by selling essential items at lower than market price
through its retail stores.
14. The CMD requested the Committee to look into the matter and prayed that the issues raised
above need to be sympathetically considered and Ministry of Urban Development’s OM should be
suitably revised.
15. Keeping in mind the hardships faced by the Kendriya Bhandar and the views expressed by
the Members of the Committee in its meeting held on 3rd June, 2008, the Chairman of the
Committee wrote a D.O. letter to the Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions (being the nodal Ministry).
“...as you are aware, the working of Kendriya Bhandar is presently under consideration of
the Committee of Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice and the Committee in its
meeting held on 3rd June, 2008 heard the Chairperson and Managing Director of Kendriya
Bhandar along with the officers of Department of Personnel and Training. During the
deliberations, the Members of the Committee had expressed their unanimous concern over
the development and felt that Kendriya Bhandar retail stores are rendering very useful
services not only to the government employees and their families but also the poor people
residing in the periphery of government colonies and for that purpose, Kendriya Bhandars
were allotted accommodations from the government pool in the residential colonies. These
days when the price rise and inflation is at its peak, the Kendriya Bhandars are giving the
much desired relief to the government employees and other common man. As such, the
Members were of the view that the Kendriya Bhandar should be allowed to continue in the
Government residential colonies in public interest.
I also feel that both the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and the
Ministry of Urban Development should discuss the issue threadbare and take necessary steps
so that Kendriya Bhandars are allowed to function from their existing government pool
residential and office accommodation.”
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
16. The Committee feels that Kendriya Bhandar retail stores are rendering very useful
services not only to the Government employees and their families but also the poor people
residing in the periphery of Government colonies and for that purpose, Kendriya Bhandars
were allotted accommodations from the Government pool in the residential colonies. These
days when the price rise and inflation is at its peak, the Kendriya Bhandars are giving the
much desired relief to the Government employees and other common man. The Committee
therefore, recommends that the Kendriya Bhandar should be allowed to continue

8
functioning from their outlets in the Government residential colonies in larger public
interest which is the fundamental of a welfare State like ours.
17. The Committee also feels that Kendriya Bhandar is providing useful services to its
major clientele i.e. Government employees, the products are below market prices and are
of highest quality. Hence, effort should be in the direction of promoting and preserving
these units rather than closing, because closing will not serve the purpose. The Committee
therefore, recommends that Government should make an all out effort in the direction of
promotion of these units.
18. The Committee further feels that Kendriya Bhandar is a welfare project of the
Central Government and is operating under the aegis of the Ministry of Personnel, PG and
Pensions. It is providing good quality grocery, consumer and household items at reasonable
prices to the Government employees and the lower income segment of the society. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that such a society which is working for the benefit of
the common people should not be asked to vacate their present units rather the
Government should provide all necessary assistance to the Kendriya Bhandar since they are
fulfilling the daily household needs of thousands of Government employees every month.
19. The Committee also recommends that Kendriya Bhandar may be directed to make
payment of monthly license fee at flat rates equivalent to that payable by a Government
employee occupying the Government residential accommodation plus the average monthly
house rent amount (which is otherwise applicable to the Government employees of that
category). The market rent should be waived off and instead a monthly license fee at flat
rates should be prescribed on Kendriya Bhandar.
20. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Urban Development should
either return the 16 nos. of surrendered accommodations to Kendriya Bhandar or
alternatively it should immediately provide alternative accommodations to Kendriya Bhandar
in lieu of the surrendered accommodations at nearby location.
21. The Committee feels that the residential and office accommodations utilized by
Kendriya Bhandar have been allotted to them, consequent upon the decision of the Union
Cabinet in the year 1963. Moreover, they are not requesting for new allotments rather what
they are pleading for is retention of existing retail outlets. The Committee feels that a
welfare project run by the Government sustains in today’s competitive environment only
when the organisation is protected/looked after well by the mother but if the mother start
giving step motherly treatment to a child whom it had nurtured for 30 years the survival
becomes difficult. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Kendriya Bhandar
should be allotted land in the Central Government colonies by the Ministry of Urban
Development at economical cost for construction of retail stores (on the same lines as
Mother Dairy) and after the construction of the retail stores they may be asked to
surrender the Government Accommodations in a phased manner.
22. The Committee further feels that the Kendriya Bhandar is the welfare face of the
Government and Government of India is holding more than 78% shares in the society then
why not the Kendriya Bhandar should have their own permanent building to carry out day
to day office work. It has also come to the notice of the Committee that the Kendriya
Bhandar had requested the Ministry of Urban Development to provide land for the
construction of its building in the year 2004 and the issue is pending till date. The
Committee expresses its displeasure to note that no concrete decision has so far been taken
with regard to providing land for construction of building for Kendriya Bhandar inspite of
the considerable time that has already lapsed. The Committee, therefore, recommends that

9
the Ministry of Urban Development should vigorously pursue the matter and ensure that
the vacant Government land should be allotted to the Kendriya Bhandar for construction of
its building without further delay. The Committee also recommends that Kendriya Bhandar
should be allowed to retain the existing office accommodations by paying rent equivalent to
that payable by post Offices etc. (Public utility departments), till such time suitable land at
economical rates is allotted to Kendriya Bhandar for construction of its own office.
23. The Committee desires that both the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions and the Ministry of Urban Development should discuss the issue threadbare and
take necessary steps together so that as a relief Kendriya Bhandars are allowed to function
from their existing Government pool residential and office accommodation.
24. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Urban Development had taken this step
because of the judgment given by the Apex court in the Shiv Sagar Tiwari Case, which laid
down the principle that residential units must be used for residential purposes and since the
Kendriya Bhandar activities are not of a residential nature this decision had to be taken
at the level of the Cabinet Committee on Accommodation. The Committee feels that though
the Hon’ble Supreme Court had given its verdict in a particular case. The point that who
should be the ‘user of premises’ is a matter of policy and it is the Government, not the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, which decides that policy. So, the Government can certainly take
a fresh policy decision that a certain percentage of residential premises can be used for
such activities and that policy is final. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government should as early as possible bring forward a new policy that a certain percentage
of residential premises could be used for such activities as are being carried by Kendriya
Bhandar.
25. The Committee feels that if these Kendriya Bhandars are closed, the people who are
working there will lose their jobs and there will be unemployment. The Government
employees and members of the general public who are patronizing the Kendriya Bhandar
will be deprived of cheaper quality products and this will be a set back to the cooperative
movement of the nation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Kendriya
Bhandars should be protected and Government should start thinking in terms of extending
their services to other areas.
26. The Committee also feels that in today’s world when things are growing at rapid pace
there is an urgent need for the Government to plan/keep enough space for public utility
services at residential area/complex. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government should earmark certain space for the public utility services in the upcoming
areas/localities/residential complexes so that the people can take benefit of these facilities.

MINUTES

12

13
13
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC
GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 3rd June, 2008, in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
10. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
11. Dr. C. Krishnan
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shri Harin Pathak
14. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
15. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
16. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
17. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
18. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
19. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

14
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Kendriya Bhandar
1. Mrs. Poonam Rawat, Chairperson;
2. Shri Jagdeesh Bhatia, Chief Managing Director;
3. Shrimati Anita Negi, Board Member;
4. Shri R.K. Singh, Deputy General Manager; and
5. Shri S.P. Sharma, Secretary.
II. Representatives of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
1. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Joint Secretary;
2. Shri Suresh Pal, Director; and
3. Shri K.G. Verma, Director.
III. Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri M. Ramachandran, Secretary;
2. Shri S.M. Acharya, Special Secretary; and
3. Shri A.K. Mehta, Joint Secretary.
I V . ***
V . ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav and Shrimati Krishna Tirath,
the newly nominated Members to the Committee. The Chairman then informed the Members that
there would be a presentation by the representatives of Kendriya Bhandar on the subject ‘Working
of Kendriya Bhandar’ presently under consideration of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman,
welcomed the representatives of the Kendriya Bhandar at the meeting.
3. The Chairperson, Kendriya Bhandar made an exhaustive presentation, which included the
organizational set up and an overview of the working of the Kendriya Bhandar. The CMD, Kendriya
Bhandar highlighted the issue of notice served by the Ministry of Urban Development to the
Kendriya Bhandar for vacation of some retail outlets.
4. * * *
5. Members were of the view that the Kendriya Bhandar had worked well and should not be
asked to vacate their existing stores from these residential units and in case the Government had
decided to close down some stores then they should be allotted accommodation on the same lines
like they had accommodated to the DMS milk booths, etc.
(Thereafter, the witnesses withdrew)
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. V erbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 1.55 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

15
15
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21st October, 2008 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Dr. C. Krishnan
10. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Adv. P. Sathedevi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh Rana, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representative of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
Shri K.G. Verma, Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
*** Relates to some other matter.

16
*** Relates to some other matter.
ADOPTION OF DRAFT 29TH AND 30TH REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4. The Committee then took up for consideration its draft 29th Report on “Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism” and draft 30th Report on “Constraints being faced by Kendriya Bhandar”.
After some discussion, the Committee adopted both the Reports with minor changes. The
Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shrimati Najma A. Heptulla, and in her
absence Shri Virendra Bhatia, MP to present both the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Shri V .
Radhakrishnan, and in his absence Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa, to lay them in Lok Sabha on the
21st October, 2008.
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.